The Impact of Principle-Based Reasoning onHands-on, Project-Based LearningMarcelo Worsley and Paulo Blikstein, Stanford University, 520 Galvez Mall, CERAS 102, Stanford, CA 94305mworsley@stanford.edu, paulob@stanford.eduAbstract: Prior research suggests that experts and novices employ markedly differentapproaches to engineering design tasks. For example, novice designers commonly use trialand error, which researchers liken to backward-reasoning. Experts use forward-reasoning,which allows them to accurately predict the impact of certain decisions. In this paper, wepresent a complementary conceptualization for how experience affects design approaches. Weliken backward-reasoning to example-based reasoning, and forward-reasoning to principlebased reasoning. In study 1 (N=13) students complete an engineering design activity. Aqualitative analysis shows clear instances of example- and principle-based reasoningstrategies. Study 2 (N=20) compares the efficacy of the two approaches by using a betweensubject design. We find that principle-based reasoning improves the quality of designs (p <0.01) and learning of important engineering principles (p < 0.001). This suggests that handson learning environments may benefit from encouraging students to employ principle-basedreasoning.IntroductionWith the rise of Makerspaces and Fablabs, constructionist (Papert 1980) and project-based learning isexperiencing a revival. Schools, community centers and museums around the world are spending millions ofdollars to create spaces where students can engage in design and invention activities (New York Hall of Science2012, Blikstein 2013). Amidst this resurgence, however, are questions about how to effectively implementhands-on learning in a way that foments Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) learning.For museums, they must address questions about how to promote changes in students STEM intuitions throughshort-lived constructionist activities (see “Keychain Syndrome”, Blikstein 2013 for an example). At the sametime, schools have to consider how to produce measurable learning gains through engaging, hands-on activities.In this paper, we begin to address these concerns through two studies. In Study 1 we describe two commonapproaches to solving open-ended engineering tasks. We refer to these approaches as example- and principlebased reasoning. These two approaches share resemblance to prior literature on learning by analogy andexpert/novice design strategies (e.g. Ahmed Wallace and Blessing 2003, Gentner 1997, Cardonell 1983). Study2 shows that principle-based reasoning produces superior designs and greater recognition of engineeringprinciples among non-expert students relative to example-based reasoning.To situate the reader this paper draws from studies of engineering education (e.g. Atman and Bursic1998, Russ et al 2008, Lau, Oehlberg and Agogino 2009, Atman and Bursic 2007, Worsley and Blikstein 2011),the role of analogy in supporting learning (e.g. Gentner and Holyoke 1997, Cardonell 1983, Lakoff and Nunez2000, Polya 1945) and prior work on expertise (e.g. Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch-Römer, 1993, Chi, Glaser andRees 1981, Cross and Cross 1998, Atman et al. 1999).Study 1Study 1 examines engineering design approaches of students with different levels of experience. Students arepresented with a mechanical engineering challenge that requires them to use their intuitions and prior knowledgeabout forces.Ten 9th- through 12th-grade students and three graduate students participated in this study. This variancein experience was a primary component in pre-defining student experience levels, i.e. low, medium, high andexpert. A detailed description of the user population can be found in Worsley and Blikstein (2013).Students worked individually using common household materials: one paper plate, one ping-pong ball,a roll of tape, four drinking straws and five wooden Popsicle sticks. The objective was to use the materialsprovided to create a structure that could support approximately 2-3 pounds. Participants were also asked tosupport the weight as high off the table as possible. Students were instructed that they would receive ten minutesto complete the task, but were permitted to work for as long as they wanted. Total participation time rangedfrom eight minutes to fifty-two minutes.Engineering StrategiesAs we analyzed each video we paid particular attention to the post-activity interviews. During this interviewstudents were asked questions about the motivation for their design. We were intrigued by how some students’designs were motivated by of real-world objects, while others relied on geometric properties and principles fromICLS 2014 Proceedings1147© ISLSengineering. As such our goal in this section is to briefly demonstrate the existence of the example-based andthe principle-based approaches. To be clear, these two approaches do not represent all strategies that studentsused, but constitutes the majority. In what follows we present short case studies of each approach.Example-Based ReasoningThe first example that we present is of a student who successfully modeled their structure after a chair (Figure1). More importantly, though, we learn that this was not modeled after just any chair, but after a chair that thestudent has at home. The student emphasizes this point when responding to a question about the inspiration forthe design: “It’s like a form of a chair… Plus. Um. Just like a chair, because I have a chair like that… at home.”Figure 1. Successful Example-based DesignThis student has drawn a connection to a real-world object from his home as a way for approaching thetask. As the student continues to describe the motivation for the design, he indicates that he had brieflyentertained another idea. This other idea very closely resembled his current structure but did not have woodensticks connecting the legs. When asked why he didn’t pursue the other design he says that the other idea “wasdumb.” While he may have been hinting at principles in engineering design, he does not articulates this point.As we examine the line of reasoning offered by students who employed principle-based reasoning, we will seean apparent difference in the extent of mechanistic reasoning that the students employ (Russ et al. 2008).Principle-Based ReasoningAmong students that exhibited principle-based reasoning it was common to find structures laden with trianglesand circles. This was the case for structure pictured in Error! Reference source not found. and Figure 5.Figure 2. Successful principle-based designFigure 3. Successful principle-based designFigures 2 and 3 contain the underside of his structure. In Figure 2 we see the early stages of the base. This basefeatures two levels of triangles. The first is the shape of each leg. The second is the triangular base that the threelegs define. Figure 3 makes the second level of triangles more explicit with the addition of three straws thatform a triangle. When asked what inspired the design the student responded, “Well triangles are strong. And so,I decided to use as many triangles as I could.” Upon further probing about the importance of triangles thestudent offered the following explanation: “It’s the most secure shape because, uhh, none of the angles canchange once you have three sides in place. Whereas a lot of other shapes, they can tilt around and change.” Thestudent is very confident in his reasoning, and provides a strong justification for his design. Furthermore, incontrast to the example-based designs, this structure bears little resemblance to any real-world object.DiscussionStudy 1 was designed to identify the ways that students would naturally go about handling an open-endedengineering design challenge. It offers a glimpse into the types of experiences that students may have whenapproaching unscripted, hands-on learning activities. Examining these practices is of particular relevance giventhe rise of making that is taking place in Maker Spaces, museums, FabLabs and schools. Within theseconstructionist environments, some students attain success by drawing on real-world examples (Gentner 1997,Cardonell 1983, Kolodner 1997). Identifying real-world examples gives students an entry point into constructingtheir design. It also challenges students to consider ways for generalizing the objectives of the challenge tostructures that are salient in their individual lives. Other students approach the task from the perspective ofengineering principles. When both designing and troubleshooting their structure, they draw upon engineeringprinciples to guide their thinking and their actions. Like the example-based approach, the principle-basedapproach yields mixed results. Nonetheless, these two approaches appear to align with prior literature onexpertise in open-ended design activities (Ahmed, Wallace and Blessing 2003). The example-based approach isICLS 2014 Proceedings1148© ISLSakin to backward reasoning, where the individual begins with a structure and works backwards to deduce itsfeasibility and quality. The principle-based approach is in line with forward reasoning - students identify theinterworkings of a design before concerning themselves with their larger, overall design. While it was not ourobjective to align these practices with levels of expertise, this is something that loosely emerged from thequalitative observations. This perceived difference in who is using the different techniques motivates the designof Study 2.Study 2In Study 2 we prompt participants to use either an example- or principle-based approach when completing thechallenge. This allows us to examine the impact of the two reasoning strategies on student success and onstudent learning. Study 2 also differs from Study 1 because participants work in pairs, instead of individually.This change in design was adopted to foster more natural verbalization of one’s thoughts and strategies.Prior to the study, we had two main hypotheses. The first hypothesis was that principle-based reasoningprompt would cause students to be more aware of the mechanisms that conferred stability. Moreover, as weobserved in Study 1, we anticipated that when students focused on mechanisms, they would be more cognizantof weaknesses in their design. This, in turn, would result in the principle-based reasoning condition being moresuccessful in building their structures. At the same time, we hypothesized that the example-based group wouldmirror the novices in Study 1 and create structures that resembled real-world structures. However, in so doing,we expect for many students to overlook one or more important engineering principles because they areprimarily thinking at the macroscopic level.Twelve 9th- through 12th-grade students and eight undergraduate students participated in this study.Pairs of students were randomly assigned to each condition, after controlling for prior education experience.Students worked with common household materials: one paper plate, 4 ft. of garden wire, four drinkingstraws and five wooden Popsicle sticks. Students were also given scissors. The objective was to use thematerials provided to create a structure that could support a weight of approximately half a pound. Participantswere also asked to support the weight as high off the table as possible. Students were instructed that they wouldreceive fifteen minutes to complete the task, but were permitted to work for as long as they wanted. Changesfrom the Study 1 protocol were adopted to avoid some of the superficial trouble shooting strategies observed instudy one. For example, tape was taken away because during Study 1 several students used excessive amountsof tape in order to compensate for unstable structural designs.Activity SequenceThe set of activities that students completed includes: a pre-test; introducing the design challenge; anintervention, i.e. one of the two conditions; a preliminary design drawing; a hands-on, paired, building activity;a post-test; and reflection. For both the pre- and post-test, students were asked to generate as many ways aspossible, to easily reinforce an unstable structure. For the post-test, students were permitted to both review andrefer back to their pre-test responses.During the intervention, students were first shown a picture of a bridge, a ladder and an igloo. In theexample-based condition students were asked to generate three ideas of relevant structures from their home,community or school that would be useful in thinking about completing the current task. Students received threeminutes to generate and draw three ideas. In the principle-based condition students were asked to generate threemechanisms, or engineering principles, that cause one or more of the three items pictured (the bridge, the ladderand the igloo) to be structurally sound. Again, students were given three minutes to generate three mechanisms.One key observation from Study 1 was the failure to recognize important engineering principles, ormechanisms, among the example-based reasoning group. Most common was for students to overlook theimportance of connecting the legs of the structure, especially when using slanted legs. In Study 2 we adopted acoding scheme that explicitly classifies pre- and post- tests based on the presence of connected legs and slantedlegs. In order for an item to be coded as having connected legs, there must be something that connects the legs atsome place other than the top or bottom of the structure. Identifying the presence of slanted legs was based onthe presence of a non-90-degree angle between the legs of the structure and the upper portion of the structure.When coding student pre- and post-tests, the presence of slanted legs resulted in a scoring of -1, and thepresence of connected legs resulted in a scoring of +1. Accordingly a given test could be coded using threepossible values: -1, 0 or 1. Each design drawing was coded by two research assistants. An analysis of inter-raterreliability analysis yielded a Fleiss’ Kappa of 0.76. In addition to coding the pre- and post-test, an explicit metricof success was used to rate the quality of each structure. In order to be deemed a success, the structure wasrequired to hold the half-pound mass for at least one minute.ResultsWe first examine the correlation between success and the two conditions. A binomial test (probability of success= 0.1 – based on prior work) confirms that the principle-based condition (M: 0.6, SD: 0.52) significantlyICLS 2014 Proceedings1149© ISLSoutperforms the baseline probability (p < 0.01), while the example-based reasoning condition (M:0.2, SD: 0.42)does not outperform the baseline probability (p ~0.40).The other value that we compared is coded values for slanted legs and connected legs. When weperform a student t-test on this data we find a significant difference (t(18)=3.46, p < 0.003). Students in theprinciple-based reasoning condition were more likely to include only connected legs, while the example-basedcondition was more likely to only include slanted legs. This is important because the slanted leg configuration inthe absence of connected legs will typically result in failure. On the other hand, using connecting legs has utilityacross several leg configurations and orientations. This is significant because it means that after doing thehands-on activity students in the example-based reasoning condition were more likely to propose a designsolution that included slanted legs, without connecting the legs. This suggested that they were less likely toattribute structural failures to having slanted legs or having unconnected legs, whereas the principle-basedreasoning group was more likely to correctly make this association.One concern is that this observation is a function of the student’s prior knowledge of structuralengineering. Accordingly, we coded the pre-tests as well as the initial design drawings (recall that each studentcompleted a design drawing immediately after having finished the intervention). From both of these, we find nosignificant difference in the averaged coded value for slanted legs-connected legs either immediately before theintervention or immediately after the intervention (pre-test - p < 0.23, initial design drawing - p < 0.13). Ofparticular note is that connecting the legs was more common in the example-based reasoning group (p=0.6) thanin the principle-based reasoning group (p=0.4) when comparing design drawings made immediately followingthe intervention and preceding the building activity. This suggests that the observed difference on the post-test isnot a function of the intervention alone, nor is it a function of prior knowledge, but is mediated through thehands-on activity.DiscussionThrough studies 1 and 2, we highlighted the existence and importance of different approaches for completingengineering design tasks. We found that students who employ principle-based reasoning were more successfulin completing the task, and also identified important mechanisms in the post-test. On the other hand, studentswho used example-based reasoning were less likely to succeed in their designs. We attribute these differences tostudents in the example-based reasoning condition overlooking important engineering principles that wereintegral to the stability of their example structure. As an example of this, consider students Mike and Tom.These two students modeled their structure after a water tower. They include several of components of a watertower in their structure. However, their structure failed because they do not recognize the importance ofconnecting the legs of their structure together. Ironically, these two included connected legs in their designdrawings, but still did not recognize their importance. Unfortunately, we do not have sufficient post-interviewdata to confirm that all students in the principle-based reasoning condition that included connected legs fullyunderstood the implications of including reinforcements or braces. Anecdotally, we observed that a number ofstudents in the principle-based reasoning condition made reference to connecting the legs during the activity, butbecause this was not explicitly tested for all participants this inference is only speculative.As we consider next steps one area for further research is to leverage an approach from our priorresearch that more explicitly studies user action patterns (Worsley and Blikstein, 2013). Within this paradigm,we would be interested in studying how the process differed between the two conditions. As a part of thisanalysis, we would look to identify if the example- and principle-based reasoning cause students to usesubstantively different iteration cycles and troubleshooting strategies. Moreover, several previous researchstudies have highlighted differences in how experts and novices complete engineering design tasks. While wehave seen that principle-based reasoning helps students be more successful, there is the additional question ofwhether or not this approach actually helps students behave more like experts when examining more finegrained action sequence. Related to this is another possible study that tries to more definitively delineate themechanics that mediate success for the principle-based reasoning group, again through process-based measures.ConclusionIn this paper we presented a pair of studies that investigate how to improve the quality of hands-on learningexperiences. In Study 1 we provided a short qualitative analysis of two engineering design approaches:example- and principle-based reasoning. We argued that these two approaches are in line with prior research inengineering education, expertise and learning by analogy. Moreover, we described how example-basedreasoning is commonly used among novices as they confront new engineering design tasks. Study 2 was acontrolled study where we compared the efficacy of the two approaches in terms of the quality of designs, andin terms of what students learn. Here we found that principle-based reasoning is associated with better qualitydesigns, and better recognition of important engineering mechanisms. As described in this paper, primingstudents to use principle-based reasoning could conceivably be enacted in the variety of constructionist learningenvironments that are currently found in community centers, museums and schools. As such, adopting thisICLS 2014 Proceedings1150© ISLSapproach could foster significant improvement to the quality of constructionist learning. More generally though,this paper echoes previous research that highlights the importance of pushing students to draw on the depth oftheir conceptual intuitions. While some prior work has cautioned that students intuitions may contain nonscientifically valid principles and concepts, in the case of this study, this concern was far less impactful than thepositive benefits conferred by promoting principle-based reasoning.ReferencesNew York Hall of Science. (2012). Design-Make-Play: Growing the Next Generation of Science Innovators.New York, NY: New York Hall of Science.Ahmed, S., Wallace, K. M., & Blessing, L. T. (2003). Understanding the differences between how novice andexperienced designers approach design tasks. Research in Engineering Design, 14(1), 1-11.Atman, C. J., Adams, R. S., Cardella, M. E., Turns, J., Mosborg, S., & Saleem, J. (2007). Engineering designprocesses: A comparison of students and expert practitioners. Journal of Engineering Education, 96(4),359-379.Atman, C. J., & Bursic, K. M. (1998). Verbal protocol analysis as a method to document engineering studentdesign processes. Journal of Engineering Education, 87(2), 121-132.Atman, C. J., Chimka, J. R., Bursic, K. M., & Nachtmann, H. L. (1999). A comparison of freshman and seniorengineering design processes. Design Studies, 20(2), 131-152.Atman, C. J., Deibel, K., & Borgford-Parnell, J. (2009). The process of engineering design: A comparison ofthree representations. International Conference on Engineering Design: Stanford University,Blikstein, P. (2013). Digital Fabrication and ’Making’ in Education: The Democratization of Invention. In J.Walter-Herrmann & C. Büching (Eds.), FabLabs: Of Machines, Makers and Inventors. Bielefeld:Transcript Publishers.Carbonell, J. G. (1983). Learning by analogy: Formulating and generalizing plans from past experience (pp.137-161). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.Chi, M. T., Glaser, R., & Rees, E. (1981). Expertise in problem solving Learning Research and DevelopmentCenter, University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh.Cross, N., & Cross, A. C. (1998). Expertise in engineering design. Research in Engineering Design, 10(3), 141149.Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Römer, C. (1993). The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition ofexpert performance. Psychological review, 100(3), 363.Gentner, D., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Reasoning and learning by analogy: Introduction. American Psychologist,52(1), 32.Guzdial, M. (2008). Education paving the way for computational thinking. Communications of the ACM, 51(8),25-27.Kolodner, J. L. (1997). Educational implications of analogy: A view from case-based reasoning. Americanpsychologist, 52(1), 57.Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. E. (2000). Where mathematics comes from: How the embodied mind bringsmathematics into being. Basic books.Lau, K., Oehlberg, L., & Agogino, A. (2009). Sketching in design journals: An analysis of visual representationsin the product design process. Engineering Design Graphics Journal, 73(3)Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas Basic Books, Inc.Polya, G. (1945). How to solve it: A new aspect of mathematical model.Russ, R. S., Scherr, R. E., Hammer, D., & Mikeska, J. (2008). Recognizing mechanistic reasoning in studentscientific inquiry: A framework for discourse analysis developed from philosophy of science. ScienceEducation, 92(3), 499-525.Worsley, M., & Blikstein, P. (2011). What's an expert? Using learning analytics to identify emergent markers ofexpertise through automated speech, sentiment and sketch analysis. EDM, 235-240.Worsley, M. and Blikstein, P. (2013). Toward the Development of Multimodal Action Based Assessment. InProceedings of the Third International Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge (LAK '13).ACM, New York, NY, USA, 94-101.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1151© ISLS