Research-Practice Partnerships WorkshopWilliam Penuel, School of Education, University of Colorado Boulder, william.penuel@colorado.eduPhil Bell, College of Education, University of Washington, pbell@u.washington.eduAbstract: This NSF-funded workshop is designed to support a community of STEMresearchers, district and school leaders, formal and informal educators, and communitycoalitions engaged in building and sustaining research-practice partnerships to improveSTEM education.Focus of the WorkshopThis NSF funded workshop aims to build a community of STEM researchers, district and school leaders, formaland informal educators, and community coalitions engaged in building and sustaining research-practicepartnerships to improve STEM education. Research-practice partnerships are long-term collaborations betweenpractitioners and researchers that are organized to investigate problems of practice and solutions for improvingthe outcomes of educational systems (Coburn, Penuel & Geil, 2012). In STEM education, Math and SciencePartnership Program projects funded by the National Science Foundation are examples of design partnershipsthat bring together subject matter experts in higher education, mathematics and science education researchers,and school districts. There are also funded partnerships in which a network of formal and informal educationorganizations are linked together and with researchers to organize more robust and equitable learning ecologiesfor youth (Bang, Medin, Washinawatok, & Chapman, 2010; Falk et al., 2013).Our aim for building a network of such partners is to increase the capacity of the field for continuousimprovement in STEM education. Our specific objectives for this workshop are to:•••Build knowledge and skill of a network of doctoral and early career researchers (see RPP Workshopfor Early Career and Doctoral students) who can form and maintain long-term partnerships withdistricts, informal education organizations, and community coalitions focused on STEM improvement.Create a network of mature research-practice partnerships focused on next generation mathematics andscience learning and equity that produces resources and knowledge to benefit new partnerships.Develop knowledge about effective partnership strategies and about how best to support a network ofscholars focused on partnership work and a network of research-practice partnerships.•Our basic premise for this work is that STEM improvement at scale requires new opportunities andinfrastructures for fostering ongoing exchange between research and practice. This premise is grounded inconclusions from a recent consensus report that concluded that regular interactions between researchers andpractitioners were the most effective strategy for promoting the use of evidence to guide policy (NationalResearch Council, 2012).ReferencesBang, M., Medin, D., Washinawatok, K., & Chapman, S. (2010). Innovations in culturally based scienceeducation through partnerships and community. In M. S. Khine & M. I. Saleh (Eds.), New science oflearning: Cognition, computers, and collaboration in education (pp. 569-592). New York, NY:Springer.Coburn, C. E., Penuel, W. R., & Geil, K. (2013). Research-practice partnerships at the district level: A newstrategy for leveraging research for educational improvement. Berkeley, CA and Boulder, CO:University of California and University of Colorado.National Research Council. (2012). Using science as evidence in public policy. Washington, DC: The NationalAcademies Press.AcknowledgmentsFunding for this workshop has been provided by the National Science Foundation (DRLAward #1408510).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1710© ISLS