Between the Lines: The Role of Curriculum Materials and TeacherLanguage in Communicating Ideas about Scientific ModelingCarrie-Anne Sherwood, University of Michigan, 610 E. University Ave., Ann Arbor, MI, 48109casher@umich.eduCarrie Allen Bemis, University of Colorado, School of Education, 249 UCB, Boulder, Colorado 80309,carrie.bemis@colorado.eduSavitha Moorthy, Cynthia D’Angelo, Tina Stanford, Christopher Harris, SRI International, 333 RavenswoodAvenue, Menlo Park, CA, 94025savitha.moorthy@sri.com, cynthia.dangelo@sri.com, tina.stanford@sri.com, christopher.harris@sri.comAbstract: This poster examines the extent to which teacher language is supported byinnovative curriculum materials to engage students in a degree of authentic science practice,specifically looking at lessons which integrate model-based activities. Our findings describepatterns in teacher language during explicit metamodeling instruction, and also describes theways in which this language appears to be supported by the science curriculum.IntroductionInnovative, reform-based curriculum materials, such as the project-based materials used in this study, have beendeveloped which reflect the changing needs of society and mirror the work of scientists by integratinginstruction of content with scientific practices. One such practice that has been incorporated into these newcurricular materials due to both its central role in science work, and it’s more prominent role in new reformdocuments (e.g., NRC, 2012), is developing and using models to advance questions and explanations and tocommunicate ideas. We know teachers find it challenging to incorporate model-based instruction into theirpractice (e.g., Windschitl et al., 2008). What is less clear is, if provided the support of reform-based curriculummaterials, of which scientific modeling is an integral aspect, whether teachers have the language around whichto engage their students in science learning that mirrors authentic science work. Classroom discourse,specifically, the language teachers use to communicate science content, provides the context through whichstudents formulate their own ideas, and is significant for the meaning it can convey to students not just aboutscience content, but also about the nature of science and science practices (Zeidler & Lederman, 1989). Thus,this analysis examines whether teacher language is supported by innovative curriculum materials to engagestudents in a degree of authentic science practice, specifically looking at a lesson which integrates a modelbased activity.Theoretical FrameworkFraming this study is the idea that science learning consists of participation in practice (Lave, 1991), and teacherlanguage is an important tool for socializing students into science learning (Gee, 2004). The social interactionbetween students and a more knowledgeable other, such as a teacher, is crucial to the acquisition of scientificmeaning, which is communicated by, and derived from, language (Vygotsky, 1976). Evidence of a relationshipbetween teachers’ language and the subsequent science conceptualizations of students already exists (Zeidler &Lederman, 1989). Specifically, if teacher discourse includes explicit communication of scientifically accurateconcepts, for example, about models, students should be more likely to develop accurate understandings aboutmodels.In a classroom learning environment, the language spoken by the teacher is, in part, influenced by thecurriculum which guides instruction, and also provides a context through which to situate students in sciencelearning. The curriculum used in this study articulates a project-based instructional stance and emphasizesinvestigation of authentic problems and participation in scientific practices, such as constructing and usingmodels. Also included in the materials are explicit opportunities for discourse around the nature of scienceepistemic practices (e.g., modeling), something teachers rarely exhibit in their instruction (Windschitl et al.,2008a). For example, the curriculum includes explicit text that prompts teachers to discuss models in science,and ask students about their experience with models. A defensible hypothesis, therefore, is that the use of thiscurriculum will support teachers’ more explicit language around model-based instruction. Challenges associatedwith enactment of project-based curricula have been well-documented (e.g., Blumenfeld et al., 1991), as havethe challenges associated with model-based science instruction (e.g., Windschitl et al., 2008b). However, asidefrom outlining the components of scientific modeling and the characteristics of model-based tasks, the researchis largely silent regarding the explicit language that has potential to engage students in authentic model-basedinquiry. This study describes ways in which teachers utilize these innovative science curricular materials tosituate students, through language, in model-based learning.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1489© ISLSMethodsThe primary data for this study include video-recordings of classroom instruction during enactment of a lessonfocused on modeling in physical science. These data were gathered from the third year (2012-2013) of a fiveyear (2010-2015) study designed to examine the efficacy of a reform-oriented middle school science curriculum.Participants consisted of nine sixth-grade science teachers, selected because they exhibited explicitmetamodeling instruction in their class. These teachers represented a range of teaching experience, education,and science backgrounds.Given the social and situated framing of this analysis, and the focus on the construct of teacherlanguage, we employed content analysis to analyze transcripts of teacher language during whole-classdiscussion. Constant comparative analysis (Glaser & Strauss, 1967), was used to identify language patternsacross participants. Findings are presented by the themes that arose during explicit metamodeling instruction.Results and ImplicationsFindings presented on this poster describe patterns in teacher language in science modeling instruction. Someillustrative findings are presented here, with more to be elucidated on the poster. We found evidence that theseteachers’ explicit metamodeling instruction both was derived from and supported by the curriculum. Forexample, the lesson text recommends that teachers tell their students, “Some models are simply smaller versionsof the real object”; this guidance was taken up by five of the nine teachers in this analysis, who describedmodels as “smaller versions” or “smaller scale” or “scaled down version” of the “real object.” Additionally, thetext prompts teachers to, “Ask the class if they have ever built a model car or train.” Four of the nine teacherstook up this instruction and asked, for example, “Has anybody ever built a toy plane or a train out of a model?You’ve made a model car, model train, model plane, right?” (excerpt 10).This research has implications for curriculum developers and the writing of educative curriculummaterials. While this analysis adds to other research evidence indicating that explicit metamodeling instructiontends to be rare in science classrooms, our findings also suggest that when provided access to appropriatecurricular materials, teachers’ enactment of explicit metamodeling instruction can be supported. Looking at thecontent of the curriculum and how the guidance for teachers was taken up during enactment, there is arguably aneed for more support for metamodeling in order to help enrich teachers’ interactions with students about thenature and purpose of models. Additionally, the metamodeling guidance needs to be more grounded in thecontext of the specific model used in the lesson. As reform-based science curricula aims to support a morerobust understanding of science practices and engage students in science in more meaningful ways, it isimportant to understand the strengths and limitations of these curriculum materials in supporting teachers'efforts toward these ends.ReferencesBlumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivatingproject-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational psychologist, 26(34), 369-398.Gee, J.P. (2004). Language in the science classroom: Academic social languages as the heart of school-basedliteracy. In W. Saul (Ed.), Crossing borders in literacy and science instruction: Perspectives on theoryand practice (pp. 13–22). Arlington, VA: NSTA Press.Glaser, B. & Strauss, A. (1967). The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research.Lave, J. (1991). Situating learning in communities of practice. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D. Teasley(Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 63–82). Washington, D. C.: AmericanPsychological Association.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978) Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes. Cambridge,MA: HarvardWindschitl, M., Thompson, J., & Braaten, M. (2008a). How Novice Science Teachers Appropriate EpistemicDiscourses Around Model-Based Inquiry for Use in Classrooms. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3),310–378Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., & Braaten, M. (2008b). Beyond the scientific method: Model-based inquiry as anew paradigm of preference for school science investigations. Science Education, 92(5), 941–967.Zeidler, D. L., & Lederman, N. G. (1989). The effect of teachers’ language on students’ conceptions of thenature of science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 26(9), 771–783.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1020407. Anyopinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors anddo not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1490© ISLS