Gesture Enhancement of a Virtual Tutor via Investigating HumanTutor Discursive Strategies: Forms and Functions for ProportionsVirginia J. Flood, Alyse Schneider, and Dor AbrahamsonEmbodied Design Research Laboratory, Graduate School of EducationUniversity of California, Berkeley, Berkeley CA, 94720-1670 USAflood@berkeley.edu, alyse.schneider@berkeley.edu, dor@berkeley.eduAbstract: We examine expert human mathematics-tutor gestures in the context of aninteractive design for proportionality in order to design a virtual pedagogical agent. Earlyresults implicate distinct gesture morphologies serving consistent contextual functionalities inguiding learners towards quantitative descriptions of proportional relations.Towards a Virtual Pedagogical Agent Capable of Instructional Math GestureMathematics teachers spontaneously employ gesture as spatio-dynamic complements to verbal and symbolicutterance (Alibali et al., 2014), and a growing body of work emphasizes such multimodality as an essentialdimension of instructional practice (e.g., Arzarello et al., 2009). However, to date, virtual pedagogical agents(VPAs) embedded in teacher-independent mathematics tutorials lack instructional gesturing capacity. Our NSFfunded CyberLearning EXP design-research project seeks to integrate an animated, gesturing VPA with TheMathematical Imagery Trainer for Proportion (MIT-P), an embodied-learning device (Abrahamson et al., 2012).The MIT-P was designed to provide an interactive context for students to ground proportionality insensorimotor schemes. Students first discover an operatory scheme for achieving a non-symbolical goal state ofa technological device—in Figure 1 this state is “green”—and then signify their strategy mathematically. Thehuman tutor guides learners through the discovery of green-making hand movements and then facilitates asequence of shifts in their green-making strategies toward a mathematical register. Each of these shifts is onset,formed, and enabled by a new symbolic artifact the tutor introduces onto the screen (cursors, a grid, numerals).(red screen)a.(green screen)b.(red screen)+c.(green screen)d.+++++++Figure 1. When the Mathematical Imagery Trainer for Proportion (MIT-P) is set to a 1:2 ratio, the right handneeds to be twice as high as the left hand in order to make the screen green. Learners receive green feedbackwhen hand heights embody a 1:2 ratio (b, d) and red feedback when hand heights depart from this ratio (a, c).The Construction of a Classification Scheme of Human Tutor GestureTo design the VPA, we are collaborating with animation specialists from the UC Davis Motion Lab who willcreate a virtual, gesturing character according to our pedagogical specifications. Because the VPA will belimited to a finite repertoire of gestures and vocalizations, our early task is to schematize the most consequentialmultimodal tactics human tutors employ in the MIT-P context for the animation team to render. Towards thisgoal, we are examining form (“what”) and function (“for what”) of human tutor gestures in our corpus of 23intensive video-recorded task-based interviews with Grade 4-6 students. The need to parameterize gestures forsimulation has necessitated that we develop new methods for accurately and systematically articulating experttutor gesture. To this end, our analysis of human tutor gestures attends to: (1) their occurrence in the temporalcontext within the tutorial sequence; (2) their spatio-dynamic morphology (e.g., hand shapes); (3) their couplingwith focal artifacts (e.g., computer monitor); and (4) their service as a MIT-P tutorial tactic (Abrahamson et al.,2012). We propose that items 2 and 3 describe gesture form while 1 and 4 are descriptors of its function. Below,we present cases that highlight gestural variation observed during three critical phases of the interviews.Distinct Forms of Pedagogical Gestures Contribute to Common FunctionsAs students embark on their initial explorations of the conditions that make the screen green, an early functionof tutorial gesture is to encourage learners to explore novel spatial regions of the screen (Figure 2, A1-3). Later,a second function of tutor gesture is to highlight latent properties of the logico-quantitative relationship betweenthe two cursor heights (Figure 2, B1-3). Still later, as students begin to describe the underlying interactionpattern quantitatively, tutor gestures become components of revoicing student strategies, such as in illustratingthe iterative-additive and multiplicative relationships (Figure 2, C1-3). As illustrated in Figure 2, however, theforms of each of these instructional-gesture functions may be diverse in terms of spatio-dynamic morphologyand coupling (or lack thereof) with environmental focal artifacts. Despite this diversity in gestural component,ICLS 2014 Proceedings1593© ISLSeach of the distinct forms bears its desired functional effect in prompting further exploration, elicitingpreliminary relationship hypotheses, and supporting more detailed articulations of quantitative relationships.Figure 2. Three functions of MIT-P tutor gestures and their distinct forms.Conclusions, Implications, and Benefits of Design WorkA serendipitous benefit of taxonomizing naturalistic gesture for the purpose of designing virtual gesture may be,reflexively, to reveal and highlight potentially critical features of instructional gesture that have been previouslyinaccessible to coarser categorization schemes, such as variation in gestural forms. Past work on instructionalgesture in math learning settings emphasizes the similarity of gestural forms serving similar broad functions(e.g., “linking episodes” in Alibali et al., 2014). However, we emphasize the nuanced variety of gestural formsused for the same highly specific functions. We submit that this variety promotes student understanding (e.g., bydepicting different spatial metaphors for the same mathematical idea; see C2 and C3 in Figure 2).Another benefit of our research has been the design and production of a novel technological system forthe efficient capture and representation of dozens of morphologically unique semiotic bundles (Arzarello et al.,2009). Our solution was to create a comprehensive GIF-clip library (Figure 3) of human tutor pedagogicalchoreographies based on human reenactments of the authentic tutorial tactical moves. This technique allowed usto preserve and organize the many variable forms of gestures by function for their future simulation.Figure 3. Selections of GIF-clip library of re-enacted pedagogical gestures for mathematicsReferencesAbrahamson, D. et al. (2012). Fostering hooks and shifts. Tech., Know., and Learning, 17(1-2), 61-86.Alibali, M. W. et al. (2014). How teachers link ideas in mathematics instruction using speech and gesture: acorpus analysis. Cognition and Instruction, 32(1), 65-100.Arzarello, F., Paola, D., Robutti, O., & Sabena, C. (2009). Gestures as semiotic resources in the mathematicsclassroom. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 70(2), 97-109.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1594© ISLS