Beyond Databases:Librarians in a Project-Based Language Arts CurriculumSarah Evans, University of Washington, 312 Miller Hall, Box 353600, Seattle WA 98195, sarahe@uw.eduAbstract: This study examines how librarians were positioned and their expertise leveraged inhigh school classrooms enacting a project-based ninth grade English Language Artscurriculum crafted from design-based research. Using a sociocultural lens, a qualitativeanalysis of the data reveals that in most situations the librarians’ lack of embeddedness in theschool and students’ lives positioned them as outsiders and diminished their effectiveness inscaffolding students in the research process.The Major Issue(s) AddressedEffective learning requires access to people and resources that represent experience and knowledge in the fieldof study (Barron, 2006; Bell, Tzou, Bricker, & Baines, 2012; Lave & Wenger, 1991). To support students indeveloping the skills required for completing research papers, librarians are often asked to provide theirexpertise as information professionals. A skilled librarian does more than provide books, but also mentorsindividuals throughout the research process, from task definition to evaluating the final product. Each studentcomes with a personal history of information seeking and use that needs to be recognized and incorporated intothe instructional scaffolding. In order for a librarian to develop useful instruction, they need to know both wherestudents are coming from and where they are going, having a vision of the curricular goals. These purposes arebest met by having a librarian embedded in the school setting. (Dresang, 2013)Despite librarians’ value as information experts, many schools no longer employ a full-time trainedlibrarian as a member of their staff. In order to meet the need for expert advice on the research process, a teachermay turn to local public librarians, particularly those whose work focuses on youth. While these publiclibrarians are also information professionals, they are not embedded within the life of the school and, moreparticularly, the lives of these students. Additionally, they may not have knowledge of the curriculum and willlikely only talk to the students a handful of times. In such a situation, it is unlikely that the public librarian’sexpertise will be fully utilized, given their limit connection to the students and their needs. Yet since manyteachers and librarians across the country engage in this manner, it is important to explore the facets of thissituation.Therefore, this research poster explores two questions: 1) how are librarians’ expertise leveraged in aschool setting? and 2) how are librarians’ positioned in a project-based English Language Arts curriculum? Thedata comes from a two-year designed based research project to create a 9th grade English Language Artscurriculum that is project-based and offers opportunity for interaction with experts. Analysis reveals theaffordances and constraints within the school setting for leveraging librarian expertise.Potential Significance of the WorkThis work is potentially significant in two ways. First, it examines how adult expertise functions in theclassroom. Second, it considers how librarians, who are often called into classrooms, are positioned within acurriculum. For many decades K-12 educators have sought ways to connect their students with “real-lifeexperts” in their community. Librarians are a part of most educational communities, whether as a full-timemember of the school staff and/or a trusted resource within the realm of student lives. Yet little existentliterature in library sciences and none in learning sciences examine the role of these adult mentors in thelearning of youth.The Theoretical and Methodological Approach(es) PursuedThe author examines this research from a sociocultural viewpoint, considering the practices enacted in thesituation. Particular attention is paid to the how librarians function as part of the students ecologies of learning(Barron, 2006) and how librarians were positioned within the curriculum (Wortham, 2006). Qualitative contentanalysis was conducted on video recordings of public librarians presenting in a classroom, survey data ofstudent opinions about these presentations, and librarians’ expert feedback on student work during the first year.From the second year, the author analyzed interviews with a school librarian and field notes from conversationswith enactment year teachers. Initial themes were identified in consultation with experts from the research team,after which the author analyzed the data corpus for additional themes.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1633© ISLSPreliminary Findings, Conclusions, and ImplicationsDuring the first year enactment of the curriculum, public librarians were asked to participate in a unit on currentcontroversies and argumentation writing. The purpose was to have these librarians share their expertise inseeking credible information on current events as well as other parts of the research process. Yet because thepublic librarians were not embedded in the life of the school, their knowledge of the students and the curriculumwas limited. Additionally, the teachers positioned the librarians as outsiders in how they spoke with and aboutthem. When the librarians came to share their expertise in class, it was in the form of a presentation that did notdraw on the students’ knowledge of information seeking nor demonstrate the depth of knowledge and resourcesthat the librarians could offer. Many students had seen similar presentations before and quickly becamedisengaged in the activities meant to assist them, later complaining about the librarians’ visit. Later in the unit,the librarians participated in a potentially more effective activity by reviewing individual students’ potentialreferences for the argument paper and offering advice. Here the librarians were better able to assess theindividual students needs and scaffold their suggestions to maximize learning. Unfortunately, because of thestudents’ frustration with previous interactions, most did not take the librarian’s feedback seriously.During the second year enactment, teachers of the curriculum at multiple locations were invited to usetheir local school and/or public librarians to participate in the current controversies and argumentation unit.Such a simple request proved complicated by the various administrative and political structures in differentschools and towns. For example, in one situation the teacher worked as part of a special program that was beinghoused in another school building, and felt they could not access the school library. In another town, there wasno school librarian and the nearest public library was a town away. In contrast, one of the high schools had alibrarian working full-time on staff that had made an effort to become in embedded in the life of the school. Thislibrarian understood the curriculum and maintained positive relations with the teachers. Positioned as a reliableresource to the students, she was able to assess and respond to students in the controversies unit as well as laterunits. She observed changes in the students patterns of inquiry in the library and found they asked moresophisticated questions as they participated in the units and she was able to work with them repeatedly overtime.Based on these initial findings, the implications are that librarians have the potential to be valuablepartners in student learning if their expertise is leveraged properly. Librarians, whether on the inside or theoutside of the school, need to be positioned as the experts they are by teachers and students. They also need tounderstand the curriculum and find ways to build on students’ knowledge, not assume what they need to be told,such as repeating a stale presentation about databases.Relevance to the Theme of the Conference.This study is about learning and becoming in practice, in that we sometimes learn or become somethingunintentional when theory meets practice. In theory, as the curriculum was designed, utilizing the expertise ofschool and public librarians seemed logical and relatively easy to accomplish. In practice, the affordances andconstraints of the school settings and the practices of the participants lead to librarians positioned as uninformedoutsiders and students learning that these information professionals aren’t able to assist them in achieving goals.While many schools had difficult situations with their librarians, the example of the well-embedded high schoollibrarian provides hope that students, and teachers, can learn a different lesson.ReferencesBarron, Brigid. (2006). Interest and self-sustained learning as catalysts of development: A learning ecologyperspective. Human Development, 49(4).Bell, Philip, Tzou, Carrie, Bricker, Leah, & Baines, AnnMarie D. (2012). Learning in diversities of structures ofsocial practice: Accounting for how, why and where people learn science. Human Development, 55(56), 269-284.Dresang, Eliza T. (2013). Digital age libraries and youth: Learning labs, literacy leaders, radical resources. In J.Beheshti & A. Large (Eds.), The information behavior of a new generation : Children and teens in the21st century (pp. 93-116). Lanham, Maryland: The Scarecrow Press, Inc.Lave, Jean, & Wenger, Etienne. (1991). Situated learning : Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge[England]; New York: Cambridge University Press.Wortham, Stanton. (2006). Learning identity : The joint emergence of social identification and academiclearning. Cambridge; New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.AcknowledgmentsThe author gratefully acknowledges the contributions of fellow researchers Paul Teske, Annie Kuo, and DéanaScipio as well as the work of the University of Washington Institute for Science and Mathematics Education andEducurious Partners.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1634© ISLS