Theorizing Learning in the Context of Social MovementsA. Susan Jurow, University of Colorado, Boulder, susan.jurow@colorado.eduBen Kirshner, University of Colorado, Boulder, ben.kirshner@colorado.eduJosé Antonio Torralba, University of Hawaii, Manoa, torralba@hawaii.eduSherine El Taraboulsi, The American University in Cairo, staraboulsi@aucegypt.eduLeah Teeters, University of Colorado, Boulder, leah.teeters@colorado.eduBarbara Guidalli, Universidad de Barcelona, bguidalli@yahoo.com.brNosakhere Griffin-EL, University of Cape Town, nosakhere.griffin-el@gsb@uct.ac.zaSamuel Severance, University of Colorado, Boulder, samuel.severance@colorado.eduMolly Shea, Exploratorium, mshea@exploratorium.eduErik Dutilly, University of Colorado, Boulder, erik.dutilly@colorado.eduDiscussant: Rogers Hall, Vanderbilt UniversityAbstract: Studying learning in social movements is important for Learning Sciencesresearchers because it can help us (a) understand how learning occurs at and affects multiplelevels of historical, cultural, and social activities and (b) how marginalized communitiesparticipate in framing problems and their solutions. The four papers in this symposium presentempirical research from diverse international movements, including the local foods movementin Colorado, youth organizing for educational equity in South Africa, school food reform inSpain, and nationalism in Libya and Italy. Each of the papers address how local actorsexercise agency in relation to complex, dynamic, contested social movements. Implicationsdiscuss how social movements collectively organize just social futures and the role thatlearning scientists can play in lending analytic precision to these processes.General IntroductionLearning scientists, particularly those working from situated or sociocultural perspectives, have argued forseveral decades that research on learning must attend to the ways that learning environments are mediated byculture and history. Classic learning sciences texts, including Bransford, Brown, and Cocking (1999), andSawyer (2006), include sections devoted to explaining how cultural practices outside of school influencelearners’ experiences in school and how classroom and school contexts shape opportunities to learn.We worry, however, that research on learning too often foregrounds dynamic learning trajectoriesagainst a presumed stable or static context. We take the position, consistent with social practice theory, that justas individual learners may be changing and growing, so too are cultural practices. Such practices are challengingto study, however, because the pace at which they change is typically much slower than microgenetic or evenontogenetic change (Rogoff, 2003; Wortham, 2005). Despite the challenge, we need to figure out ways to studylearning as a form of cultural or social organizing aimed at developing new social futures (Penuel & O’Connor,2010). Social movements provide a particularly helpful example of this.Social movements are valuable sites for investigating processes of learning and becoming because aspart of them, groups of people are explicitly attempting to change and challenge the structures that shape theiractions and those of their communities (Holland, Fox, & Daro, 2008). Studying social movements could beadvantageous for Learning Sciences researchers because it can help us understand (a) how learning occurs atand affects multiple levels of historical, cultural, and social activities and (b) the greater inclusion ofmarginalized communities in framing problems and their solutions.We frame our research within a social practices perspective that argues for the importance of studyingthe organizing processes involved in learning and social change (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Holland, Lachicotte,Skinner, & Cain, 1998). A key assumption of this perspective is that researchers of learning should attend to theactive and often contentious work of organizing people, things, and ideas to create access to valued socialfutures (Hall, Wieckert, & Wright, 2010; Nespor, 2004). Building on this perspective, Penuel and O’Connor(2010) have argued that scholars interested in learning should focus on activist projects, as these involve notonly the purposeful organizing of new forms of practice and knowledge, but also of linkages between priorforms of practice and knowledge across settings. The “historically new forms of activity” that emerge fromthese projects often challenge those developed within and rewarded by dominant social groups, and expandopportunities for action, especially among non-dominant communities (Engeström, 1987; Gutierrez, 2008).In this symposium, we bring together four research studies that examine the relationship betweendynamic societal change and individual learning "with the goal of supporting new forms of learning":● Jurow, Teeters, Shea, and Severance examine learning and social change in the local food justicemovement in the western United States.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1302© ISLSTorralba and Guidalli study examines the eating experiences of children in Spanish schools as forms ofactivism against a reductionist school food reform.● Kirshner, Dutilly, and Griffin-EL investigate how an educational equity movement in South Africacoordinates local youth participation with national strategy.● El Taraboulsi studies the structures that facilitate and impede the development of citizenship in thecontext of nation building in Libya.In an increasingly interconnected world, our studies of learning and becoming must account for localglobal interactions. Each project highlights the agency of people as they are mobilized by and create new formsof practice through social movements. Each site under study has a unique history, patterns of immigration,geographic organization, and economic development, which is critical to how each of the researchers conductedtheir analyses. The purpose of our symposium is to draw out common issues shaping learning and becoming aspeople engage in re-assembling scales of practice and their relations to each other. In his role as discussant,Rogers Hall (Vanderbilt University), will use his expertise in studying learning across multiple scales in thecontext of shifting cultural practices at work, in schools, and communities to provide critical commentary andraise implications for the learning sciences. Some of the questions that we hope our cross-context and crossmethodological studies raise include:● In communities facing social upheaval and social injustices, how do people organize new ways ofparticipating in civic society?● What methodological tools and insights could learning scientists productively employ for examininglearning across local and global contexts?● What are some of the tensions for researchers studying activist projects?●Expansive Learning in the Urban Food Justice MovementA. Susan Jurow, Leah Teeters, Molly Shea, and Samuel SeveranceThis paper examines social processes of learning in the local food justice movement. Our project is situatedwithin collective efforts of private, non-profit, and governmental organizations to transform how food isproduced, distributed, and consumed in the western United States. Many of these organizations focus onincreasing food access for the most vulnerable populations in the state where we conducted the research; somecenter on food itself as a core component of promoting community health, while others use food as a means ofworking for social justice. As we have found through our ethnographic and participatory research, thismovement has provided a means for communities to resist, transform, and learn in the “tight circumstances” inwhich they live (McDermott, 2010).Our findings come from a two-year, ongoing study of community organizing led by a non-profitorganization working closely with residents in a largely Mexican immigrant community. The neighborhood hasbeen designated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as a food desert because there are a large number ofpeople living in poverty with limited access to healthy foods (USDA, 2012). The non-profit has the dual aim ofempowering residents and improving food access. It uses an approach that relies on promotoras, i.e., residentshired to facilitate links between the non-profit and the community. The promotora model originated as a LatinAmerican public health strategy; it was developed to help institutions like hospitals capitalize on the sharedcultural practices and language backgrounds between promotoras and residents to facilitate desired health goals(Elder, Ayala, Parra-Medina & Talavera, 2009). In the focal neighborhood, promotoras act as communityconnectors between the non-profit and the community. A central part of the promotoras’ work involves teachingresidents to grow their own backyard gardens, which can provide them with fresh, organically grown food.The backyard garden program has created new connections between people, practices, and values andhas expanded possibilities for learning and action (Engeström & Sannino, 2010). Our first finding reveals thatthrough their compassionate and sustained engagement with community members, promotoras have developed acritical perspective on the needs of residents, the inequities facing their community, and a sense of responsibilityas emerging civic leaders. Our second finding documents how the promotoras’ changing sense of who they arebecoming has affected their actions in the community. Their initial aim of growing gardens has grown to includea desire to challenge inequitable relations of power through reorganizing residents' access to social, educational,and economic resources. In collaboration with the non-profit leadership and residents, promotoras are nowdeeply engaged in developing a community-owned food cooperative and a commercial and educational kitchen.Our study underscores the need to develop ways of theorizing learning as it is situated in intricatelytangled networks of practice. Promotora learning, for example, took shape in relation to historical patterns ofimmigration, the uneven development of educational and health resources in the city, and changing conceptionsof food production and community. To create greater equity within and across these networks of practice, weneed to examine efforts that aim not only to reveal their tensions, but also strive to transform them (Avis, 2007).Radical social movements like the local food justice movement provide a powerful avenue for studying socialchange and its implications for learning, becoming, and organizing a just and sustainable world.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1303© ISLSExamining Children’s School Eating Practices as Processes of Learning toEnvision Alternative Forms of Social Participation: Implications for SchoolFood ReformJosé Antonio Torralba and Barbara GuidalliHow do school children’s and youth’s eating practices and understandings of food constitute a form of activismthat disrupts existing school food reforms and seeks to re-store social and cultural aspects of food and eating?Answering this question requires us to focus on the active participation of children in a process or practice thathas attracted little or no attention from the educational research community (Weaver-Hightower, 2011) and inwhich children have been conceptualized as passive recipients of adults’ designs. It also encourages anexamination of learning, development, and becoming within complex social-cultural and politicized contexts(Poppendieck, 2010), where issues of becoming intersect with social and personal activism. Within thereductionist context of school food reform in Spain, often recognized as ‘nutritionism’ (Scrinis, 2002; Pollan,2008), we document students’ statements and actions that disrupt underlying assumptions of those reforms(namely understanding and producing food and eating experiences in terms of nutrient intakes) and seek to restore key aspects of food and eating (e.g., sociability, pleasure, traditional meals) aligned with children’sidentities as cultural and social eaters (Haden, 2006).In this paper, we show how children in Spanish schools envision themselves as school eaters andthrough that process offer alternative visions of the school foodscape and their positioning within it. Weunderstand this process as a form of activism because it seeks to change, or at least create the underlyingconditions for changing, the organizational structures and eating experiences of students in schools.We employ the notion of foodscape (Mikkelsen, 2011; Johansson et al, 2009) to re-store analyticallythe social, economic, political and cultural elements to a practice - eating - and a setting - the school lunchroom- that have been examined in very restrictive manners (cognitively and socially). Working within this newperspective, we examine issues of learning to become a particular practitioner (Lave & Wenger, 1991) andelaborate a construct, “eater-in-context,” to ground our emerging understanding of learning and becomingwithin the context of eating in schools. We think children’s active roles in learning and becoming are alsoattempts to modify or change the context in which one is forging an identity, namely providing alternativeimages of the school foodscape. We treat documented eating practices and preferences as a form of activismbecause they are deployed and offered by students to modify or critique the existing conditions and to positionthemselves as a different type of eaters than that expected by the institution of school. Eating in a way thatdisrupts traditional Spanish meals or not eating certain foods because of their appearance, lack of ingredients,preparation, and/or presentation are all ways to become an activist and offer forms of resistance to and proposalsfor different eating experiences in the school foodscape. We examine these processes as a way to producequestions of learning and becoming in socioculturally and politically complex settings at the individual andcollective levels. We employ two vignettes to do this.At the individual level, we show how Iñigo, a second grader, employed the geography of the schoollunchroom to suggest and obtain changes with whom he participated during eating. He joined a particular groupand once there, learned to participate in the eating practices of that group to craft an identity as a third gradeeater. His activism resides in the fact that he demonstrated how the organizational structures of the schoollunchroom could be employed to advance his aims of becoming part of a practice (a third grade eater). At thecollective level, we examined statements produced by children from different grade levels and schools inreference to school food and eating experiences. We use these statements and their contexts as evidence orrepresentations of these children’s envisioned identities as school eaters. We treat these visions as part of a childactivist positioning that has been systematically ignored but that continues to impact and to some degree guidethe initiatives of school food reform (e.g., school food waste, preferences, conditions, etc.). The changes thatemerged out of this activism included a call for greater autonomy in the eating experiences of students at school,a call for more equitable forms of eating, and a call for meals that are prepared and offered in ways that betteraligned with their social and cultural perceptions of food and eating. Based on these analyses, we conceptualizebecoming a school eater as a way to:● appropriate ways of eating that are deeply context-bound (eater-in-context), and thus unique to theschool foodscape;● compare elements of different foodscapes to articulate (sometimes in the form of criticism) an image ofone’s eating experiences inside the school foodscape; and,● develop a personal notion of eating as a collective social activity.The school lunchroom is a highly contentious and politicized place (Poppendieck, 2010), where notionsof health, economics, childhood, parenthood, and education compete to craft the eating experiences of children.Examining learning and becoming in such a complex system (foodscape) from the perspective of the eater mayrepresent a productive opportunity for re-examining the capacity and limitations of the bounded systemICLS 2014 Proceedings1304© ISLSconceptualized by researchers from the social cultural historical activity theory perspective (Engeström, 1987).Because we conceptualize learning and development in the school foodscape as a form of activism (i.e., a wayfor children to engage in actual or prospective change), we are proposing that processes of learning within thiscontext are interesting in that they may emerge in constant tension with a parallel activity system- that of theinstitution. How children in such a tension-dense context craft learning and identity is a question worthexamining.Every Generation Has Its StruggleBen Kirshner, Erik Dutilly, and Nosakhere Griffin-ELHow do ordinary young people work together to change institutions or policies that affect their lives? Complexsystems are notoriously hard to alter, especially for youth who lack voting rights and financial resources.Furthermore, the local scale at which youth may experience problems – such as lack of computers in theirschools – is not the scale from which the problem originated (Kurtz, 2003). Current theories of civic learning arelimited because they do not conceptualize the problem of agency at the proper scale. They tend to privilegeclassrooms rather than networks, discrete action projects rather than movements. In this sense they do notprovide theoretical clarity to describe the kinds of coordination challenges facing organizations that aim tofacilitate youth participation in social movements.We address this shortcoming by drawing on work by Nespor (2008) and Zuckerman (2013) toconceptualize and study the social production of political agency in one youth organization, called here LearnerRights, located in South Africa. We examine how young people between the ages of 15 and 24 learn toparticipate in a complex, nation-wide social movement for educational equity. Claims are based on datacollected during 12 months of ethnographic and archival research, including field notes from meetings withyouth, interviews with youth leaders, organization documents, newspapers, and historical analyses.Our findings focus on the ways that Learner Rights (LR) 1) situates its work in a historical narrativeand 2) coordinates local scales of meaning with national scales of regulation.With regard to historical narratives, today’s critics of the African National Congress, South Africa’sgoverning party, confront a dilemma. Criticizing the ANC, which is in power because of its recognized“struggle credentials,” risks being painted as not in solidarity with the South African liberation project.Furthermore, young people today, known as the the born-free generation, have only known the post-apartheidstate.In this context, LR has developed a narrative that claims its legitimacy by linking the revolutionarystruggles of the apartheid years to the present day movement. Several examples from our fieldwork demonstratethis effort to situate the work in a broader historical narrative, best exemplified in LR’s slogan, “Everygeneration has its struggle.” The creation and singing of songs are another example of linkages to “the struggle,”because of the role of “struggle songs” in the anti-apartheid movement. Group singing at LR events is common;the songs include ones that attach new lyrics about contemporary issues to melodies from older struggle songs.With regard to our second finding, people tend to experience injustices at a local level (scales ofmeaning); but often the solution to these injustices can only be found at a more geographically diffuse nationalset of policies (scales of regulation) (Kurtz, 2003). For example, the “scale of meaning” for most ELREmembers is located in their school or township. But learners attending township schools can only get so far intargeting their school principal to address brick and mortar issues.LR manages this scale dilemma by developing, coordinating, and exercising power at three differentscales, all in the service of the same campaign. The first scale is local and seeks to build power in numbers bymobilizing students and their families around issues that affect them directly, such as poor sanitation in theirschools. The second scale is legal: EE has an affiliated “law centre” that researches statues and files legal briefs.The third scale is devoted to media communications and messaging.In a time when ordinary people may feel that government is unaccountable or that the avenues forsocial change are too opaque, social movement organizations fill an important need. This paper shows how LR’seffort to foster youth participation in radical social change involves coordination across various scales of history,meaning, and regulation.Statehood in Purgatory: Regionalism, Nationhood and State-Building in Italyand LibyaSherine El TaraboulsiStudies of civic development are almost uniformly set against a context of national stability or assumedstatehood. Ongoing mobilization in North Africa and Europe, however, underscores the need for historicallygrounded theories of citizenship that account for the messy, dynamic, and conflict filled process of nation andICLS 2014 Proceedings1305© ISLSstate building. This paper offers possible direction for such efforts by engaging in a comparative analysis of thestruggle of nation and state building in two neighboring countries—Italy and Libya.In his book, A History of Modern Libya, Vandewalle (2006) highlights an important point in Libya’srelation to its colonizer; when Italy invaded Libya in 1911, it had only been “unified” for fifty years (24). Italycould not provide a model of statehood to which the Libyan people might have aspired to after liberation; it didnot have much experience in state building itself so it had little to contribute to an already existing non-state.Moreover, Italy had suffered from extreme regionalism that compromised the development of a solid imaginaryof the nation and placed state-building structures in a continuous flux; historical differences between theNorthern regions and the Southern ones produced very complex and diversified understanding of nationhood. Innineteenth century Italy, Royal Prime Minister Massimo D’Azeglio of Sardinia-Piedmont described how theunification had made “Italy but not Italians” (p. 128, Amoretti, 2002). The nation as imagined was fragmentedso it could not provide a model of that to the Libyan population, nor were the Libyans given a chance toorganically develop structures for both statehood from within; continuous political and economic instabilitiesalong with the absence of an indigenous capacity to produce those structures thwarted their development.The process of “learning” and developing tools of state building was impeded, an imaginary of thenation was confused, and so the process of “becoming” a coherent nation and a consolidated state was not madepossible. Both Italy and Libya struggle today because of incomplete state building and nation building processes.There is a need to develop frameworks of understanding of the transition from a non-state to statehood in termsof its implications for civic participation as well as building institutions that contribute to or thwart statehood.The role of institutions in state building and the role of cultural constructs in nationalism are central.The core question is if it is possible to establish a state with a confused sense of nationhood. Which comes first?What kind of lessons learned can we obtain from other countries that can help inform our understanding of thecrossroads between both? I propose to take state and nation building to their points of departure and explore inlight of those examples how the path from a non-state to statehood was thwarted or made possible. Critical tomy historical analysis is the role of institutions, formal and informal, in allowing or preventing that transitionacross the trajectory from unification or liberation to the present. Historical institutionalism will be used as anapproach in the analysis with a revisiting of North’s (2009) thesis on transitioning from one social order toanother and his concept of an Open Access order. Special emphasis will be placed on the role of civil societyand citizen mobilization in state building and establishing understandings of nationhood. The approach andmethods that inform this research are qualitative and combine both history and social anthropology. Datasources include archives in Italy at the University of Bologna and exploring recordings of oral history at theCenter for Libyan Studies in Tripoli. In depth interviews and focus group discussions will also be conductedwith civil society leaders, activists and government officials to inform my analyses.ConclusionThe focus of this symposium is on understanding the nature of learning in social movements. To date, socialmovements have received relatively little attention from learning sciences researchers. We argue, however, thatthey provide a powerful perspective for examining transformative learning and the emergence of new culturalpractices in shifting sociohistorical contexts. This holds great potential for learning sciences research,particularly efforts to design for greater equity for historically marginalized communities. Through comparisonof four investigations into social movements situated in different parts of the world, we aim to stimulatediscussion of the possibilities of social movement research for the learning sciences and educational practice.ReferencesAmoretti, U. M. (2002). A new look at federalism: Italy decentralizes, Journal of Democracy, pp. 126-140.Avis, J. (2007). Engeström’s version of activity theory: A conservative praxis? Journal of Education and Work,20(3), 161-177.Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.) (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, andschool. Washington, DC: National Academy.Elder, J.P., Ayala, G., Parra-Medina, D, Talavera, G. (2009) Health communication in the Latino community:issues and approaches. Annual Review of Public Health, 30(1), 227-251.Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research.Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit.Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and futurechallenges. Educational Research Review, 5, 1-24.Gutiérrez, K. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading Research Quarterly, 43(2),148-164.Haden, R. (2006). Pandora’s lunchbox: On esthetics, education, and food. Food, Culture and Society, 9(3): 26574.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1306© ISLSHall, R., Wieckert, K., Wright. K. (2010). How does cognition get distributed? Case studies of making conceptsgeneral in technical and scientific work. In M. Banich & D. Caccamise (Eds.), Generalization ofknowledge: Multidisciplinary perspectives, Psychology.Holland, D., Fox, G., & Daro, V. (2008). Social movements and collective identity: A decentered, dialogic view.Anthropological Quarterly, 81(1), 95-125.Holland, D., W. Lachicotte, D. Skinner, and C. Cain. 1998. Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge,MA: Harvard University.Johansson, B., Hansen, G. L., Makela, J., Hillen, S., Jensen, T. M., Huotilainen, A. (2009). Nordic children’sfoodscapes: Images and reflections. Food, Culture and Society, 12(1), 26-51.Kurtz, H. (2003). Scale frames and counter-scale frames: constructing the problem of environmental injustice.Political Geography, 22, 887-916.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation, Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity.McDermott, R. (2010). The passion and ingenuity of learning in tight circumstances: Toward a politicaleconomy of education (pp. 144-159). National Society for the Study of Education Yearbook, 109(1)Mikkelsen, B. E. (2011). Images of foodscapes: Introduction to foodscape studies and their application in thestudy of healthy eating out-of-home environments. Perspectives in Public Health, 131(5), 209-216.Nespor, J. (1994). Knowledge in practice: Space, time and curriculum in undergraduate physics andmanagement. London: Routledge.Nespor, J. (2008). Education and place, Educational Theory, 58, 475-489.North, D.C., Wallis, J.J., & Weingast, B.R. (2009). Violence and social orders: A conceptual framework forinterpreting recorded human history. Cambridge and NY: Cambridge University.Penuel, W., & O'Connor, K. (2010). Learning research as a human science: Old wine in new bottles? In W. R.Penuel & K. O'Connor (Eds.), Learning research as a human science (pp. 268-283). National Societyfor the Study of Education Yearbook, 109(1).Pollan, M. (2008). In defense of food: An eater’s manifesto. New York: Penguin.Poppendick, J. (2010) Free for all: Fixing school food in America. Berkeley, CA: University of California.Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. New York: Oxford University.Sawyer, R.K. (2006). The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 1-16). NY: Cambridge University.Scrinis, G. (2002). Sorry Marge. Meanjin, 61(4), 108-16.Torralba, J. A., & Guidalli, B. A. (2013). A conceptual framework for understanding children’s foodscapes, In& Out of School: Implications for School Food Reform. 4th European Conference on HealthPromoting Schools. October 6-9, Odense, Denmark.United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). Economic Research Service. Products: Food Desert Locator.http://www.ers.usda.gov/dataproducts/food-desert-locator.aspx. Retrieved October 11, 2012.Weaver-Hightower, M. B. (2008). An ecology metaphor for educational policy analysis: A call to complexity.Educational Researcher, 37(3), 153-167.Wortham, S. (2005). Learning identity: The joint emergence of social identification and academic learning.New York: Cambridge University.Zuckerman, E. (2013). Beyond the crisis in civics. Keynote presented at the Digital Media and LearningConference, Chicago, IL.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1307© ISLS