What Is and Who Can Do Science?Supporting Practice-Linked Identities in Science forRacially/Ethnically Underrepresented YouthTammie Visintainer, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, tvis@berkeley.eduAbstract. This study examines the development of students’ science and racial identitiesduring summer science research programs. I utilize qualitative and quantitative data sources toexamine students’ incoming ideas about what science is and who can do science, how theseideas shift while participating in scientific practices, and program resources that support theseshifts. Findings show that ideas about what and who shift together and unique resourcessupport the co-construction of students’ science and racial identities.IntroductionThe issue of racial/ethnic underrepresentation in science (Oakes, Ormseth, Bell & Camp 1990) is complicatedby dominant representations of what science is and who can do science. These representations provide narrowimages of science (e.g. prescribed labs) and scientists (e.g. white, male) that are problematic for students fromdiverse backgrounds. A typical solution to increasing diversity in science is through instructional and policyreforms (i.e. focusing on what science is), yet racially-based achievements gaps are persistent (National ScienceBoard, 2012). In order to dismantle persistent issues of equity, equal attention must be paid to the messagesyouth of color receive in science contexts about who can do science.ObjectiveThis study examines trajectories of developing interest in, and identification with science for high schoolstudents of color as they participate in summer science research programs designed for racially/ethnicallyunderrepresented youth. Students conduct investigations alongside scientist mentors as part of the programs. Iexplore science identity in relation to racial/ethnic identity to examine how ideas about what science is and whocan do science develop together through participation in the practices of science. I ask three questions:•••What are racially/ethnically underrepresented students’ incoming ideas about who does/can do science?How does conducting research alongside scientist mentors inform students’ views of what science is?How do program resources support shifts in students’ ideas about what science is and who can doscience?Potential Significance of WorkThough research shows that racial positioning matters for women of colors’ long-term science trajectories (e.g.Carlone & Johnson, 2007; Malone & Barabino, 2008), treatments of race in relation to science are limited. Newtheoretical frameworks are needed that consider relationships between science learning and multiple aspects ofidentity construction (racial, disciplinary, academic) (Varelas, Martin, Kane, 2012). This research providesempirical evidence for how students’ racial and science identities develop together in science contexts and thetypes of program resources that support shifts in students’ ideas about what science is and who can do science.Theoretical FrameworkI draw on socio-cultural theories of learning and identity (Wenger, 1998). I view identities as fluid, dynamic andsocially constructed from the resources available (Holland et.al.,1998) as students are positioned and positionthemselves in science learning environments (Harre, 2008). Science identity literature offers insights into thetypes of identities offered to underrepresented youth (e.g. Polman & Miller, 2010; Tan & Calabrese Barton,2010), yet research that examines how youth of color negotiate their racial positioning in relation to science islimited (Rahm, 2007). I utilize the “practice-linked identity” framework (viewing participation in a practice asintegral to who one is) and its supporting identity constructing resources (material, relational, ideational) (Nasir& Cooks, 2009; Nasir, 2012) in order to explore how learning, positioning, engagement, and connection toscience develop in context.Overview of MethodsPrograms. The three summer science programs involved in this study contrasted in two main ways: 1) programcontent: race/diversity explicit (directly addresses race/diversity) vs. race/diversity implicit, and 2) scienceinvestigation content: community-based (e.g. environmental science) or traditional (e.g. physics). Participants.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1673© ISLS1) Students: grades 9-12, Northern California high schools, 2) Mentors: science instructors, science graduatestudents. Data Sources. 1) Pre/post student surveys; 2) Pre/post student content assessments; 3) Semi-structuredinterviews: a) student interviews (pre/post, 6 focal students/program), b) scientist mentors; 4) Programobservations.FindingsAnalyses show that students’ incoming ideas about who does science are often shaped by stereotypical imagesof scientists (e.g. white, male, lab coats) and science practices (e.g. mixing chemicals). As a result, studentsoften see their own racial background and experiences as discontinuous with scientists. This informs students’sense making regarding racial/ethnic underrepresentation in science in ways that often places blame on theindividual or ones’ culture/racial group. Findings show that students’ ideas about what science is (e.g. practices)and who can do science shift together while participating in the practices of science. Conducting researchalongside scientist mentors broadens students’ views of what counts as science, and allows students to identifyas capable science learners. In addition, different practices (e.g. presenting research) serve different identityfunctions for students impacting how they see themselves in relation to science. Some program resourcesutilized by instructors/mentors support holistic (science and racial) identity construction. Instructors whoemployed a racially conscious lens made unique resources available that supported the co-development ofstudents’ science and racial identities. Findings from this research illuminate program resources that increasestudents’ understanding of and ability to take up the practices of science and create opportunities that allow forshifts in students’ ideas of who can do science.Conclusions and ImplicationsThis research challenges and extends our understanding of scientific practices that can be leveraged in scienceprograms and classrooms to create more authentic experiences and broaden opportunities for participation inscience. Likewise, this research illuminates program resources that allow students to negotiate their racial/ethnicidentities and positioning in relation to science and create opportunities for shifts in their ideas of who can doscience. Together these findings can inform the design of learning environments that create multiple pathwaysfor learning and identification in science and better support practice-linked identities in science for all learners.ReferencesCarlone, H.B. & Johnson, A. (2007). Understanding the science experiences of successful women ofcolor:Science identity as an analytic lens. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44(8)1187-1218.Harre, R. (2008). Positioning Theory. Self-Care and Dependent-Care Nursing, 16(1), 28-32.Holland, D., Skinner, D., Lachicotte, W., and Cain, C. (1998). Identity and Agency in Cultural Worlds. FirstHarvard University Press.Malone, K.R., & Barabino, G. (2008). Narrations of race in STEM research settings: Identity formation and itsdiscontents. Science Education, 93(3), 485-510.Nasir, N.S. (2012). Racialized Identities: Race and Achievement Among African American Youth. StanfordUniversity Press, Stanford, CA.Nasir, N.S. & Cooks, J. (2009). Becoming a hurdler: How learning settings afford identities. Anthropology &Education Quarterly, 40(1), 41-61.National Science Board (2012). Science and Engineering Indicators Digest 2012. Arlington VA: NationalScience Foundation (NSB 12-02).Oakes, J., Ormseth, Bell & Camp (1990). Multiplying inequalities: The effects of race, social class, andtracking on opportunities to learn mathematics and science. RAND Report. Pp. 1-152.Polman, J.L. & Miller, D. (2010). Changing stories: Trajectories of identification among African Americanyouth in a science outreach apprenticeship. American Educational Research Journal, 47(4), 879-918.Rahm, J. (2007). Youths’ and scientists’ authoring of and positioning within science and scientists’ work.Cultural Studies of Science Education, 1, 517–544.Tan, E. & Calabrese Barton, A. (2010). Transforming science learning and student participation in sixth gradescience: A case study of a low-income, urban, racial minority classroom. Equity & Excellence inEducation, 43(1), 38-55.Verelas, M., Martin, D.B, Kane J.M. (2012). Content learning and identity construction: A framework tostrengthen African American students’ mathematical and science learning in urban elementary schools.Human Development 55, 319-339.Wenger, E.(1998).Communities of practice:Learning, meaning, and identity.New York:Cambridge UniversityPress.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1674© ISLSWorkshops