Investigating the Effect of Curricular Scaffolds on 3rd-GradeStudents’ Model-Based Explanations for Hydrologic CyclingLaura Zangori, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68583, laura.zangori@huskers.unl.eduCory T. Forbes, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68583, cforbes3@unl.eduChristina V. Schwarz, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, cschwarz@msu.eduAbstract: Opportunities to generate model-based explanations are crucial for elementarystudents yet are rarely foregrounded in elementary science learning environments, despiteevidence that early learners can reason from models when provided scaffolding. We use amixed methods design to investigate the comparative impact of embedded visual and writtenprompts (e.g. curricular scaffolds) on 3rd-grade students’ formulation of model-basedexplanations for the water cycle. Students from six 3rd-grade classrooms generated models ofthe water cycle during an 8-week water unit. Findings suggest that students in the scaffoldedgroup (n = 120) more frequently represented sequences of water underground than theunscaffolded group (n = 112). However qualitative results indicate the scaffolded group wasalso less likely to generate model-based explanations from their sequences of ‘hidden’ waterprocesses. We conclude that embedded curricular scaffolds may support students to consider‘hidden’ components but, alone, may be insufficient for theory building.Objectives and Potential SignificanceModel-based explanation-construction in science learning environments involves students constructing anexternal representation to explain how and why a systems works (Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 2005; Lehrer &Schauble, 2010; Schwarz et al., 2009). The external representation is an abstraction of a process that representssystem components, interactions, and connections. Students are then able to operationalize how and whythrough the underlying unobservable cause – the mechanism - of key processes that interconnect to define thesystem (Braaten & Windschitl, 2011; Machamer, Darden & Craver, 2000). Though generating model-basedexplanations is a powerful practice, it is rarely foregrounded in elementary science instruction or widelyavailable science curriculum materials, despite evidence that students are capable of engaging in these practiceswhen supported to do so (Gunckel, Covitt, Salinas, & Anderson, 2012.; Lehrer & Schauble, 2010; Manz, 2012;Schwarz et al., 2009). Most often when students engage with models in elementary science learningenvironments, they serve as illustrations, demonstrations, or summaries of processes, but are not used orconsidered as a way of learning (Abell & Roth, 1995; Windschitl, Thompson, & Braaten, 2008).In this study, we draw upon Sherin and colleagues’ emphasis on ‘learning artifacts’ (2004, pg. 406) toexplore the comparative impact of curricular, task-based scaffolds on 3rd-grade students’ model-basedexplanations about sequences underlying the water cycle, a complex system comprised of many constituentprocesses. The Next Generation Science Standards (NRC, 2012) identify the hydrologic cycle as a coreconceptual strand across the elementary grades that anchors future learning about water-related phenomena(Gunckel et al., 2012). However, water-related phenomena are challenging for students (Henriques, 2002),particularly process sequences that underlie system dynamics. Yet, little research has been conducted onelementary students’ reasoning about hydrologic cycling and, as a result, there is much to learn about how tooptimally support early learners to use models to reason scientifically about the water cycle. This study isgrounded in a learning performances framework (Forbes, Zangori, & Schwarz, 2014; Schwarz et al., 2009) thathighlights mechanism and sequence as core elements of model-based explanations. Our questions are:1.2.Do embedded curricular scaffolds impact students’ model-based explanations for the water cycle?If so, how do 3rd-grade students formulate model-based explanations for the water cycle whenprovided embedded curricular scaffolds?Background and Theoretical FrameworkThe hydrologic cycle is a particularly challenging area for students because many underlying processes thatcomprise this complex geosystem, such as phase change and groundwater flow, do not lend themselves tounaided observation (Gunckel et al., 2012; Henriques, 2002). Early learners struggle to postulate unseenmechanisms for observable phenomena. Both evaporation and subsurface water flow are ‘hidden’ processesthat even older students have difficulties conceptualizing (Gunckel et al., 2012; Henriques, 2002). Rich,learner-centered science learning environments should therefore be designed around multiple scaffolds, bothcurriculum-embedded and provided by the teacher through instruction, that work synergistically to addresscognitive and practice-oriented learning outcomes (Sherin, Reiser, & Edelson 2004). Curricular scaffolds, heredefined as visual and written prompts embedded within curriculum materials (McNeill & Krajcik, 2009), are anICLS 2014 Proceedings942© ISLSimportant mode of providing cognitive supports to students. However, little research has been conducted toexplore how to optimally scaffold early learners’ use of models to reason about water systems.To support both the design AND empirical study of model-centric elementary science learningenvironments, we have developed a comprehensive, domain-specific learning performance framework toaccount for students’ model-based explanation-construction and conceptual understanding about water inmotion (i.e. ‘big ideas’) and the scientific practice of modeling (Forbes et al., 2014; Schwarz et al., 2009). Acore component of the framework is process sequences. Sequences represent the connections and the continuitybetween components of the process that comprise a complex system (Machamer et al., 2000). For example,when scientists attempt to understand or explain complex systems through modeling, the components of thesystem are connected with arrows (e.g., condensation  precipitation evaporation). The arrows represent theactivity for how and why, for example, the condensation component ‘became’ the precipitation component andso on. It is within the arrows that the mechanism – the underlying unobservable cause – is articulated. It is onlyin the understanding of what the arrows represent that the mechanism is understood (Bechtel & Abrahamsen,2005; Machamer et al., 2000). Sequences are apparent in geosystems which are defined by overlapping andintegrated processes creating dynamic complex systems. These processes are a function of sequential cause andeffect, both observable and unobservable, in which one phenomenon impacts another. In order to understanddynamic systems, including the water cycle, early learners must be provided opportunities to both identify thesequences within this system of occurrences and postulate mechanisms that connect them to provide afoundation for a more sophisticated understanding of systems (i.e., systems thinking) that they will develop inlater grades (Gunckel et al., 2012; Schwarz et al., 2009).Research Design and Methodological ApproachThis concurrent mixed methods study is situated within a broader design-based research program conducted aspart of a 3-year, NSF-funded project designed to a) explore and promote 3rd-grade students’ formulation ofmodel-based explanations for hydrologic cycling through curriculum materials enhancement and instruction,and b) empirically investigate associated instructional and student learning outcomes. Six 3rd-grade classroomswere purposefully selected (Patton, 2001) based on teachers’ teaching experience, student demographics, andtheir use of an existing, commercially-available, kit-based curriculum module about water.DesignTo afford student opportunites to formulate model-based explanations, two supplemental lessons wereintegrated into to the curriculum module, one each at the beginning and end. Each lesson afforded students theopportunity to complete a modeling task that involved constructing a 2-D diagrammatic process model of thewater cycle and responding to a series of prompts designed to elicit students’ mechanism-based explanations foranswers to the following question: ‘where does the rain go when it reaches the ground?’. Two differentversions of the modeling task were employed. Students in three classrooms completed modeling tasks thatincluded no written or visual prompts while students in the other three classrooms completed tasks with bothverbal and visual prompts (Table 1). The modeling tasks were otherwise identical.Table 1: Elements of scaffolded and unscaffolded student modeling tasksUnscaffoldedStudentInstructionsUse the box on thenext page to draw amodel of what youthink happens to rainafter it reaches theground.ModelTemplateICLS 2014 ProceedingsScaffoldedUse the box on the next page to draw a model of what you thinkhappens to rain after it reaches the ground.• Include what you think are the very most important things thathappen to rain when it reaches the ground• Include what you think happens on top of and under the groundwhen it rains• Show why these things happen to rain when it reaches the groundIf helpful, use words and/or numbers to label parts of your model(Empty box)943© ISLSData Collection and AnalysisAll pre- and postunit student modeling artifacts were collected (n=120 scaffolded; n=112 unscaffolded) andscored using a rubric developed from an empirically-tested learning performances framework for elementarystudents’ sensemaking about the hydrologic cycle (Forbes et al., 2014; Schwarz et al., 2009). We examined andscored the students’ modeling tasks for the level of sophistication in their representations of sequences (e.g.water in the sky  falls to the ground) for the big idea of water in motion. The scoring rubric is shown in Table2. Scoring levels were identified and validated through empirical development of the learning performanceframework (see Forbes et al., 2014). The unit of analysis for scoring was the students’ models and writtenresponses to task prompts. The individual scores for students’ pre- and postunit modeling tasks were importedinto SAS for statistical analysis using double-factor repeated measures mixed model ANOVA. The dependentvariable was the students’ scores on the postunit modeling task and the independent variable was the scaffoldedand unscaffolded modeling groups, controlling for student scores on preunit modeling task.Table 2: Sequence scoring rubricLevel0123Sequence representationNo sequence representedOnly describes 1 change (water in the sky  falls to the ground)Describes 2 or more changes but the sequence only goes in one directionDescribes 2 or more changes and the sequence goes in two directionsFive students from each classroom were also selected to participate in reflective grounded interviewsabout their pre- and postunit water cycle models and written responses (n=60). All student interviews wereimported into ATLAS.ti and analyzed qualitatively using classical content analysis (Patton, 2001) for a prioricode of sequence and mechanism. Qualitative analysis involved an iterative process of data coding, displayingand verification (Miles & Huberman, 1994) to identify themes within the interviews that provided insight intothe students’ articulation of mechanisms generated from their modeled water cycle sequences.Empirical ResultsCount	  In research question 1, we examined the impact of embedded curricular scaffolds on students’ representation ofwater cycle sequences and found that embedded curricular visual and written prompts supported students’representation of the direction and quantity of process sequences underlying the water cycle in their postunitmodels, F(1, 90) = 0.05, p = 0.01, as shown in Figure 1.45	  40	  35	  30	  25	  20	  15	  10	  5	  0	  Without	  prompts	  With	  Prompts	  0	  1	  2	  3	  Score	  Level	  Figure 1. Process sequences in students’ scaffolded (n=60) and unscaffolded (n=55) water cycle modelsAs shown in Figure 1, the most substantial difference between the two conditions was the prevalence oflevel ‘3’ scores in the scaffolded group as compared to the unscaffolded group, in which there were no level ‘3’scores. More students from the scaffolded group were able to incorporate two or more process sequences intotheir models and illustrate multidirectionality of these process sequences in their explanations.In research question 2, we qualitatively analyzed students’ modeling tasks and interviews to exploredifferences in students’ model-based explanations between the two conditions. We found two dominant themes.First, students in the scaffolded modeling group more frequently represented ‘hidden’ sequences of groundwaterand water movement underground prior to returning to the sky (Figure 2). The students in the scaffolded groupused both words and arrows to show sequences of rain moving through the underground layers. They frequentlyICLS 2014 Proceedings944© ISLSarticulated that “water get trapet [trapped]” (A.CM1) in the gravel layer and was unable to move any furtherunderground. They drew and traced with their finger sequences of water moving vertically until it reached thegravel layer then moving horizontally into the lake (Figure 2). As Jackie stated, since “[rain] can’t go under thesolid rock…it goes back into the lake” (P1:2713:2714). While the unscaffolded group also drew sequences ofrain reaching the ground, their representations did not go further into the ground than just under the surface.They articulated that vertical water movement stops at ground surface because once rain reaches the ground, itdoes not have “anywhere else to go” (P1: 2904:2907) under the ground. We found that both groups includedevaporation in their sequences (Figure 2); however, only the scaffolded group connected evaporation to theirunderground sequences creating a continuous loop and thereby representing the water cycle. The unscaffoldedgroup most frequently only considered evaporation occurring from puddles and did not connect this sequence totheir representations of water falling to the ground. While evaporation in both groups was drawn as arrowsmoving from bodies of water back to the sky, the scaffolded group most frequently drew arrows of waterreturning to clouds while the unscaffolded group drew arrows of water returning to the sun (Figure 2).Second, even though the scaffolded group more frequently represented arrows connecting andindicating ‘hidden’ sequences underground, they were unable to articulate the mechanism - the how and why –for how water moves underground and returns to the sky. When we asked students in the scaffolded group whywater flows vertically through the gravel layer, they responded with a description of what occurs rather thanhow or why it occurs. For example Nancy stated “…it [rain] comes from the sky…into the grass, and throughthe soil, sand and gravel, and…it makes the lake bigger…and the thing [evaporation] is taking the water fromthe lake” (P1:2836:2841). In this manner, Nancy has described her model to us, but not generated anexplanation for the process sequences. However the unscaffolded group used their models to begin to attributemechanisms for how and why water moves both in their representations of water falling to the ground and thenwater returning to the sky. They discussed that water reaches the ground because plant matter “acts like amagnet” for pulling water from the sky (N.CM2) and the “sun is so hot” it ‘takes’ (P1:2981) or ‘soaks’ (P1:423)water up from the ground. Overall, the unscaffolded group more frequently generated model-based explanationsmodels for process sequences while the scaffolded group typically did not.Figure 2. Students sequence in embedded scaffold (S3.AM2) and unscaffolded (T.NM2) postunit modelsDiscussion and Relevance to the Conference ThemeThis work foregrounds elementary students’ learning within a discipline-specific (i.e. hydrologic cycle)epistemic practice (i.e. modeling) and therefore exemplifies the ICLS 2014 conference theme of ‘learning andbecoming in practice’. Scientific modeling is a core scientific practice (NRC, 2012) that remainsunderemphasized in K-12 science, particularly in the elementary grades. Too often, when models are used inscience classrooms, they are provided as static illustrations rather than to engage students in modeldevelopment, use, and refinement as an active, sustained practice. As a result, little research exists to guideefforts to engage students in epistemically-rich, model-centric elementary science learning environments thatfoster and promote modeling as a way of learning (Abell & Roth, 1995; Windschitl et al., 2008). Here, weengaged students in co-development of modeling practices and content knowledge to support their formulationof model-based explanations (Forbes et al., 2014; Lehrer & Schauble, 2010; Manz, 2012; Schwarz et al., 2009).The water cycle is a complex geosystem fundamental to understanding biotic and geosphericphenomena and, as such, is central in K-12 science standards (Gunckel et al., 2012; Henriques, 2002; NRC,2012). However, students often struggle with the epistemic and cognitive demands placed upon them by thedynamic processes that comprise complex systems such as the hydrologic cycle where major components arelargely ‘hidden’ from view. In order to support students in considering hidden process sequences, we providedvisual and written prompts (McNeill & Krajcik, 2009) to explore the ways in which students engaged with theseprompts to conceptualize water cycle sequences, and reason about groundwater. Study findings indicate thatICLS 2014 Proceedings945© ISLSvisual and written prompts embedded in curricular tasks supported students to consider some important ‘hidden’components of water in motion that the unscaffolded group typically did not include in their models. This mayimply that embedded scaffolds provide students with additional representational space to add elements theywould not otherwise consider (Sherin et al., 2004). However, results also indicate that the students who wereprompted to model underground water processes seemed unable to articulate conceptual understanding about thephenomenon and did not generate explanations for sequences they represented within the visual prompts. Wehypothesize that even though the invisible components were present, the phenomena may become meaninglessto the learner if they cannot generate an explanation. In these instances, models became illustrations to describerather than representations for use in sensemaking (Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 2005; Braaten & Windschitl, 2011).In contrast, the unscaffold group did not represent water underground, but did articulate model-basedexplanations for the sequences they included in their models. Even though the explanations from this groupwere based on naïve mechanisms of evaporation, their reasoning indicates that they were able to generatescientifically accepted explanations from their representations (Machamer et al., 2000). Taken together, theseresults suggest that engaging elementary students in generating model-based explanations about the water cyclemay require multi-modal representations and varied scaffolds to support students in conceptualizing hiddencomponents and how they may function within a system to afford mechanistic outcomes (Sherin et al., 2004).However, caution must be followed using embedded visual prompts within the modeling task as they mayinhibit student opportunities for sensemaking (e.g., Abell & Roth, 1995).ReferencesAbell, S. & Roth, M. (1995). Reflections on a fifth-grade life science lesson: Making sense of children’sunderstanding of scientific models. International Journal of Science Education, 17(1), 59-74.Bechtel, W. & Abrahamsen, A. (2005). Explanation: A mechanist alternative. Studies in History and Philosophyof Biological and Biomedical Science. 36, 421-441.Braaten, M. & Windschitl, M. (2011). Working toward a stronger conceptualization of scientific explanation forscience education. Science Education, 95(4), 639-669. doi: 10.1002/sce.20449Forbes, C.T., Schwarz, C., & Zangori, L. (in press). Development of an empirically-based learningperformances framework for 3rd-grade students’ model-based explanations about hydrologic cycling.In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference of the Learning Sciences – ICLS 2014.Boulder, CO: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Gunckel, K. L., Covitt, B. A., Salinas, I., & Anderson, C. W. (2012). A learning progression for water in socioecological systems. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 49(7), 843-868. doi:10.1002/tea.21024Henriques, L. (2002). Children’s ideas about weather: A review of the literature. School Science andMathematics, 102(5), 202-215. doi: 10.1111/j.1949-8594.2002.tb18143.xLehrer, R. & Schauble, L. (2010). What kind of explanation is a model? In M. K Stein & L. Kucan (Eds.)Instructional explanations in the disciplines, 9-22, New York, NY: Springer.Machamer, P., Darden, L. & Craver, C. (2000). Thinking about mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 67(1), 1-25.Manz, E. (2012) Understanding the codevelopment of modeling practice and ecological knowledge. ScienceEducation, 96(6), 1071-1105. doi: 10.1002/sce.21030McNeill, K. L. & Krajcik, J. (2009). Synergy between teacher practices and curricular scaffolds to supportstudents in using domain specific and domain general knowledge in writing arguments to explainphenomena. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(3), 416-460.Miles, M.B. & Huberman, A.M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.NRC, (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, cross-cutting concepts, and core ideas.Washington, DC: National Academies PressPatton, M. Q. (2001). Qualitative research and evaluation methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Schwarz, C. V., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Kenyon, L., Acher,A., Fortus, D., Shwartz, Y., Hug, B., & Krajcik, J.(2009). Developing a learning progression for scientific modeling: Making scientific modelingaccessible and meaningful for learner. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 632-654.Sherin, B. Reiser, B. J., Edelson, D. (2004). Scaffolding analysis: Extending the scaffolding metaphor tolearning artifacts. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 13(3), 387-421. doi: 10.1207/s15327809jls1303_5Windschitl, M., Thompson, J. & Braaten, M. (2008). How novice science teachers appropriate epistemicdiscourses around model-based inquiry for use in classrooms. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3), 310378. doi: 10.1080/07370000802177193AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation (DRL-1427115). Anyopinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) anddo not necessarily reflect the views of NSF.ICLS 2014 Proceedings946© ISLS