Developing Mechanistic Model-Based Explanations of Phenomena:Case Studies of Two Fifth Grade Students’Epistemologies in Practice over TimeChristina V. Schwarz, Li Ke, May Lee, and Joshua RosenbergDepartment of Teacher Education, Michigan State University, 620 Farm Lane, East Lansing, MI 48824cschwarz@msu.edu, keli1@msu.edu, leemay1@msu.edu, jrosen@msu.eduAbstract: To foster meaningful engagement in scientific practices within classrooms, we mustbetter understand how students can productively develop their epistemologies in practice(EIP) across contexts. This study traces how two high-performing fifth grade students engagedin scientific modeling across three modeling-centered units over one and a half years. Toanalyze their epistemologies in practice over time, we examined their model-basedexplanations and reflective talk about the rationale and purposes of their explanations. Whileboth students developed more mechanistic explanations of phenomena, they did so in differentways. One developed a meta-level rhetorical strategy to explain “how and why” phenomenaoccurred, even in non-prompted contexts. The other used a reductionist analytical strategy tolook for deeper level mechanisms of phenomena. These cases provide evidence that studentsdevelop EIPs across contexts, and leads to insights about what develops, what might influencethis development, and how EIPs can be further supported in classrooms.Supporting Meaningful Engagement in Scientific PracticesThe science education community has taken a “practice turn” with respect to K-12 reform efforts (Ford &Forman, 2006). The Framework (National Research Council, 2012) and NGSS (National Research Council,2013) have highlighted the idea that students should learn core disciplinary knowledge while engaged inscientific practices. This turn recognizes the importance of engaging students in communities of practice (e.g.,Wenger, 1998) that pursue classroom versions of the knowledge-building goals embraced by the scientificcommunity (e.g., establishing claims supported by empirical evidence, and generating, evaluating, and revisingknowledge products that embody descriptions and mechanisms of phenomena). But for these goals and relatedpractices to be meaningful (rather than procedural), they must be guided by the epistemological considerationsthat characterize disciplinary science (e.g., Duschl, 2008). However, engaging students in epistemologicallymeaningful practices in K-12 classrooms is extremely challenging. Furthermore, the science education andlearning sciences communities do not yet have strong understandings of how students develop theirepistemologies in practice over time (across units and classroom settings) and what increasingly productiveepistemic engagement might look like. Epistemological considerations are critical for engaging in scientificpractices in ways that are meaningful for students and authentic to the discipline. If we are to successfully enactreform efforts emphasizing student engagement in scientific practices, then we must better understand howstudents learn to use epistemological considerations to productively engage in practices over time.Studying Students’ Developing Epistemologies in PracticeOur work has centered on how students learn to engage in scientific practices within elementary and middleschool contexts (Schwarz et al., 2009). In particular, we have been studying how elementary and middle schoolstudents engage in scientific modeling, explanation, and argumentation practices to make sense of the world andthe role of epistemological considerations in making those practices meaningful. By epistemologicalconsiderations, we refer to students’ practical epistemologies as they are engaged in practices – or notions aboutthe knowledge-related purposes, methods, and goals of the work in which they are engaged (Sandoval, 2005).We argue that students need to understand and use epistemological considerations for productive andmeaningful engagement in scientific practices. For example, developing and revising models that address themechanism of phenomena lies at the core of the scientific endeavor; thus, considering the degree to which anexplanation is mechanistic should guide learners engaged in scientific practice. We termed theseepistemological considerations that frame and guide practices “epistemologies in practice” (EIP) (Berland,Schwarz, Kenyon, & Reiser, 2013).Our prior work has found that students can attend to and productively engage in severalepistemological considerations. One such consideration includes students’ justification of their knowledgeproduct (such as a model-based explanation) and ranges from students basing their decisions on authoritativeclaims to basing their decisions on empirical evidence and theory; in short, we label this as the evidenceconsideration. Another consideration includes students’ decisions concerning what kind of answer theknowledge product should provide, and ranges from students providing visible descriptions of phenomena toICLS 2014 Proceedings182© ISLSproviding non-visible causal mechanisms and explanatory processes that explain or predict phenomena; in short,we label this as the mechanism consideration. These, as well as our other considerations, emerged from priorempirical and theoretical work (Schwarz et al., 2012) and share similarities with epistemic criteria in otherscience education research (Duschl, 2008; Pluta, Chinn, & Duncan, 2011).Our overall research goal has been to investigate how to support meaningful scientific practices bydeveloping students’ EIPs within scientific practices. We aim to determine how and why students’ EIP developor shift over time and to investigate promising pathways for EIP development in scientific practices. Therefore,our research question asks: How do students’ EIPs develop or shift over time and across contexts with respect tothe kind of model-based explanations they generate about phenomena? To address this question, we analyzeddata from two high-performing fifth grade students across several science units. We target the analysis aroundthe kind of model-based explanations students generated particularly with respect to whether or how theyattended to mechanism, an aspect that played an important role for both students. Mechanism, or causalexplanatory processes, are critical in science and for model development and use (Braaten & Windschitl, 2011;Russ, Scherr, Hammer, & Mikeska, 2008). We also analyzed students’ reflective talk about their work toexamine their notions of what is important in a model-based explanation and how that may have impacted orframed their engagement in the practice.MethodTo determine how students’ epistemologies in practice developed or shifted, we interviewed a cohort of ten fifthgrade students from four classrooms in 2011-2012 and a second cohort of fifteen fifth grade students from fourclassrooms in 2012-2013 as they participated in several model-based science units over time. These unitsengaged students in iteratively developing and revising scientific models that addressed how and why thephenomena of evaporation, condensation, and light occur. All students attended a suburban public elementaryschool in the Midwest. In this paper, we describe our analysis of data from one student in the 2011-2012 cohort(LS) and one student from the 2012-2013 cohort (JS) who shared the same fifth grade teacher in subsequentyears. Both were academically high-performing female students of European-American ethnicity and werechosen for this analysis because they were highly reflective and articulate ten-year-olds. We also chose thesestudents because they made some relatively clear and significant shifts in their EIPs over time, which was oftennot as visible in other fifth grade students’ data. To determine how their EIPs developed over time, weinterviewed LS three times (post-evaporation, post-condensation, post-light) in the 2011-2012 school year andthree times (pre-chemistry, mid-chemistry, post-chemistry) in the 2012-2013 school year; we interviewed JSfour times (pre-evaporation, post-condensation, pre-light, post-light) in the 2012-2013 year.During the semi-structured interviews, we asked students to describe their (1) models and model-basedexplanations generated in class, (2) rationales for developing and revising those models, (3) development andapplication of models and model-based explanations in new contexts, and (4) reflection on this process. Forinstance, during the condensation interview we asked questions such as: “What did you want your finalcondensation model to show?” “How does your model answer the question ‘How and why do liquids sometimesappear on cold surfaces over time?’” “Looking back at your initial condensation model, what were someimportant changes that you made and why?” and “Can you use your revised condensation model to explain thephenomenon of how and why rain forms?” As such, the interview elicited information about students’reflections on their model-based explanations and the process of modeling in class, as well as their ownpractices developing and using model-based explanations.Table 1 shows the coding rubric for the mechanism EIP consideration we used to code the students’interview responses. The mechanism coding rubric was developed from our prior work (Schwarz et al., 2012)and addresses the kind of answer the knowledge product (i.e., model-based explanation) provides. Similar toBraaten and Windschitl’s (2011) framework of ambitious practice for explanation, we coded students’ modelbased explanations as ranging from students attending to non-mechanistic details (Level 1), to descriptiveaccounts (Level 2), to mechanistic explanatory processes (Level 3). Descriptive accounts (Level 2) only addresshow a phenomenon happens, which can be a chronological order of events or the condition(s) under which aphenomenon occurs. In contrast, explanatory processes (Level 3) include a causal relationship or mechanismthat also addresses why a phenomenon happens. These ordered levels do not necessarily imply a sequential ordevelopmental pathway. Instead, they are meant to capture increasing levels of sophistication with respect to thetype of explanation students generate.It is important to note that we did not code the students’ responses based on one or two utterances inthe interviews. Rather, we analyzed student talk, as well as their diagrammatic model, throughout the interview.For example, if a student provided a partial explanation of the phenomenon in one response and another partialexplanation in another response later during the interview, we combined those responses to determine if s/heproduced a full mechanism-based explanatory process. By analyzing the students’ interview responses andmodels holistically, we more accurately characterized their model-based explanations about phenomena.ICLS 2014 Proceedings183© ISLSTable 1: Scoring rubric for the type of model-based explanation.Level321Students’ model-based explanation of the phenomena attends to:a partial or full mechanism-based explanatory process that addresses “why it is happening”a partial or full descriptive accounts (including sequences) that addresses “how it ishappening” without a mechanism-based explanatory processdetails that only focus on visible aspects of the phenomenonNote: If explanations were scored slightly above/below the identified levels, a positive (+) or negative(–) or sign was added (e.g., 2+, 3–).In addition to using the scoring rubrics to code students’ model-based explanations, we also coded thereflective talk that accompanied their decisions and justifications. Students’ reflective talk often reveals theirviews about the purpose of models/modeling or their notions of what is important in a model or explanation,which is critical to better understanding the epistemologies students leverage within their practice. As such, weanalyzed LS’s and JS’s reflective talk to determine why they attended to particular aspects of their model-basedexplanations. Our analysis of this talk used an inductive approach informed by grounded theory methodology(Charmaz, 2006) to determine reoccurring themes and approaches students brought to justifying their decisionsabout their model-based explanations. The authors of this manuscript compared and contrasted their individualanalysis of students’ themes and approaches to decide what themes best fit the patterns in the evidence. Whilerefining our analysis of students’ reflective talk, we found that students had particular approaches and ways offraming what was important to include in a model-based explanation. These themes or approaches aligned withseveral of Braaten and Windschitl’s explanation categories (2011), including views about the purpose of anexplanation as a simple causal story or as a justification for a claim or argument.Prior Results and EIP Analysis for Two CasesOur prior analysis of interview and written data from the larger sample of fifteen focus students indicated thaton average, students made modest improvements in their overall EIPs throughout the year and across curricularcontexts. In particular, we found productive shifts with respect to all EIP considerations across the evaporationand condensation unit and a smaller shift to the end of the subsequent light unit. Our prior analysis alsosuggested that the nature of instruction and students’ attending to particular EIP considerations impacted howtheir EIPs developed over time (Schwarz, et al., 2013). Additional analysis of students’ embedded assessmentsfrom a larger sample of 113 students in a separate study indicated that they significantly improved their attentionto mechanism from the evaporation unit to the condensation unit, and modestly improved their attention tomechanism from the condensation unit to the light unit.In ongoing work to determine how and why such changes might have occurred, we then analyzed thewritten and interview data from a range of students in greater depth. Our analysis indicated that some studentsforegrounded heuristics or strategies which seemed to function as lenses, or potential scaffolds, in using theirEIP in future contexts. In this study, we report on how two students, LS and JS, did so in particular and nonidentical ways. We illustrate their shifts as well as their heuristics or strategies through excerpts of theirinterview transcripts and diagrammatic models over time. Such data are challenging to present conciselybecause they span across time and are embodied in particular contexts with specific meanings. Nonetheless, weshow how this evidence illustrates visible patterns that contribute to our understanding of how LS and JSdeveloped their EIPs over time with respect to the kind of model-based explanations they generated.Case 1: LS – Making Models That Explain How and WhyLS was a student from the 2011-2012 fifth grade cohort whom we followed into sixth grade in 2012-2013. InOctober 2011, we interviewed LS mid-way through the evaporation and condensation unit. We asked LS aboutthe changes she made between her first and second diagrammatic models of evaporation. When asked what shewas trying to figure out with her [revised] model (Figure 1), she responded that she was “trying to figure outevaporation and how much time it takes to evaporate.” In this instance, LS talked about how long it took forevaporation to occur as a descriptive, rather than mechanistic (i.e., causal), account. When asked if she couldtalk about the changes she made between the two models, she stated, “I didn’t have any temperatures or howand why’s [in my first model], so I decided to do how and why [in my revised model]…” While it appears fromthis reflection that LS may be attending to more causal aspects of the phenomena (‘why’) in the revised model,she referred to the ‘why’ in a descriptive manner, indicating that her revisions came from knowing “whatactually happens from doing experiments” and ideas from the simulations. When asked how the writtendescriptions in her revised model improved her model and the reasons she included them, LS responded that “itgives more of an explanation about what happens and more evidence of what I did.” At this point, LS’s ideasICLS 2014 Proceedings184© ISLSabout her model were primarily focused on capturing what happened from the experiments and the computersimulation in support of her model, rather than capturing how or why they occurred.Figure 1. LS’s Revised Model of EvaporationFigure 2. LS’s Revised Model of CondensationAnalysis of LS’s revised model of evaporation (Figure 1) supports this interpretation and indicates thatshe focused on the states of matter (something often emphasized in school) rather than the process ofevaporation. Although her model was predominantly descriptive (using temperature, etc.), she included detailsat the molecular level about particles. LS appeared to be documenting information about evaporation withoutnecessarily attending to how or why evaporation was occurring. As such, her model-based explanation andjustification was scored at a Level 2 because it provides a descriptive account (sequence of steps) that addresses“how evaporation is happening” without providing a mechanism-based explanatory process (such as waterparticles spreading out into the air when liquid water comes into contact with air).When LS was interviewed at the end of the condensation unit in December 2011, the nature of her talkand model showed an increased level of sophistication and orientation towards mechanism, including hernotions about model-based explanations (see Figure 2). When asked if she could explain how and whycondensation happened in the written question, LS said it was because “the air molecules get cold. … [and the]water molecules [are] coming into contact with the air molecules and making little droplets on the ice pack.”This statement, along with her model (in which she wrote “…water vapor in the air went into contact with airmolecules. The water vapor slowed down…”) and reflective talk, indicated that she provided a partialmechanism for how condensation happens (water vapor comes in contact with cold air, and water vapor sloweddown to become water droplets). Her reflective talk showed an increasing emphasis in addressing “how andwhy” questions to explain her model. For example, when LS was asked what she was trying to figure out withthe models she created, her response was that she wanted to know “How and why condensation and evaporationhappens.” Similarly, when asked if she could talk about the changes she made between the two models, shepointed out that she “…didn’t add how and why in this [initial model]…” Her sense of mechanism also becamesomewhat more sophisticated when she included invisible particles to convince people how the phenomenonhappens. When asked which activity addressed this change, LS responded that “…the experiments and probablyfrom the simulations, too, how molecules move and at what temperature and what pace and stuff.” Nonetheless,when asked what her group thought was important in a model, she said that they needed “…to have a key and anexplanation and evidence and to have people be convinced about what we were doing.” At this point in the year,we see that LS is still focused on “what’s happening” because she included the actual experiment into hermodels. At the same time, she also started to recognize the importance of “how and why” when shifting from“what’s happening” to “how’s it happening” at the molecular level. This resulted in our scoring LS as a lowLevel 3 for this EIP consideration.In April 2012, LS finished a short modeling-based unit on the nature of light and was interviewedabout her understanding of light and her modeling experiences. Within that post-interview, we again saw thather performance and ideas about mechanism and notions of explanation developed further. For example, whenasked, “Could you please describe your final model?” She replied:ICLS 2014 Proceedings185© ISLS“…So right here, the light source is coming to the person’s eyes and also the light source iscoming to the cup and the image of the cup is traveling and reflecting to the eye. So I also didreflecting and it says how you see the cup…. It says that the cup is shiny and smooth so [thelight] reflects off of it and bounces off. And I said that the light source travels to the cup andan image of the cup travels to the person’s eye so that she can see. For scattering, the lightbounces off the hard, rough wood table and the light travels and bounces in differentdirections, making light shine everywhere in the room. … We see things because there’s alight pathway …. Scattering happens because the surface is rough, unlike reflection where thesurface has to be smooth.”This excerpt illustrates that LS is capable of identifying the reason why people see the cup. For instance, shesaid that she can see the cup because the light pathway travels from the light source to the cup, which is thenreflected to her eyes; this is as an explanatory process. This response is different from a typical fifth gradedescriptive account in which a student might say that we could see the cup because of the light, or because theperson faces the object. In this excerpt, LS also explained the difference between reflection and scattering byusing the same explanatory process, a light pathway, and further discussing how non-visible light moves bybouncing off in different directions. LS describes a fully-mechanistic explanatory process, which is why wescored her response at a high Level 3. Thus, we see LS’s model-based explanations and justifications withrespect to mechanism become more sophisticated across the year from the evaporation unit to the light unit.Concurrently, LS’s reflective talk indicated that she still continued to think about how and whyphenomena happen. When asked what she wanted to figure out with these models, she replied that she “wantedto figure out how and why these things happen…how and why we see things.” When asked if she had any goalsfor herself [in constructing and revising models], she stated, “Well, when we did evaporation and condensationwith this, I didn’t really know how to make models as well. So I sort of have a goal set that I would make betterexplanations for how and why things happen, so I tried to add that into my model as much as I could.” Soonthereafter, she continued with “If you don’t know the how and why, you can’t really explain other situations…”which shows her emphasis on the generality of the mechanism.We interviewed LS during the first unit on chemistry in sixth grade to determine how her EIPs mighthave changed with a different teacher and new unit. Interestingly, we saw evidence of similar themes in herresponses to those from the prior year. For example, we continued to see her emphasis on addressing the “howand why” questions in the pre-chemistry interview. For example, when questioned about why she was asked todraw the model, she recalled the models she had drawn in fifth grade and noted that a model “…helps you knowhow and why things happen.” When asked what she wanted her model to show, LS responded that she “wantedit to show how it happens … because [the teacher] never told us to do a how and why.”In addition to the continued focus by LS from the previous to the present year on addressing the “howand why” questions during the pre-chemistry interview, LS also demonstrated her knowledge of how her modelcould help her learn. LS said, “…especially when we do more and more because you know more about thingsand then you can look back at your older models and see if you missed anything. Or when you’re revising it,you can look back at your old ones.” Similar to the pre-chemistry interview, LS demonstrated her continuedfocus on explaining “how and why” in the mid-chemistry interview.In LS’s final interview after the end of the chemistry unit, she explained how and why someone couldsmell an odor by giving a fully-mechanistic (Level 3) “how and why” response. She explained that how the airmolecules “are just moving around and once the smell goes, the odor molecules, after they evaporate from theobject, they travel around the air together and they will eventually get to your nose. That’s why they’re movingaround all different directions.” See Figure 3 for LS’s corresponding model. Later in the interview, she added,“If it’s more of a hot room they have more energy and they spread out and move faster. If it was a cold room Ithink they have less energy and they don’t move as fast.”Figure 3. LS’s Post Chemistry ModelICLS 2014 Proceedings186© ISLSIn summary, we saw LS shift her level of talk and performances, as related to the EIP mechanismconsideration, throughout her fifth and into her sixth grade science classes. Her first interview in fifth gradeindicated that she foregrounded descriptive and detailed accounts of evaporation (and condensation, to somedegree). Over time, we saw LS shift to the idea that models and their explanations should address how and whyphenomena occur through her development of models and explanations that provided more mechanisticaccounts in the light and chemistry units. In these units, she included non-visible components of the phenomenaand described explanatory processes that captured the causal mechanisms involved. As she stated several timesin her interview, LS’s notions about what counts as an explanation or model (to address “how” and “why”) mayhave guided her in seeking those causal or mechanistic aspects for her models and explanations.Case 2: JS – Detailed Mechanisms and Evidence to Justify ExplanationsJS is a student from the 2012-2013 fifth grade cohort. At the beginning of the year, JS began her pre-evaporationinterview with a few ideas about how and why evaporation occurs. When asked what question she could answerwith her model, she responded, “I wanted to explain evaporation. I think [the model] could use a little bit more,but I’m not sure exactly what to add yet.” When describing her model, she stated, “I drew the lines [in mymodel] to show like air and it’s supposed to show how contact with the air over time makes the water evaporate.I’m not sure exactly how that works.” JS stated what she knew about evaporation (by describing that contactwith the air makes it happen) but mentioned that she was not sure how it worked. This response was scored aLevel 2 for mechanism because she provided a descriptive account with a non-visible component, but did notprovide a theory (even if incorrect) to explain why this happened (such as the movement of water into the air).At the end of the evaporation and condensation unit, we see evidence that JS began to develop a robustsense for mechanism and the importance of empirical evidence. In particular, she seemed to acquire the idea thata convincing causal account for the interactions of components was of paramount importance. JS showed this ina number of ways. First, when asked what question she was trying to answer with her model, she replied, “Well,basically I was trying to answer how and why condensation happens and how it works.” Her response illustrateshow she was already potentially attuned to mechanism in her language. More detail about what she meant camelater in the interview when she asked other questions such as if the various criteria in her model were important:JS responded, “Yeah, they’re definitely all important … for mechanism - what’s the point of a model if itdoesn’t explain how it’s happening? That’s the whole point of it. And evidence [information] sort of showspeople that it is possible.” She continued on by adding, “For evaporation [the teacher] said that [the waterparticles] are sort of attracted to the air molecules, but she didn’t say exactly how that worked or anything.”From her response to this question and others, JS seemed to use the term “evidence” to mean “proof” or“information” in the form of a detailed causal mechanism for how the phenomenon occurs. When she was thenasked if she though that she had evidence in her model, she replied, “As much as I know. [My model] says that[the water particles] slow down but it doesn’t say why they slow down. [Our teacher] never told us why theyslow down, besides that they’re getting near something cold. …it’s kind of hard to come by because at thisgrade they give you some evidence [information] but they don’t tell you the whole thing.” When asked how shewould convince someone that her model was correct, she stated, “Well, I wanted to convince them this is how ithappens, but like I said, you need evidence [information]. And I didn’t get a lot of evidence [information]. Iknew that it happened because I saw it in experiments, but I wasn’t sure exactly how it worked…”Figure 4. JS’s Final Model of CondensationICLS 2014 Proceedings187© ISLSOverall, her responses indicated that JS prioritized details and accuracy for how condensation occurs.From her model (seen in Figure 4) and in her talk, with respect to condensation, JS described how condensationoccurred “as [the particles of water vapor] slow down, they stuck together because they’re getting close andcloser because they’re all slowing down.” JS also added that the phenomenon made her think “…[about] the icepack… I thought that the humidity would go up [around the condensing ice pack] because I thought that the icefrom it would end up evaporating. But when [the humidity level] went down, it made me realize that [the icepack is] pulling the moisture out of the air. Even if there’s more water there, if it’s cold it’s not going to be asmuch moisture in the air.” In summary, JS seemed inclined towards focusing on the detailed causal accounts ofcondensation, consistent with a Level 3 mechanism score. Her tendency to refine her ideas seemed to focus oncomparing alternative ideas to the empirical data collected in class.When JS started the mini light unit at the end of the year, she began with the same analytical stance onmechanism and evidence that we noted in the evaporation and condensation unit. In other words, JS seemed touse her EIP related to mechanism - her sense for what an explanation involves - as a lens to orient her to the newsubject matter. For example, when asked how her model explains how people see, she replied, “The human’seyes can see because they’ve got some light source. I’m not sure if the light source actually bounces off this orit’s just somewhere from some that might have bounced off that and then bounced off a wall or something. Butit’s a pretty safe guess to say it bounced off this. So once light gets to the eye, the eye – I’m not sure quite how –uses the light to get an image that the brain then processes.” While she was not sure exactly how the lightentered the eye from the light source, she was willing to think about possible mechanisms and possibilities forhow that could have happened (e.g., the light source bounced and eventually gets to an eye to create an imagethat the brain processes.)Based on her extensive ideas about how and why light travels, JS seemed to have a fully-developedversion of a light model by the end of the unit. Not only did she gain content knowledge about the nature of themechanism, but she also sought and advanced her ideas about mechanism across contexts. When asked if shecould explain what was happening in the model, JS talked about how the light source emits light such that “mostof the light gets over here, but some of it hits some bump or groove or something and bounces into a shadow….And then the light that hit the wall and the little bit of light that hit the shadow bounces back and some of thelight that bounces back will hit the eyes to let us see.” This excerpt illustrates a causal account for lightscattering and reflecting using ideas such as light hitting groves and bouncing back and forth following apathway. JS seemed to reflect more generally about transferring her analytical stance in explaining phenomenawhen she said, “If you’re actually thinking about the way the world works, you can’t look at something and notthink of it like you think of everything else.” Overall, JS appeared to have developed some ways of thinkingabout how phenomena occur (using detailed mechanistic explanations of phenomena) that may be carryingforward across contexts.In summary, we saw JS advance her model-based explanations and reflective talk related to the EIPmechanism consideration throughout the two modeling units in fifth grade. Her first interview highlighted herconcern that there was much to understand about the world that she did not know about. In her second interview,JS began to blur the boundaries between mechanism and evidence by her attempts to provide a convincingexplanation for how and why something happens. By the end of the year, we saw JS consistently using a highlyanalytical approach in trying to understand mechanisms of how phenomena occur, even at the beginning of newunits, using evidence she thought was convincing. Her notions about having a convincing and detailed modelbased explanation may have guided her to seek those causal or mechanistic aspects to make sure they wereconsistent with empirical evidence in order to address alternative arguments.Discussion and ImplicationsWhile there has been skepticism as to whether students can build their epistemologies in practices acrossconceptual contexts, our analysis of data from LS and JS indicates that some students can make significantprogress constructing more mechanistic explanations of phenomena over time and across subject matter contextsas they considered the kind of model-based explanations they sought to generate. We found that LS focused oncreating models and explanations that addressed how and why phenomena occurred. This pathway is consistentwith her framing of the “explanation as simple causation” (Braaten & Windschitl, 2011) in which the goal andpurpose of the model-based explanation is to provide a causal account of the phenomena. We found that JSfocused on creating model-based explanations that were consistent with the phenomena and addressed the“why” question in a highly detailed manner. This pathway is consistent with her framing of “explanation asjustification” (Braaten & Windschitl, 2011) in which the goal of the explanation is to justify the causal accountwith detailed mechanisms and evidence. Both cases illustrate that while the students experienced similarinstructional approaches by the same teacher, the students used different pathways to develop theirepistemologies in practice by leveraging different resources to frame their endeavors and to advance their work.The students’ reflective language indicates that their individual framing about what counts as a model-basedexplanation may have foregrounded approaches that led them on their unique pathways across subject areas.ICLS 2014 Proceedings188© ISLSThere are several important implications of this work. First, this research begins to elaborate possiblepathways of students’ developing practices by illustrating the importance of framing goals for explanation thatcan impact how students navigate their practices and develop strategies and approaches. This is important forbetter supporting students over time through curriculum and instruction. Curriculum can be designed to helpteachers recognize and attend to student and scientific goals of the knowledge products as well as how to makethose goals explicit for aligning classroom work with those goals. Understanding pathways can also helpteachers identify and support EIP development for particular students. Additionally, this research deepens ourunderstanding of how and why scientific practices bridge across contexts in productive ways. Our results showthat learners can leverage and carry epistemological considerations of practice across content areas throughheuristics and approaches, and potentially use them productively in those new areas. Our case studies indicatethat these heuristics and approaches may be due in part to the students’ foregrounding of particularepistemologies in practice and by their framing of the endeavor.We return to our argument that engaging students in scientific practice is not adequate for scientificliteracy. Students also need support in attending to epistemological considerations across curricular andinstructional contexts in order to make practice meaningful and productive. As such, we advocate that EIPsshould be considered through the thoughtful design of curriculum materials and instruction that align withdiscussions in which classrooms address questions such as, “Why are we doing what we’re doing? What’s ourgoal? How will we know whether we’ve gotten there?”ReferencesBerland, L., Schwarz, C., Kenyon, L., & Reiser, B. (2013, April). Epistemologies in practice: Making scientificpractices epistemologically-rich for students. Paper presented at the annual meeting for the AmericanEducational Research Association: San Francisco, CA.Braaten, M., & Windschitl, M. (2011). Working toward a stronger conceptualization of scientific explanationfor science education. Science Education, 95(4), 639–669. doi:10.1002/sce.20449Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide Through Qualitative Analysis.Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.Duschl, R. (2008). Science education in three-part harmony: Balancing conceptual, epistemic, and sociallearning goals. Review of Research in Education, 32(1), 268–291. doi:10.3102/0091732X07309371Ford, M. J., & Forman, E. A. (2006). Redefining disciplinary learning in classroom contexts. Review ofResearch in Education, 30, 1–32. doi:10.2307/4129768National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. (H. R. Quinn, Ed.). Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.National Research Council. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC:The National Academies Press.Pluta, W. J., Chinn, C. A., & Duncan, R. G. (2011). Learners’ epistemic criteria for good scientific models.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48(5), 486–511.Russ, R. S., Scherr, R. E., Hammer, D., & Mikeska, J. (2008). Recognizing mechanistic reasoning in studentscientific inquiry: A framework for discourse analysis developed from philosophy of science. ScienceEducation, 92(3), 499–525. doi:10.1002/sce.20264Sandoval, W. A. (2005). Understanding students’ practical epistemologies and their influence on learningthrough inquiry. Science Education, 89(4), 634–656.Schwarz, C., Reiser, B., Acher, A., Kenyon, L., & Fortus, D. (2012). MoDeLS: Challenges in defining alearning progression for scientific modeling. In A. Alonzo & A. Gotwals (Eds.) Learning Progressionsin Science (LeaPS) (pp. 101-137). Boston, MA: Sense Publishers.Schwarz, C., Reiser, B., Davis, B., Kenyon, L, Acher, A., Fortus, D., Shwartz, Y., Hug, B., & Krajcik, J. (2009).Designing a learning progression for scientific modeling: Making scientific modeling accessible andmeaningful for learners. Journal for Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 632-654.Schwarz, C. V., Akcaoglu, M., Ke, L., Zhan, L. (2013, April). Fifth grade students’ engagement in modelingpractice across content areas: What epistemologies in practice change over time and how? Paperpresented at the meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUniversity Press.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the Practices research group, the participating teachers and students, and the anonymous reviewers fortheir feedback. This research was funded by the National Science Foundation grants DRL1020316 and DGE0707432. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed here are those of the authors.ICLS 2014 Proceedings189© ISLS