Multiple-Text Processing in Text-Based Scientific InquiryKatherine James, Susan R. Goldman, and Mon-Lin Monica Ko, University of Illinois ChicagoCynthia Greenleaf and Willard Brown, WestEdE-mail: kjames26@uic.edu, sgoldman@uic.edu, mlko@uic.edu, cgreenl@wested.org, wbrown@wested.org	  Abstract: This	   study	   examined	   multiple-­‐text	   processing	   in	   the	   context	   of	   text-­‐based	  scientific	   inquiry	   for purposes of generating causal models. We used a series of rubrics toexamine students’ use of the texts, the quality of the causal models they created, and theimpact of text use on model quality. Results indicate that multiple text users engaged with thetexts in qualitatively different ways and created significantly higher quality models than singletext users.	  ObjectivesThis study examined how students used an intentionally designed text set to generate causal models of thecarbon cycle prior to and following an instructional intervention. Using a series of rubrics, we analyzed thepre/post models to determine the extent to which students made use of the texts and the quality of the modelsthat they created. We then examined the relationship between text use and model quality, focusing on the role ofmultiple-text processes.Theoretical FrameworkConsistent with authentic practices of the discipline, scientific literacy involves working with multiple sourcesto acquire information (Chinn & Malhotra, 2002). When scientists read articles to advance their understandingof a phenomenon, they engage in multiple-text processing to evaluate, corroborate, and synthesize sources ofevidence for particular models and theories (Bazerman, 1985). However, novices tend to approach sourcesseparately and uncritically, failing to notice connections among them (Wolfe & Goldman, 2005). Textprocessing research provides insights into the challenges associated with multiple-text processing and the role ofthis practice in scientific understanding. Initial research indicates that deep engagement in text processing playsa role in understanding, but additional work is needed to examine this relationship. The current study endeavorsto build on this body of work by examining the ways that students make use of multiple texts in a text-basedinquiry context and the impact of text use on scientific understanding as represented by model quality.Methods and Data SourcesThis study occurred in the context of an ongoing design-based research project investigating evidence-basedargumentation and multiple text use in middle and high school history, science, and literature classrooms(Goldman et al., 2009; Greenleaf et al., 2013). The specific focus of this study is a three-week implementationof a text-based inquiry module on the water cycle conducted in a 6th grade science classroom located in anurban, Midwest public school. Pre and post module, students completed an assessment that engaged them in thesame reading and inquiry practices taught during the module but for a different topic. The pre/post text set wasdesigned to facilitate an investigation of students’ text use and multiple-text processing in that it required theselective use of information from multiple texts and cross-text synthesis to produce a complete causal model.The four texts included several different types of information, including running text and illustrations. Duringthe pre/post assessment, students were asked to read and annotate the texts. They were then asked to useinformation from the texts to create a model that explained how and why the scientific phenomenon occurred.The pre/post assessment was administered individually to each student in the class one day prior to and twodays following the instructional module. Pre- and post-test data were available for 22 consented students.The analytic approach was designed to capture the range of performances on the pre/post modelingtask across students and changes in performance from pre to post instructional intervention. The performancesof interest were students’ use of the texts and the causal models that they constructed. The pre/post assessmentwas administered individually to each student in the class one day prior to and two days following theconclusion of the instructional module. Pre/post test data was available for 22 consented students.The models constructed during the pre and post assessment constitute the data source for this poster.These models were coded for text use and model quality using two rubrics that were developed through aniterative refinement process of generating criteria, applying them to student work, and revising the criteria toeffectively capture variation.Rubric for text use. This rubric allowed us to trace the information in each model to the texts that eachstudent used to create their model. We identified the type of information that was used including 1) running text,2) illustration. Overall text use was evaluated based on the number of texts used (1) none, 2) single, 3) multiple).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1571© ISLSRubric for model quality. Model quality was scored against an “expert” model of the elements andcausal links in the model, as reflected across the text set. Models were scored for how many of the elements(max = 3) and links (max = 2) in the expert model that were reflected in the student’s model.ResultsOur findings indicate that students varied in the extent to which they made use of the texts that were providedduring this task. We also found a small pre/post shift from single to multiple text use for those students whomade use of the texts. At pre, 59% of students used a single text, 36% used multiple (two or more) texts, andonly 5% failed to use any texts. At post, 41% of students used a single text, 50% used multiple texts, and 9%failed to use any texts. This indicates that some students were more aware of the need to examine and usemultiple texts than others.Our findings suggest that students in these groups engaged with the texts in qualitatively differentways. We found that 62% of single text users at pre and 67% at post only made use of one of the twoillustrations in the text set. In contrast, 62% of multiple text users at pre and 64% at post used illustrations inaddition to running text, while other multiple text users (38% at pre, 36% at post) only used running text. Thissuggests that single text users largely relied on illustrations to create their models whereas multiple text usersengaged with all aspects of the texts. We also found that only multiple text users included causal links in theirmodels. In fact, 63% of multiple text users at pre and 73% at post included one or more causal links. In contrast,no single text users included causal links at either time point. This indicates that only multiple text users weremaking connections within and across texts.We found that these variations in text use led to important differences in model quality. A one-way,between subjects analysis of variance was conducted on post-test data comparing the effect of text use on (1)number of elements (2) number of causal links for no text, single text, and multiple text groups. These analysesrevealed a significant effect of text use on model quality with respect to the number of elements,F(2,19)=45.017, p<.001, and the number of links, F(2,19)=9.00, p=.002, that students included in their models.Planned comparisons revealed that students who used multiple texts included significantly more elements thanstudents who used a single text, t(19)= 8.14, p<.001, and students who used no texts, t(19)=6.85, p<.001.Multiple text users also included significantly more causal links than students who used single texts, t(19)=4.03p=.001, and students who used no texts, t(19)=2.35, p=.03. Thus, our findings suggest that the unique ways thatmultiple text users engaged with the texts, particularly their engagement with all aspects of the texts andsynthesis within and across texts, led to the creation of high quality models that reflect a complete, integratedunderstanding of the phenomenon.ImplicationsThis work provides insight into the challenges associated with multiple-text processing and highlights theimpact of this practice on scientific understanding. The findings from this work will be used to inform thedevelopment of curricular materials to support these critical scientific literacy practices.ReferencesBazerman, C. (1985). Physicists reading physics: Schema-laden purposes and purpose-laden schema. WrittenCommunication, 2(1), 3–23.Chinn, C.A., & Malhotra, B.A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic reasoning in schools: A theoreticalframework for evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86, 175–218.Goldman, S.R., et al. (2009). Reading for understanding across grades 6-12: Evidence based argumentation fordisciplinary learning. Funded July 2010 by Institute for Educational Sciences, U.S. Department ofEducation, Grant# R305F100007.Greenleaf, C., Brown, W., Goldman, S.R., & Ko, M. (2013) READI for Science: Promoting Scientific LiteracyPractices through Text-Based Investigations for Middle and High School Science Teachers andStudents. Washington, D.C: Exploring the Overlap between “Literacy in Science” and the Practice ofObtaining, Evaluating, and Communicating Information: A Workshop.Wolfe, M.B.W. & Goldman, S.R. (2005). Relations between adolescents’ text processing andreasoning. Cognition and Instruction, 23, 467-502.AcknowledgmentsIn addition to the authors, Gina Hale and Ursula Sexton made important intellectual contributions to the designof the water cycle module. The research reported here was supported, in part, by the Institute of EducationSciences, U.S. Department of Education, through Grant R305F100007 to University of Illinois at Chicago. Theopinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department ofEducation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1572© ISLS