Becoming a Computer Scientist: Early Results of a Near-Peer andSocial Justice Program with Latino/a ChildrenJill Denner and Jacob Martinez, Education, Training, Research, jilld@ etr.org, jacobm@etr.orgHeather Thiry, Golden Evaluation and Policy Research, heather.thiry@goldeneval.comAbstract: This report describes the results of a pilot study of CSteach, an afterschool programdesigned to get Latino/a students on the pathway to becoming a computer scientist. Thehypothesis was that a social justice perspective and the use of near-peer teachers aremotivating for elementary school children with little prior exposure to computer science.Using a mixed-methods approach, the study employed pre-post surveys, focus groupinterviews, observations, and an assessment rubric for student projects. The data showmeasurable increases in students’ computer science identities, capabilities, and networks ofsupport, and provide information that was used to strengthen the next phase of the program.High school-aged near-peer teachers also benefited from the program. They described growthin their leadership and communication skills and recognized their position as role models forthe younger students. The paper has implications for designing culturally relevant learningenvironments.Deep learning of the kind valued in the learning sciences requires students to be motivated to participate andpersist in the face of challenges or uncertainty. This is particularly important in the field of computer science(CS) for two reasons. First, CS is not required or available in most US schools, and stereotypes based on genderand race/ethnicity prevent many students from taking or finishing these classes (Margolis, 2008). Second,learning to think computationally requires cycles of design, test, and revise (Lee et al., 2011), and beliefs about alack of innate ability prevent many students from persisting when their initial program does not work. Thisstudy focuses on Latinos, who are the fastest growing ethnic minority group in the US but are underrepresentedin CS. They are 16% of AP test takers, but only 1% of the AP Computer Science test takers; those that took itscored far below their peers (College Board, 2011). In order to increase the numbers of Latinos in CS, we needto create learning environments that excite them about becoming a computer scientist starting in elementaryschool and motivate them to persist in deep CS learning.In this paper, we describe research on CSteach, an afterschool program that aims to move Latino/astudents down the path to becoming a computer scientist by fostering capacities, identities, and relationshipsstarting in 5th grade. Our Design Experiment involves an iterative cycle of implementation, data collection, andrevision that is well-suited to developing programs that aim to avoid a deficit perspective when promotinglearning experiences for marginalized populations (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004). The design of theCSteach program was based on the understanding that CS, like all knowledge, is situated within a culturalcontext (Nasir & Hand, 2006) and that educational approaches should affirm and draw on intellectual resourcesin a given culture or community (Bang & Medin, 2010). CSteach draws on research in mathematics that showsthat creating learning experiences that are culturally relevant and connect with social justice issues can engagestudents in learning in a way that is deep, meaningful, and that contributes to the development of a positiveidentity (Leonard et al., 2010). CSteach is the first known effort to integrate CS and social justice in elementaryschools, and it builds off examples of “computing for the social good” in college (Goldweber et al., 2011).Our hypothesis is that by integrating social justice into a CS curriculum, it would make it more relevantand increase students’ motivation to pursue and persist, particularly when faced with challenging CS concepts inan after school setting. Key determinants of motivation and cognitive engagement are the value students placeon the subject matter, their feelings of competence, their opportunities for autonomy or agency, and the extent towhich their needs for relatedness are met (Blumenfeld et al., 2006). The incorporation of social justice isdesigned to increase the value of CS, and hands-on, scaffolded computer experiences and projects are designedto increase feelings of competence and opportunities for autonomy and agency. To meet relatedness needs, theclasses are led by near-peers—high school students from the same community who teach, offer stories, andbuild connections that help 5th graders navigate competing expectations across their worlds of home, school, andpeers (Cooper, Domínguez, & Rosas, 2005). While a near-peer teaching strategy has been used in educationalsettings for decades, there is very little research on effective implementation strategies, the benefits for theteachers and learners, and no examples of its use to engage underrepresented students in CS. The relationalaspects of learning are well documented, and are part of what Pea (2004) describes as the process of “becoming”as children engage in a mutually influential interaction with the world. CSteach builds on these perspectives inthat the teaching approach involves modeling and supporting experiential learning, with limited directinstruction.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1007© ISLSCSteach is being pilot tested with Latino students, due to their underrepresentation in computing fields.While there is great variation in the group of students called “Latino/a,” studies across regions and samples haveled to some consistent themes. The focus of this study is on students of Mexican origin, who make up 63% ofthe US Latino population and accounted for three quarters of the growth in the US Latino population in the lastdecade (Ennis, Ríos-Vargas, & Albert, 2011). We use the term “Latino,” because it is commonly used in ourcommunity.CSteach StrategiesCSteach employs exemplary practices for engaging Latino/a students in CS (Computer Science CollaborativeProject, 2012). This includes culturally-targeted programming, which makes connections to students’ values(Sheridan, Clark, & Williams, 2013) and engages Latino/a youth by building connections to their identity andculture and addressing the needs of the community, not just the individual (Cooper et al., 2005; Solórzano,Villalpando, & Oseguera, 2005). For example, students use technology to research social justice issues, and toidentify strategies to address them in their local community. Another strategy is to challenge the image of CSincluding commonly held beliefs that computer scientists are white or Asian, male, geeky, and unconcernedwith the social good. To this end, CSteach builds a network of support for 5th grade students throughcollaboration with their peers, and instruction by high students that understand local challenges (e.g., financial,stereotypes, etc.) and role model an interest and curiosity about CS. Activities are also designed to address CSStandards (Computer Science Teachers Association, 2011). For example, activities both on and off the computerintroduce CS concepts like algorithms and networks; these are applied in students’ final project where they use achild-friendly programming environment to create an animation that informs people about their social justicetopic.The CSteach curriculum was developed by a team of computer science educators and social justiceexperts to ensure that CS concepts are introduced in an exciting and developmentally appropriate way that isrelevant to students’ experiences. CS and social justice are integrated in several ways. For example, studentsidentify their own personal network and generate ideas about how that network can help them make positivechange; then they learn about computer networks, and how information is transferred within the network inways that are similar to their own personal network. In another activity, students learn to efficiently and safelydo online research about a social justice topic, and then apply algorithmic thinking (a logical sequence of steps)to make a plan to address that problem. In a subsequent activity, they apply algorithmic thinking to create anddebug a computer program. In this paper, we examine the effectiveness of these strategies by addressing thefollowing questions:•••Does the pilot data suggest that the CSteach program can increase the computer science identities,capacities, and networks of support of Latino/a students?How can we maximize the impact of a near-peer approach on learning and identity development in K12 computer science?How can we integrate social justice with CS principles, and does this motivate Latino/a students topursue and persist in CS?MethodsParticipantsA pilot study in Spring 2013 included 37 5th grade students (mean age=10) and five high school students (meanage=16) in a class that met 2 hours/week for 12 weeks as part of an afterschool program at two schools. Overhalf of the 5th graders (68%) were female, and 86% self-identified as Latino/a. More than half (54%) of studentshad a mother or maternal figure who had not completed high school, and 69% of students’ fathers or paternalfigures had not completed high school. Most (72%) of the students reported that a language other than Englishwas spoken in their household at least half the time. The five high school near-peer teachers were all female;three seniors, one junior and one freshman; four of them identified as Latina and one identified as AfricanAmerican.Research Design and Data Collection MethodsThe evaluation of the pilot CSteach program used a mixed-method approach to gather formative feedback onhow the program was working, as well as a preliminary assessment of whether the activities were influencingthe development of students’ computer science identities, capacities, and networks of support to studycomputing. Findings from surveys, focus groups, student projects, and observations will be presented.All 5th grade students and high school student near-peer teachers (Tech Teachers) completed a pre-postsurvey that built on and adapted existing instruments to apply to the CSteach focus and population. The scalesmeasured change in students’ expectations for success in college and career, perceived support to studyICLS 2014 Proceedings1008© ISLScomputers, CS identity, beliefs about the value of computing, confidence and ability to use technology toaddress community needs, expectations for success in computing, and ability to evaluate web-basedinformation. A focus group was conducted with the five high school Tech Teachers at the end of the semesterand lasted 60 minutes. The questions focused on challenges and how they handled them, how the 5th gradestudents benefited from the program, how they benefited from the program, and suggestions for improving theirtraining and preparation.Student projects were scored using a rubric that was based on the Computer Science TeachersAssociation (CSTA) national standards, which include computational thinking, as well as awareness about thecommunity, global and environmental impacts of technology. The projects included a set of Power Point slidesand an animation created in the Scratch programming environment. The slides were scored on 4 characteristics(e.g., contains a graph; poses questions about a social justice topic). The Scratch animation projects were scoredon 6 characteristics (e.g., keyboard-driven events; moving characters). The raters used a 3-point scale (0=did notmeet standard, 1=partially met standard, 2=demonstrated proficiency); two raters scored the projects anddiscussed discrepancies in scores until agreement was reached.Data AnalysisThe surveys were analyzed by conducting basic, descriptive statistics, such as frequencies, means, and crosstabsto explore patterns in the data. Additionally, paired samples t-tests, chi-square, and one-way analysis of variance(ANOVA) were conducted to compare students’ pre-post responses on survey scales and to measure differencesacross key demographics like gender, parental education level, and prior computer use. Simple descriptiveanalyses were used to summarize the results of scoring student projects. The focus groups were transcribedverbatim and analyzed using domain analysis; codes were generated deductively, based on evaluation questionsand theoretical constructs from the CSteach program design, and inductively, based on important themes thatemerged from analyses. Codes were organized into taxonomies and patterns were compared across interviews.Sample analytic categories identified in the analysis include: Motivation for participating in the CSteachprogram, Teaching strategies, Challenges faced and how they dealt with them, Beliefs about computing and thesocial good, Tech Teacher outcomes, and Elementary student outcomes.ResultsThe results provide a picture of the implementation and impact of the first (pilot) semester of CSteach, as wellas information to guide the next phase of the program. The findings are organized by Research Question.• Does the Pilot Data Suggest that the Csteach Program Can Increase rhe Computer Science Identities,Capacities, and Networks of Support of Latino/a Students?Although the sample size is small, we detected modest gains in most of the domains measured by thesurvey among the elementary students, and received positive evaluations of the impact of the program on bothelementary and high school students’ identities, capacities and networks of support. The results also provideinformation about how the program can be strengthened. Based on their surveys, the strongest gains were in 5thgrade students’ confidence to use a computer to address needs in their community (statistically significantchange). There were also increases in self-efficacy to use and study computers, and in their CS identity,specifically the belief that computer science is a creative endeavor. In the focus groups, high school studentstalked about how the 5th graders changed. Clara [names were changed] stated “They’re definitely moreconfident. They call me over sometimes and say, “teacher look at what I know how to do,” and I’m like, “that’sawesome.” Natalia commented “I think they are more confident. At the beginning of the year, there were somegirls that were very unsure of the computers, but like now, I see them helping each other. And they really knowhow to work the computer and all the programs.”Results from surveys, student projects, and interviews suggests that there were some areas in whichCSteach engaged students in understanding and applying CS and social justice concepts. In their surveys,students reported significant increases in the frequency with which they evaluate the credibility of information,such as judging whether internet sites are trustworthy, and in the ratings of their ability to organize andmanipulate information. The results of scoring student projects suggest that students developed CS capacities,including proficiency in manipulating data and evaluating information, and in the ability to gather andmanipulate data using digital tools. The projects also show that most were able to integrate a social justice topicinto a programming activity (83%), and social justice questions into a Power Point presentation (78%). Natalia,a Tech Teacher, commented on students’ growing capacity to use technology for academic purposes, rather thanjust for fun: “Now they know how to make a chart off of data they collected. They know how to do apresentation, they know how to do Power Point, they know how to do a lot of things for middle school, and thatwill prepare them.”ICLS 2014 Proceedings1009© ISLSThe data also suggest some impact on students’ perceived networks of support to pursue computing.For example, the Tech Teachers described how students began to see their peers as tech savvy. Sofia, anotherTech Teacher, said that students began to see one another as knowledgeable and capable in computing: “Whenthey use Scratch, one thing that’s good is that sometimes I’ll admit that I don’t know how to do it, and there’salways someone who gets it and I’ll send them to go help another student. So then they’re like teachingthemselves.”Similar to the 5th grade students, the Tech Teachers’ largest gains were in their ability to use computersto address community needs, and in their identity as computer scientists. Several important themes emerged ininterviews, including the development of leadership skills, influences on career and educational paths, andcareer preparation and personal growth. Alisa said “The CSteach program benefited me by outfitting me withknowledge and skills involving computers, leadership and overall abilities to interact with others, that I didn'tknow I had in the first place.” The Tech Teachers also developed an identity as role models to the 5th graders,which increased their confidence to be teachers and leaders, as well as their motivation to do so. Ana said: “Thefact that you’re older, it gives you a sense of leadership. Since they’re younger, they’re like, ‘Oh, she’s older, soI’m just gonna look at her as a role model or a leader.’”•How do we maximize the impact of a near-peer approach on learning and identity development in K-12computer science?In the pilot study, the near-peer approach involved five female high school students that hadparticipated in other technology-based after school programs; they were divided across the two pilot school sitesto balance their experience and teaching confidence. Observations and focus group interviews were used toevaluate the effectiveness of the near-peer approach and identify ways to strengthen it. For example, we tested amodel where the Tech Teachers led 30% of the activities at the beginning of the semester, and then slowlytransitioned to leading 70% by the end of the semester. Although this helped to ease the Tech Teachers into theirrole, it also set up an expectation by both the 5th grade and high school students that the adult teacher was theprimary authority, and reduced the message that the near-peers were tech savvy role models. We now have theTech Teachers leading most of the class activities starting at the beginning of the semester; the adult teacherintroduces each activity to set the tone and expectations, and the Tech Teachers take the 5th graders through eachstep and provide support. This helps to clarify their role vis-à-vis the adult teacher.In addition to increasing the leadership of the high school students, the pilot study suggested otherways to strengthen the near-peer component are to create a targeted recruitment strategy and provide moretraining. For example, some of the high school students were motivated to participate because they likedcomputers and wanted to get younger children excited about them, but several did it just for the money. Theideal near-peers would have a stronger orientation to computers, and be excited about sharing their passion. Thehigh school students also needed additional training (e.g., in Scratch) to have the confidence to help the youngerchildren. As Sofia said, “They’re more tech-savvy. They were introduced to these things sooner than we were.”Others gained a greater appreciation for what it means to teach: “After this, I feel totally sympathetic to all myteachers. This stuff is hard!” The data were used to inform what was covered in the next round of high schoolstudent recruitment and training, the adult teacher training, and in the curriculum.•How can we integrate social justice with CS principles, and does this motivate Latino/a students topursue and persist in CS?CSteach aims to increase the relevance of CS by integrating it with social justice issues in two ways.First, we aim to motivate students to deeply engage in CS concepts and use them to create a project on a topicthat is meaningful to them and their community. Topics so far have included bullying, drugs and alcohol, animalcruelty, poverty, among other issues. The Tech Teachers thought that the social justice aspect really wasmotivating for the children. Adriana said: “I know a lot of people feel really passionate about their thing…abouttheir social justice thing.” But they also thought it would be more motivating if the students presented theirprojects to others: “I think that would be pretty cool if their parents could come, and they could tell them, ‘Hey,this is what I think is wrong in our community, and this is what I think we should do.’” The analysis of theirprojects also suggested that the topic was motivating: over half used event-driven dialogue (one of the morecomplex features) to either raise awareness or propose ways to address their social justice topic.The second way that CS was integrated with social justice was to use information technology toshowcasing the issue and the steps to address it, including the strengths of their community. Most students couldapply algorithmic thinking to both address the social justice issue and to create a programming project about thattopic. However, the Tech Teachers suggested adding more reflection about what they were learning, as well asmore explanation about why they were learning it: “Show them stuff that they can do with this knowledge,that’s what I wanna do. Like you can do this or you can build this, but you need to learn the basics first.” To thisICLS 2014 Proceedings1010© ISLSend, we rewrote the curriculum to clearly describe all the CS principals that were addressed in each activity, aswell as how to reinforce them in a language that the 5th grade students could understand. This meant letting goof some CS topics, like vector graphics, because they were more difficult to explain by linking to a social justiceprinciple.ConclusionThe results suggest that the CSteach program has the potential to support Latino/a youth on the path tobecoming computer scientists. The pilot study suggests that combining near-peer teaching and computing for thesocial good was motivating, and has the potential to increase students’ CS identities, capacities, and networks ofsupport; a necessary step toward deep learning. However, additional work needs to be done to increase students’engagement with CS (e.g., include fewer CS concepts and address them with greater depth), strengthen thesocial justice component (e.g., scaffold final projects to more strongly reflect how technology can be used toaddress community needs), and maximize the impact of the near-peers (e.g., more targeted recruitment andtraining). These results are being used to inform the next stages of implementation, and the curriculum continuesto be revised based on input from the near-peers, the adult teachers, and the partnering afterschool program. Inthe 2013-14 school year, CSteach is being implemented in 8 schools with 160 elementary and 17 high schoolstudents.ReferencesBang, M., & Medin, D. (2010). Cultural processes in science education: Supporting the navigation of multipleepistemologies. Science Education, 94(6), 1008-1026.Campbell, M. (2011). Hispanic students: 2010 statistical survey. Hispanic Outlook, 46-48. Retrieved on October29, 2013 from https://www.wdhstore.com/hispanic/data/pdf/jan3-hipanicstudents.pdfBlumenfeld, P.C., Kempler, T.M., & Krajcik, J.S. (2006). Motivation and cognitive engagement in learningenvironments. In R.K. Sawyer (Ed.), Handbook of Learning Sciences, 475-488. New York: Cambridge.CollegeBoard(2011).APCS:PrinciplesCurriculumFrameworkretrievedfromhttp://www.collegeboard.com/html/computerscience/index.htmlCollins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42.Computer Science Collaborative Project (2012). Exemplary practices for engaging Hispanic/Latino(a) youth incomputer science. (www.cscproject.org/index.php?q=node/162).Cooper, C.R., Domínguez, E., & Rosas, S (2005). Soledad’s dream: How immigrant children bridge theirmultiple worlds and build pathways to college. In C. R. Cooper et al. (Eds.) Developmental pathwaysthrough middle childhood: Rethinking context and diversity as resources (pp. 236–259). NJ: Erlbaum.Ennis, S.R., Ríos-Vargas, M. & Albert, N.G. (2011). The Hispanic population: 2010. 2010 Census Briefs.Retrieved on January 7, 2012 from http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-04.pdfLee, I., Martin, F., Denner, J., Coulter, B., Allan, W., Erickson, J., Malyn-Smith, J., & Werner, L. (2011,March). Computational Thinking for Youth in Practice. ACM Inroads, volume 2, no 1, 32-37.Leonard, J., Brooks, W., Barnes-Johnson, J., & Berry, R.Q. (2010). The nuances and complexities of teachingmathematics for cultural relevance and social justice. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(3), 261-270.Margolis, J. (2008). Stuck in the shallow end: Education, race, and computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Nasir, N.S. & Hand, V.M. (2006). Exploring sociocultural perspectives on race, culture, and learning. Review ofEducational Research, 76(4), 449-475.Pea, R. (2004). The social and technological dimensions of scaffolding and related theoretical concepts forlearning, education, and human activity. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 423-451.Sheridan, K.M., Clark, K., & Williams, A. (2013). Designing games, designing roles: A study of youth agencyin an urban informal education program. Urban Education, 48(5), 734-758.Solorzano, D., Villalpando, O., & Oseguera (2005). Educational inequities and Latina/o undergraduates in theUS: A critical race analysis of their educational progress. Journal of Hispanic Higher Education, 4,272–294.AcknowledgementsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. CNS-1240756.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1011© ISLS