How Do Learners Process Information in Lectures?The Role of Projected Slides and Type of Note-takingChristof Wecker, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Leopoldstr. 13, 80802 München, Germany,christof.wecker@psy.lmu.deAbstract: Today’s lectures are typically supported by means of computer-based slideprojections, and it is common for learners to take notes on printed handouts containing thelecturer’s slides. In a 2x2-factorial design involving 81 students, the effects of slide projection(absent vs. present) and type of note-taking (on empty sheets vs. on handouts) wereinvestigated with respect to the learners’ processing of information and their knowledge aboutinformation presented on slides and about information presented orally immediately after alecture and two weeks later after an additional review phase. Preliminary analyses indicate abeneficial effect of note-taking on handouts on knowledge about information presented onslides after the additional review phase, which appears to be mediated to a substantial extentby the processing of information presented on slides while watching the lecture. Hence theeffect cannot be explained exclusively by the completeness of this information in the learners’notes.Today’s lectures typically involve computer-based slide projections. In conjunction with this technological aid,students often receive slides in advance to print and use them as a basis for note-taking. Despite substantialliteratures about the effects of using computer-based slide projections (see Craig & Amernic, 2006; Levasseur &Sawyer, 2006; Shapiro, Kerssen-Griep, Gayle, & Allen, 2006 for reviews) and the effects of student note-takingin lectures (see Kiewra, 1989; Kobayashi, 2005; 2006 for reviews), little research has focused on the way inwhich these two aspects interact when using printed slides for note-taking. In particular, the role of the learners’processing of the information presented on slides or only orally in the lecture as well as the role of students’notes for review when preparing for an examination have not been investigated systematically so far. Thisinterplay of learner-generated artefacts and their cognitive processing in a technology-supported learningscenario, both when creating these artefacts and when using them for further study, makes this topic aninteresting challenge for Learning Sciences research.Prior researchComputer-Based Slide ProjectionsSince the mid-nineties, many researchers have conducted studies about the effectiveness of computer-basedslide projections in their own or their colleagues’ lectures. According to several reviews, however, this body ofresearch has failed to produce conclusive evidence for beneficial effects of using computer-based slideprojections in lectures on student learning (Craig & Amernic, 2006, p. 150; Levasseur & Sawyer, 2006, p. 109111; Shapiro et al., p. 69; Wecker, 2013). To the contrary, single studies have provided some indication thatusing computer-based slide projections in lectures may actually be detrimental with respect to certain aspects ofknowledge acquisition, i. e. the acquisition of knowledge about information that is presented only orally (Savoy,Proctor & Salvendy, 2009, p. 863; Wecker, 2012, p. 267). Although replication studies are certainly needed toexamine the robustness of these negative effects, it may at least be concluded from this research that future workshould differentiate knowledge according to the sources of the information that students are supposed to learnabout (Wecker, 2012, p. 271).There are several potential explanations for the negative effect of computer-based slide projections onknowledge about information presented only orally: From a cognitive load perspective, this finding might beexplained as a so-called “redundancy effect” (Sweller, 2005) because of cognitive overload caused bysimultaneous written and oral presentation of information. On top of several theoretical reasons that questionthis explanation, the pattern of findings concerning cognitive load did not support it either (Wecker, 2012, p.268). Another potential explanation for such a negative effect of computer-based slide projections on knowledgeabout information presented orally is that learners might process information presented only orally less deeply inthe presence of computer-based slide projections and thereby less likely comprehend individual sentences (cf.Kintsch, 1988, pp. 166-168; 1998, pp. 96-101). Put differently, learners may be less likely to actually take noticeof what is presented to them in oral speech when confronted with computer-based slide projections. Finally,learners may process information presented orally equally well with and without computer-based slideprojections, but simply regard the information presented only orally as “secondary” and maybe less important(Adams, 2006). This could be reflected in different amounts of notes taken by the learners about informationpresented on slides and information presented only orally.ICLS 2014 Proceedings519© ISLSTo evaluate these potential explanations, it would be helpful to measure the processing of informationpresented only orally, the degree of distraction by the processing of information presented on slides, and theamount of note-taking about information presented on slides and presented only orally.Note-TakingPotential obstacles to the processing of information presented only orally could be compensated by relievinglearners from the requirement to take notes about the information presented on slides. This is what happenswhen learners receive the lecturers’ notes in advance in order to print them and use them as a basis for theirnote-taking during lectures, as it is common in many universities today.When considering potential effects of different types of note-taking, the two main functions of notetaking differentiated in the literature need to be taken into account: First, it has been assumed that during notetaking, the processing of the information presented may be beneficially affected due to the requirement totransform it into something that can be written down quickly and still be understood later (“encoding function”).However, research indicates that these mechanisms alone may not be sufficient to improve learning (Kiewra,1989, pp. 149 f.; Kobayashi, 2005, p. 251).Second, note-taking enables learners to review and study the information presented to them on a lateroccasion („storage function“). This characteristic has in fact been found to increase learning outcomes (Kiewra,1985, p. 33; 1989, p. 148). As a consequence, when studying the effects of different types of note-taking, it isimperative to include measures of learning outcomes after an opportunity for the learners to review their notes.Several findings are of importance when considering the potential role of note-taking on handoutscontaining the lecturer’s slides: First, the completeness of the learners’ notes correlates with learning outcomes(Kiewra, 1987, p. 242; 1989, p. 150). This suggests that note-taking on handouts may foster learning to theextent that it leads to more complete notes.Second, if learners take notes on their own, i. e. if they do not get handouts but use empty sheets ofpaper instead, their notes typically cover only a relatively small proportion of the information presented(Kiewra, 1985, p. 33). If, however, information is presented to them in written form (e. g. on the blackboard), itis more likely to be included in the learners’ notes than if it is presented to them only orally (Locke, 1977, p.94). The same has been found for computer-based slide projections (Austin, Lee & Carr, 2004, pp. 317 f.).Third, if learners receive some kind of support for note-taking, such as incomplete handouts (Cardetti,Khamsemanan & Orgnero, 2010, pp. 82-84) or handouts containing structural outlines (Kiewra, Benton, Kim &Risch, 1995, pp. 175 f.), they acquire more knowledge than if they have to take notes on their own (Cardetti,Khamsemanan & Orgnero, 2010. p. 87; Kiewra, 1985, p. 35; Kiewra, 1989, p. 160; Kiewra, Benton, Kim &Risch, 1995, p. 177). A small number of studies have investigated the effects of note-taking on handouts thatcontain the lecturer’s computer-based slides. Although learners tend to write less in this case than if they have totake notes on their own (Marsh & Sink, 2010, pp. 697; 701), typically the coverage of the information presentedis higher (Austin, Lee & Carr, 2004, pp. 317 f.; Stefanou, Hoffman & Vielee, 2008, p. 11). The findingsconcerning effects on knowledge acquisition remain inconclusive, however (Bowman, 2009, p. 106; Marsh &Sink, 2010, p. 702; Raver & Maydosz, 2010, p. 194).In light of these considerations it seems appropriate to investigate whether note-taking on empty sheetsof paper may be associated with less processing of information presented only orally compared to note-takingon handouts, especially in the presence of a computer-based slide projection that learners attempt to copy down.In contrast, note-taking on handouts might relieve learners of this task and thereby increase the processing ofinformation presented only orally.Furthermore, note-taking on handouts is likely to lead to higher knowledge acquisition provided thatlearners have the opportunity to review the material on the basis of the notes they took on the handouts. Thisshould apply particularly to the information presented on slides that is printed on the handouts as well. Such aneffect could be due either to the completeness of information presented on slides in learners’ notes taken onhandouts as compared to less complete notes taken on empty sheets of paper, or to increased processing ofinformation presented on slides while listening to a lecture and taking notes.Research QuestionsThe study presented in this paper aims to shed light on how slide projections and the type of note-taking impactlearning in lectures via the processing of the information presented on slides and only orally, and via the noteslearners take and use for later review. In the following, analyses pertaining to the following three specificresearch questions will be presented:(1) What are the main and interaction effects of slide projection and type of note-taking on knowledgeabout information presented on slides and about information presented only orally immediately after a lectureand after learners had the opportunity to review and study using their own notes?(2) What are the main and interaction effects of slide projection and type of note-taking on learners’processing of information presented on slides and of information presented only orally during a lecture?ICLS 2014 Proceedings520© ISLS(3) How is the processing of information presented on slides and of information presented only orallyduring a lecture related to their knowledge about information presented on slides and about informationpresented only orally immediately after a lecture and after learners had the opportunity to review and studyusing their own notes?Data analysis for this project has not been finished yet. Therefore, analyses based on about 2/3 of thefinal sample are included in this paper, while the complete findings will be available for presentation at theconference.MethodInstructional Unit and SettingThe present study was designed to make learners’ processing during lectures accessible to measurement andanalysis and to achieve as much experimental control as possible, while at the same time retaining as much ofthe authentic learning scenario as possible. The approach to measuring learners’ cognitive processing ofinformation presented only orally requires interrupting the lecture for the administration of test items referring toinformation presented within a narrow window of time before the interruption. Experimental control requiresminimizing variation in implementation and presentation times among conditions. To achieve both of thesegoals, the video recording of a lecture was presented to the learners. Retaining as much of the authentic learningscenario as possible implied that learners should not watch the video on a computer screen, but in an almost lifesize projection to the wall with high quality.The topic of the lecture was the German legal system. This topic is covered in many differenteducational institutions, such as in social studies in ordinary schools or professional schools, in degree programsin Law at the university level, or in adult education centres. Nevertheless, the topic is sufficiently difficult, andthe target group of participants has only little knowledge about it. It involves different kinds of knowledge thatare typically presented using computer-based slide presentations, such as technical terms, definitions,classifications, rules, conditions for application etc. The lecture was given by a young man standing behind alectern next to a white area that could be filled by projected slides (see Figure 1a), and had a duration of 30minutes.(a)(b)Figure 1. Stills from two versions – (a) without versus (b) with projected slides – of the same video recording ofa lecture about the German legal system.ICLS 2014 Proceedings521© ISLSTo investigate the role of learners’ notes for learning in lectures, the participants could study their notesin a second experimental session two weeks after watching the lecture before taking a final test. To this purposethe notes they had taken while watching the lecture were returned to them during this second session for areview phase of 45 minutes. During this phase they could make annotations and take further notes using a pen ina colour different from the one used in first session.DesignThe study had a two-factorial experimental between-subjects design with the factors slide projection (absent vs.present) and type of note-taking (on empty sheets vs. on handouts). Individual persons were assigned to the fourconditions at random.ProcedureThe first session of data collection was conducted with with each learner individually. After a 5-minuteintroduction, they had up to 15 minutes to complete the first pretest for prior knowledge and further controlvariables. Then, the gaze-tracking equipment was calibrated, which could last for up to 15 minutes. Next, thelearners watched the video recording of the lecture. Depending on whether their processing of the informationpresented was measured (see below), this could last either 30 minutes or about 45 minutes. Finally, theycompleted a 40-minute immediate posttest for knowledge and some additional variables.About two weeks (i. e. 10 to 18 days) later, the learners participated in the second session of datacollection in groups of six or seven persons. After completing a second pretest for further control variableswithin 30 minutes, they reviewed their own notes for 45 minutes. Finally, they completed the 45-minute delayedposttest for knowledge and some additional variables.Manipulation of Independent VariablesSlide ProjectionIn the conditions with slide projection, text slides were cut into the video recording of the lecture at the positionof the white wall area next to the speaker (see Figure 1b). The slides contained technical terms, definitions, rulesand principles as well as examples in short phrases rather than full sentences. Overall, 31 slides including a titleslide and an outline slide were shown. Each slide comprised at most seven lines (excluding headlines) or sixpoints in bulleted or numbered lists. The background of the slides was white, and the slides did not contain anygraphical corporate identity elements.In the conditions without slide projection, the uncut video recording of the lecture was shown to thelearners (see Figure 1a).Type of Note-TakingIn the conditions with note-taking on empty sheets, the learners received eight sheets of paper with lines on oneside in portrait format. Upon request they could receive additional sheets of the same type.In the conditions with note-taking on handouts, the learners received eight sheets of paper printed withcontent on the left and lines on the right on one side in portrait format. The content on the left hand side of eachsheet corresponded to four slides used in the conditions with projected slides. However, no slide borders wereprinted on the handouts, and headlines were not repeated (as in sequences of slides belonging to the samesection) in order to avoid too close resemblance to slides, especially for the participants in the condition withoutslide projection and with note-taking on handouts. In addition, upon request the learners could receive sheets ofruled paper of the same type as in the condition with note-taking on empty sheets.Measurement of Dependent VariablesKnowledgeKnowledge was measured in both the immediate and the delayed posttest by means of an identical computerbased test that contained 32 multiple-choice items with four options one of which was correct. These itemscovered only content presented during the first two thirds of the lecture, for reasons to be explained below. Halfof the items covered information that was presented on slides in the conditions with slide projection, half ofthem covered information that was presented only orally in all conditions. Separate scales were constructed forknowledge about information presented on slides and knowledge about information presented only orally byadding the scores for all items belonging to the respective scale. Then, the scales were z-standardized for boththe immediate and the delayed posttest using the means and standard deviations from the condition without slideprojection and with note-taking on empty sheets in the immediate posttest. Scales for overall knowledge in theimmediate and delayed posttest were constructed by calculating the mean of the scales for knowledge aboutinformation presented on slides and knowledge about information presented only orally in the respective test.ICLS 2014 Proceedings522© ISLSA subset of six items from the posttests was used to measure prior knowledge in the first pretest andscored accordingly (but without the z-standardization).Processing of InformationProcessing of information was measured in two ways: Processing of information presented on slides and ofinformation presented only orally was captured by means of items that were interspersed during the final third ofthe video-recorded lecture (to avoid interference with the knowledge measured in the posttest). In addition,processing of information presented on slides was also captured by means of gaze-tracking.Processing of both kinds of information was measured by 16 multiple-choice items with four optionsone of which was correct. These items were presented to the learners during an interruption of the video within30 seconds after the information covered in the item had been presented in the lecture. Half of them coveredinformation presented on slides, and half of them covered information presented only orally. These constraintswere applied both to prevent forgetting and interference of reliance on the phonological loop, and to avoidsensitizing the participants to one of the two sources of information (slides or oral speech). Furthermore, tocheck for any reactivity associated with this measurement, measures of processing by means of intersperseditems were taken from only half of the participants in each condition.Two scales were constructed for processing of information presented on slides and processing ofinformation presented only orally by adding the scores for all items belonging to the respective scale. Then, thescales were z-standardized using the means and standard deviations from the participants to whom theinterspersed items were administered in the condition without slide projection and with note-taking on emptysheets.In addition to this item-based measurement of learners’ processing of information, their gazes weretracked using an Ergoneers 25 Hz head-mounted eye-tracker. The gaze data were anchored to the visual scenarioby means of five marker symbols placed at different positions the learners could look at within the setting, suchas the lectern or the projection area in the video, or the learners’ table (see Figure 1a and b). The markers werecaptured by the field camera and recognized automatically by the software.Areas of interest were defined to capture learners’ visual attention to all individual information units onthe slides. These areas of interest were anchored to the markers in the field camera video. Furthermore, learners’own note-taking was operationalized as the automatic recognition of the marker placed on the learners’ table inthe field camera video because this marker became only visible when the learners lowered their eyes to theirnotes. Besides, for each information unit in the lecture the time windows in which they were presented orally toeach participant were determined based on timestamps in the log files.These data are used to construct the following measures: (a) the proportion of each learner’s dwell timein the corresponding area of interest during which the same information unit is presented orally (indicating theproportion of slide reading with consistent oral input for each information unit), (b) the proportion of eachlearner’s dwell time in the corresponding area of interest during which a different information unit is presentedorally (indicating the proportion of slide reading with inconsistent oral input), (c) the proportion of the oralpresentation time during which the learner read the text in the corresponding area of interest (indicating theproportion of oral input consistent with slide reading), and (d) the proportion of the oral presentation timeduring which the learner read the text in a different area of interest or was occupied with his or her notes(indicating the proportion of oral input inconsistent with slide reading). These analyses will be completed by thetime of the conference.Amount of Note-TakingThe learners’ notes are used as a further data source. The amount of note-taking is determined separately forinformation that is presented on slides and information presented only orally. The learners’ notes are segmentedto idea units of a size (typically sentences or phrases) corresponding to the 261 information units contained inthe lecture. Each of the resulting segments is coded as either one of the 261 information units contained in thelecture or as other content. Furthermore, each segment is coded as written down while watching the lecture or aswritten down during the review phase, based on the colour of the pen used.Three coders independently analyzed a portion of the data from all conditions. Their agreementindicates satisfactory objectivity (81 to 82 %; Cohens κ = .81 to .82). The whole material is currently beingcoded.Two scales are constructed from these data: The amount of note-taking concerning information that ispresented on slides and the amount of note-taking concerning information that is presented only orally arecalculated as the proportion of the information units contained in the learner’s notes as compared to allinformation units from the respective information source (slides or only oral speech).ICLS 2014 Proceedings523© ISLSParticipantsThe dataset analyzed for the present study includes the first 81 participants, mainly students of Psychology orEducation (but not of Law). They were recruited by means of lecture visits, postings on notice boards, and socialmedia. They were compensated by receiving either money or credit counting towards participation requirementsin their degree programs.The sample comprises 73 % female and 27 % male students. On average they were M = 24.0(SD = 6.1) years old.Statistical AnalysisBecause of the preliminary character of the present analyses based on a sample smaller than the final samplesize, the level of significance was set to 10 % for all statistical tests presented in this paper.ResultsEffects on Knowledge about Information Presented on Slides and KnowledgePresented Only Orally Immediately after the Lecture and Two Weeks LaterThe effects of slide projection and type of note-taking on knowledge about information presented on slides andknowledge presented only orally immediately after the lecture and two weeks later were analyzed by means ofanalyses of covariance with prior knowledge as a covariate. In addition to the two independent variables, thefactor whether measurement of the processing of information by means of interspersed items had taken placewas included as a further between-subjects factor. With one exception, no significant main effect of themeasurement of the processing of information and no interaction effect with any of the other factors was found.Concerning knowledge about information presented on slides in the immediate posttest, learners in theconditions without slide projection (M = 0.10; SD = 0.82) demonstrated only minimally higher amounts ofknowledge about information presented on slides than learners in the condition with slide projection (M = 0.07;SD = 0.69). This difference was not significant, F(1; 72) = 0.52; p = .48; partial η2 = .01. Similarly, learners inthe conditions with note-taking on empty sheets (M = 0.12; SD = 0.80) exhibited little more of this knowledgethan learners in the conditions with note-taking on handouts (M = 0.06; SD = 0.70). This difference was notsignificant, F(1; 72) = .34; p = .56; partial η2 = .01, and neither was the interaction of the two independentvariables, F(1; 72) = 1.48; p = .23; partial η2 = .02.Although with respect to knowledge about information presented only orally in the immediate posttestthe descriptive findings showed slightly higher knowledge about information presented only orally in theconditions without slide projection (M = 0.19; SD = 0.93) as compared to the conditions with slide projection(M = 0.01; SD = 1.07) – which is in line with the speech suppression effect observed in the literature –, thisdifference was not significant, F(1; 72) = 1.91; p = .17; partial η2 = .03. Likewise, the difference between theconditions with note-taking on empty sheets (M = -0.10; SD = 1.05) and the conditions with note-taking onhandouts (M = 0.28; SD = 0.94) was not significant, F(1; 72) = 1.93; p = .17; partial η2 = .03. Furthermore, therewas no indication of an interaction effect, F(1; 72) = 0.05; p = .83; partial η2 < .01Knowledge about information presented on slides in the delayed posttest was minimally lower in theconditions without slide projection (M = 0.65; SD = 0.83) than in the conditions with slide projection (M = 0.69;SD = 0.87), but this difference was not significant, F(1; 72) = 0.02; p = .88; partial η2 < .01. In contrast, thedifference between the conditions with note-taking on empty sheets (M = 0.36; SD = 0.82) and note-taking onhandouts (M = 0.95; SD = 0.78) in favour of the latter was significant and corresponded to a large effect,F(1; 72) = 10.60; p < .01; partial η2 = .13. The interaction effect was not significant, F(1; 72) = 2.05; p = .16;partial η2 = .03.With respect to knowledge about information presented only orally in the delayed posttest learners inthe conditions without slide projection (M = 0.45; SD = 0.97) demonstrated slightly higher knowledge aboutinformation presented only orally than learners in the conditions with slide projection (M = 0.31; SD = 0.98).Although again descriptively in line with the speech suppression effect, this difference failed to reachsignificance, F(1; 72) = 1.37; p = .25; partial η2 = .02. The difference between the conditions with note-takingon empty sheets (M = 0.24; SD = 1.03) and note-taking on handouts (M = 0.50; SD = 0.90) in favour of the latterwas not significant as well, F(1; 72) = 0.82; p = .37; partial η2 = .01. Again, there was no indication of aninteraction effect, F(1; 72) = 0.41; p = .52; partial η2 = .01.Effects on Processing of Information Presented on Slides and Information PresentedOnly OrallyThe effects of slide projection and type of note-taking on the processing of information presented on slides andknowledge presented only orally were analyzed by means of analyses of covariance with prior knowledge as acovariate on the basis of the learners that received the interspersed items. The processing of informationICLS 2014 Proceedings524© ISLSpresented on slides was slightly higher in the conditions without slide projection (M = 0.31; SD = 1.49) than inthe conditions with slide projection (M = 0.11; SD = 1.65), but this difference was not significant,F(1; 33) = 0.41; p = .53; partial η2 = .01. However, learners in the condition with note-taking on empty sheets(M = -0.34; SD = 1.60) – according to the less stringent level of significance applied in this preliminary analysis– exhibited significantly lower processing of information presented on slides than learners in the condition withnote-taking on handouts (M = 0.63; SD = 1.44), F(1; 33) = 3.12; p = .09; partial η2 = .09. No significantinteraction effect was found, F(1; 33) = 0.52; p = .48; partial η2 = .02.With respect to the processing of information presented only orally the conditions without slideprojection (M = 0.05; SD = 1.24) and with slide projection (M = -0.08; SD = 1.53) did not differ significantly,F(1; 33) = 0.32; p = .57; partial η2 = .01. Also the difference between the conditions with note-taking on emptysheets (M = -0.36; SD = 1.19) and the conditions with note-taking on handouts (M = 0.25; SD = 1.53) did notdiffer significantly in this respect, F(1; 33) = 1.23; p = .28; partial η2 = .04. Furthermore, there was nosignificant interaction effect, F(1; 33) = 0.89; p = .35; partial η2 = .03.The Role of Processing of Information for KnowledgeThe processing of information presented on slides significantly correlated with knowledge about informationpresented on slides both in the immediate posttest, r = .35; p = .02, and in the delayed posttest, r = .59; p < .01.Similarly, the processing of information presented only orally significantly correlated with knowledge aboutinformation presented only orally both in the immediate posttest, r = .52; p < .01, and in the delayed posttest,r = .55; p < .01.As the type of note-taking had a significant effect on knowledge about information presented on slidesin the delayed posttest, a mediation analysis for this effect was conducted with processing of informationpresented on slides as the potential mediator. The effect size of partial η2 = .21 without controlling forprocessing of information presented on slides that was found for the learners from whom measures ofprocessing were collected was reduced to partial η2 = .14 by including processing of information presented onslides as a covariate. This means that 32.9 % of the effect of note-taking on handouts as compared to note-takingon empty sheets on knowledge about information presented on slides exhibited in the delayed posttest seem tobe mediated by the processing of information presented on slides while watching the lecture.DiscussionThe descriptive differences between the conditions without and with slide projection with respect to knowledgeabout information presented only orally in both posttests are compatible with the speech-suppression effectreported in the literature (Wecker, 2012, p. 267). However, in the preliminary analyses presented here theyfailed to reach significance. It remains to be seen whether in the final sample this effect will be replicated.Note-taking on handouts had a strong beneficial effect compared to note-taking on empty sheets onknowledge about information presented on slides (and printed on the handouts) after the learners had theopportunity to study using their notes, and tended to benefit the processing of information presented on slidesduring the lecture. The former effect appears to be mediated to a large extent by the processing of informationpresented on slides while watching the lecture. This suggests that – in contrast to the storage hypothesis – thiseffect is not exclusively due to the availability of the information that was presented on slides on the handoutsduring review. Rather – in line with the encoding hypothesis – learning seems to be influenced by the processingof this information during note-taking as well (Kiewra, 1989, pp. 149 f).That the two scales for processing of information presented on slides and of information presented onlyorally significantly correlated with the respective knowledge scales in the immediate and in the delayed posttest,provides some initial validation for these measures.Obvious limitations of the analyses presented here include the liberal level of significance chosen dueto the current state of the project. This issue is connected to the insufficient sample size included in the presentanalyses as well as the issue of not yet including measures of processing of information based on gaze trackingand analyses of the amount of note-taking. Beyond these limitations that have to do with the current state of theproject, despite serious efforts to keep the learning situation as similar to a real-life lecture setting, severalcharacteristics of the learning scenario may be regarded as somewhat artificial. In particular, this applies to thevideo-taped lecture viewed in individual learning sessions and interrupted for some participants by intersperseditems, to the review phase of limited duration immediately before the final test, during which the learners couldonly use their notes rather than textbooks and other resources, and the final test as a proxy for a realexamination. Future studies should relax some of the laboratory-type restrictions of the present study.ReferencesAdams, C. (2006). PowerPoint, habits of mind, and classroom culture. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 38(4),389-411.ICLS 2014 Proceedings525© ISLSAustin, J. L., Lee, M. & Carr, J. P. (2004). The effects of guided notes on undergraduate recording of lecturecontent. Journal of Instructional Psychology, 31(4), 314-320.Bowman, L. L. (2009). Does posting PowerPoint presentations on WebCT affect class performance orattendance? Journal of Instructional Psychology, 36(2), 104-107.Cardetti, F., Khamsemanan, N. & Orgnero, M. C. (2010). Insights regarding the usefulness of partial notes inmathematics courses. Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 10(1), 80-92.Craig, R. J. & Amernic, J. H. (2006). PowerPoint presentation technology and the dynamics of teaching.Innovative Higher Education, 31, 147-160.Kiewra, K. A. (1985). Providing the instructor's notes: An effective addition to student notetaking. EducationalPsychologist, 20(1), 33-39.Kiewra, K. A. (1987). Notetaking and review: the research and its implications. Instructional Science, 16, 233249.Kiewra, K. A. (1989). A review of note-taking: The encoding-storage paradigm and beyond. EducationalPsychology Review, 1, 147-172.Kiewra, K. A., Benton, S. L., Kim, S. I. & Risch, N. (1995). Effects of note-taking format and study techniqueon recall and relational performance. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 20, 172-187.Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse processing: A construction-integration model.Psychological Review, 95(2), 163-182.Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Kobayashi, K. (2005). What limits the encoding effect of note-taking? A meta-analytic examination.Contemporary Educational Psychology, 30(2), 242-262.Kobayashi, K. (2006). Combined effects of note-taking/reviewing on learning and the enhancement throughinterventions: A meta-analytic review. Educational Psychology, 26(3), 459-477.Levasseur, D. G. & Sawyer, J. K. (2006). Pedagogy meets PowerPoint: a research review of the effects ofcomputer-generated slides in the classroom. Review of Communication, 6(1), 101-123.Locke, E. A. (1977). An empirical study of lecture notetaking among college students. The Journal ofEducational Research, 71(2), 93-99.Marsh, E. J. & Sink, H. E. (2010). Access to handouts of presentation slides during lecture: Consequences forlearning. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 24, 691-706.Raver, S. A. & Maydosz, A. S. (2010). Impact of the provision and timing of instructor-provided notes onuniversity students' learning. Active Learning in Higher Education, 11, 189-200.Savoy, A., Proctor, R. W. & Salvendy, G. (2009). Information retention from PowerPoint and traditionallectures. Computers & Education, 52(4), 858-867.Shapiro, E., Kerssen-Griep, J., Gayle, B. & Allen, M. (2006). How powerful is PowerPoint? Analyzing theeducational effects of desktop presentational programs in the classroom. In B. M. Gayle, R. W. Preiss,N. Burrell & M. Allen (Eds.), Classroom communication and instructional processes: Advancesthrough meta-analysis (pp. 61-75). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Stefanou, C., Hoffman, L. & Vielee, N. (2008). Note-taking in the college classroom as evidence of generativelearning. Learning Environments Research, 11, 1-17.Sweller, J. (2005). The redundancy principle in multimedia learning. In R. E. Mayer (Hrsg.), The Cambridgehandbook of multimedia learning (S. 151-167). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Wecker, C. (2012). Slide presentations as speech suppressors: When and why learners miss oral information.Computers & Education, 59(2), 260-273.Wecker, C. (2013, August). Does PowerPoint foster learning? A meta-analysis. Paper presented at the 15thBiennial Conference for Learning and Instruction of the European Association for Research onLearning and Instruction (EARLI) "Responsible Teaching and Sustainable Learning", Munich, 27–31August 2013.AcknowledgmentsThis research has been funded by a grant (WE 5426/1-1) from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).ICLS 2014 Proceedings526© ISLS