Three Diagnoses of Why Transfer Across Disciplines Can Fail andTheir Implications for Interdisciplinary EducationEric Kuo, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, erickuo@stanford.eduDanielle Champney, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, CA 93407,dchampne@calpoly.eduAbstract: One goal of interdisciplinary educational efforts is to increase students’ ability totransfer knowledge from one disciplinary context to another. The approach taken to fosterthis transfer depends on the diagnosis of why this transfer can fail in the first place. Althougha common diagnosis focuses on content knowledge and problem features as explanatory, thereexist other, less prevalent diagnoses for why transfer across disciplines fails. In this paper, weshow how one student responds differently to two similar problems set in physics and calculusproblem contexts. We argue that beyond a content knowledge diagnosis, an epistemologydiagnosis and an accountability diagnosis can also plausibly contribute to an explanation ofwhy this student approaches these two similar problems differently, presenting additionalconsiderations in fostering interdisciplinary transfer.How Approaches to Interdisciplinary Education Imply Diagnoses of WhyTransfer FailsThe transfer of content knowledge across different disciplines is one goal of a multidisciplinary educationsystem. A typical curriculum for an undergraduate STEM major is designed with the expectation that studentscan and will, in any particular course, apply knowledge and skills learned in other disciplinary courses – forexample, the typical undergraduate physics curriculum is designed expecting that students can and will transferknowledge learned in prerequisite math courses into those physics courses; similarly, engineering coursesexpect students can transfer-in knowledge from math and physics courses.Although these various courses are largely designed independently from one another, someinterdisciplinary course reform efforts have developed, aiming to bolster transfer across the disciplines. Themost common interdisciplinary approach is to align the content between two courses in order to constructcontent connections across the disciplines (e.g. Al-Holou et al., 1999; Dunn & Barbanel, 2000; Plomer, Jessen,Rangelov, & Meyer, 2010). Common goals of these efforts include avoiding haphazard coverage of relatedcontent across disciplinary courses as well as highlighting content connections between disciplines to decreasecompartmentalization of knowledge and encourage future transfer to different disciplinary problem contexts.Approaches such as these reveal (either explicit or implicit) views that poor content knowledgegeneralization and problem-specific surface features are explanatory in understanding why transfer acrossdisciplines can fail. This content knowledge diagnosis is aligned with classical views of transfer that foundreduced spontaneous transfer of a learned problem solution when the surface features of transfer problems weremade more dissimilar from the initial training cases (Gick & Holyoak, 1980; Reed, Ernst, & Banerji, 1974).Such transfer is improved when multiple training cases were used, supporting the development of a moregeneral solution schema not tied to the surface features of any one particular case (Gick & Holyoak, 1983;Reeves & Weisberg, 1994). In the same way, the alignment and co-presentation of content in interdisciplinaryefforts aims, in part, to prevent the content knowledge from being tied to any one disciplinary context while alsoproviding practice in applying that content knowledge in multiple disciplinary problem contexts.We argue that there exist other possible diagnoses for why transfer across disciplines fails, which arenot as prevalent as the content knowledge diagnosis. In this paper, we present one student, Will, who reasonsdifferently on two similar problems set in physics and calculus disciplinary contexts. Investigating why hisreasoning differs on these problems leads to two additional diagnoses of why he applies different ideas andapproaches in each case: an epistemology diagnosis and an accountability diagnosis. We conclude with thepossible implications of these alternative diagnoses for interdisciplinary education efforts.Two Problems Asking “What Counts as a Good Approximation?”As part of a larger study, we designed a set of problems to investigate how students might reason with similarmathematical content in different disciplinary problem contexts. This paper will include an in-depth discussionof one student’s reasoning on two of these problems. The two problems, PENDULUM and ARCTAN, askabout approximations and infinite series in physics and calculus problem contexts, respectively:PENDULUM (includes a figure of a pendulum with angle, length, and mass labeled): Youhave a pendulum made of a metal ball on a string. The string is 1 meter long and the metalball has a mass of 1 kg. You might know that the approximation for the period of a pendulumICLS 2014 Proceedings62© ISLSfor small oscillations is: ! = 2!!!, where T is the period of the pendulum, l is the length ofthe pendulum, and g is acceleration due to gravity (9.81 m/s2). This equation only holds forsmall angle oscillations of the pendulum. For larger angles, the period of a pendulum can befound with the following equation: ! = 2!!!1 +!!!"!! ! +!!!"#$!! ! + ⋯ , where θ0 is theangle of displacement of the pendulum from vertical in radians. You want to calculate theperiod of oscillation for this pendulum. How big can the angle of displacement of thependulum be before the equation for small oscillations isn’t a good approximation of theperiod?TAYLOR SERIES (note: since both problems relate to Taylor series and infinite series, forclarity, we refer to this problem in this paper as “ARCTAN”): The Taylor series about x = 0!!!for arctan(x) is: !"#$!% ! = ! − ! ! + ! ! − ! ! + ⋯. How big a value can x be before!!!stopping at the second term is a bad approximation?Each problem contains two mathematical expressions, one an approximation of the other. In bothproblems, these two expressions are exactly equal when the relevant parameter is zero (θ0 = 0 in PENDULUMand x = 0 in ARCTAN). However, as these parameters increase, the two expressions become more different.The interviewee’s task is to determine how large the parameters can get before the two expressions are sodifferent that one is no longer a good approximation for the other. Although the specific mathematicalexpressions were not identical across both, these two problems deal with a similar issue of how to judge “whatcounts as a good approximation?” for an infinite series expression. Because the idea of what counts as a “goodapproximation” is not precisely defined here, tasks such as these reveal how interviewees might make thesejudgments differently in different disciplinary problem contexts.Will’s Reasoning on PENDULUM and ARCTANThe interview with Will was conducted in the summer of 2011 by the first author. At the time, Will was a risingsophomore at a large, public east coast university and was planning on declaring a mechanical engineeringmajor. In his freshman year, Will had completed two semesters of calculus (which covered infinite series andTaylor series) but had only taken one semester of physics (which did not cover pendulum oscillations).However, he had taken physics in high school and commented that he had seen the small angle approximationequation for the period of a pendulum before. The interview session lasted about 90 minutes. In the interview,Will reasoned about PENDULUM first (from 00:02:25 – 00:45:22), then ARCTAN (00:45:22 – 01:15:16), andthen reflected on his work on the two problems (01:15:16 – 01:27:12).The data collection and analysis were driven by two research questions: 1) “How do students approachthese approximation problems similarly/differently in the different problem contexts?” and 2) “What factorsplausibly support this similar/different reasoning?” The interview was semi-structured in that the interviewerwas free to ask follow-up questions and probe deeper into unclear statements or interesting emergent topics. Toaddress the research questions, we analyzed the entire video with corresponding transcript and written work tocharacterize Will’s approaches to these problems as well as his thoughts and reflections on those solutions.Once we had these initial characterizations, we performed more careful, line-by-line analysis through keysections of the transcript, looking for confirmatory or disconfirmatory evidence of our characterizations.Through this analysis, we argue that one difference between Will’s approaches to the two problems isthat he attempts to make sense of and explore possible analytical solutions on PENDULUM, while he insteadattempts to recall ideas from calculus on ARCTAN. Then, we argue for three possible diagnoses of why suchdifferent approaches were taken: a content knowledge diagnosis, an epistemology diagnosis, and anaccountability diagnosis. In conclusion we argue that these diagnoses have implications for how transfer ofreasoning across the disciplines is supported.Will’s Approach to PENDULUM: Making Sense and ExploringWill starts his work with PENDULUM by noting that he has not seen this problem before, and he reads the textcarefully to make sense of what it is asking. Although unfamiliar to him, Will is able to make sense of theexpressions and notes that being a good approximation means the two expressions for the period are equal toeach other. He notices that the two expressions are the same except for the addition of 2!!!! !"!! ! +!!!! ! in the series expression, and that each progressive term in the series gets smaller and smaller. He saysthat this additional term is added to “make up for the error that occurs…when the angle gets too big.” He goes!"#$ICLS 2014 Proceedings63© ISLSon to explain that for small angles, the additional term is small, and so the two expressions will beapproximately equal, but for larger angles, the additional term is large, so the two expressions will not be equal.Will takes two approaches to trying to answer the problem: setting common-sense, physical bounds onthe angle and attempting to set up and solve an equation that will produce a value for θ0. In both approaches, heuses his physical understanding of the motion of the pendulum in order to evaluate the reasonableness of theanswers. In setting an upper bound on the angle, he looks at the picture and declares that the upper bound is 90degrees, because he feels that motion past that would no longer be that of a typical pendulum. While attemptingto manipulate the equations to find values of θ0 within the limits of a good approximation, one approach Willtries is to set the two expressions equal to each other to solve for θ0. While the interviewer points out that θ0 = 0would satisfy this mathematical relation, Will argues that is not a reasonable answer, because when the angle iszero the pendulum is not swinging at all. As Will says, “You can't really have a period when it's just sittingthere not moving.”We label Will’s approach here as making sense and exploring. Will starts by making sense of how twounfamiliar mathematical expressions are similar and different. Throughout the problem, he uses hisunderstanding of the physical motion of a pendulum to make sense of the bounds on the angle. Without a senseof what the correct approach must be, Will tries to set up an equation and solve for θ0, using his physicalunderstanding to evaluate his results. Independent of his final answer here, this overall approach of makingsense and exploring stands in contrast to his approach on ARCTAN.Will’s Approach to ARCTAN: Recalling Formal KnowledgeIn contrast to making sense of an unfamiliar problem on PENDULUM, Will starts ARCTAN by pointing outthat he does not remember the general method for finding the Taylor series of a function and by recognizing thisproblem as the kind he has done before in calculus class.Throughout ARCTAN, Will fixates on certain pieces of knowledge he learned in his math classes thathe believes are relevant and attempts to recall them. He mentions that arctangent has asymptotes, but he can’tremember what they are. He cues in on the phrase “about x = 0” as being important and tries to remember whatit means and how it is relevant for this problem. He also tries to remember common Taylor series expansions,such as those for sine and cosine, as well as the general formula for generating Taylor series.!As with PENDULUM, Will attempts to set bounds, on ! − ! ! ! ,!for which the approximation is!good. He vaguely remembers that some parameters have to be less than 1 in certain series convergence tests in!calculus, and he uses this remembered fact to set the bounds as 0 < ! − ! ! ! < 1, although he recognizes!that this is a guess and is not the “right way to do it.” Later, the interviewer supplies two pieces of informationat Will’s request: the graph of arctangent with asymptotes labeled (y = π/2 and y = -π/2) and the general formula!!!for Taylor series. Will uses the asymptotes of arctangent to change the bounds to − ! < ! − ! ! ! < . He!!!does not use the general Taylor series formula in his final answer.Although he produces bounds for what counts as a good approximation in both PENDULUM andARCTAN, his approaches are very different. Throughout his work on ARCTAN, rather than attempting tomake sense of the relevant equations and ideas or trying to manipulate expressions to solve for x, Will seeks torecall formal knowledge from his calculus class. At the end of the interview, Will articulates his awareness ofthese two different approaches:956957958959960961962[01:17:00] W: [On ARCTAN] I was thinking from the top down in that, “What's a Taylorseries? What are the equations related to it? Uh, what's the information that I was once toldrelating to this subject that I would need in order to find basic numbers, the number that Ineed.” So it was actually a complete opposite way of looking at it. [On PENDULUM] Iimmediately read it and tried to, pssh, clear my mind and, alright, what am I looking for?Basics. [On ARCTAN] I immediately read it and I was filled with, “What's Taylor seriesagain? How do you find the equation for approximations?”Three Diagnoses of Why Will Does Not Take the Same Approaches to TheseProblemsHow can we explain why Will attempts to make sense and explore on PENDULUM but tries to recall formalknowledge on ARCTAN? Here, we present three possible diagnoses.1) A Content Knowledge DiagnosisAttention to the content knowledge used and differences in specific problem features offers several specificdiagnoses of why Will takes different approaches to these two problems, suggesting possible treatments forsupporting alignment of Will’s reasoning across these problems:ICLS 2014 Proceedings64© ISLSI)Although both problems involve infinite series, ARCTAN contains many explicit cues toTaylor series (i.e. explicit mention of “Taylor series” and the phrase “about x = 0”). OnPENDULUM, Taylor series are never explicitly mentioned. If PENDULUM similarlycontained these explicit cues to Taylor series ideas, Will may have sought to recall formalknowledge of Taylor series on PENDULUM as well.!II) Because arctan(x) ≈ ! − ! ! ! includes transcendental and polynomial terms, it is not as!easy to manipulate this equation to solve for x as it is in PENDULUM, where the analogousequation contains only polynomial terms. This difference in the mathematical structure of thetwo problems could explain a difference in Will’s approaches. If arctan(x) was changed to adifferent expression, such as (1 - x)-1, Will may have also have sought to solve for xalgebraically on ARCTAN.III) In PENDULUM, the diagram of the pendulum cues the physical motion, providing a way todetermine the bounds on the angle, whereas ARCTAN contains no such diagram. Althoughnot cuing the same type of intuitive knowledge about physical motion, a graph of y =arctan(x) given in the problem statement (rather than given later by the interviewer) couldprovide similar visual cues for making sense and exploring bounds.Here, the intention is not to present all possible such diagnoses. Rather, the above examples are meantto illustrate what we take to be a content knowledge diagnosis: differences in reasoning on these problems stemfrom different content knowledge being cued by different problem features. We have argued that this type ofunderlying diagnosis is common in interdisciplinary course design efforts. For example, Dunn and Barbanel’s(2000) co-taught multivariable calculus/electricity & magnetism course develops the mathematics and physicsin parallel, with common language and notation. The hope is that content knowledge will be learned in a waythat isn’t compartmentalized to particular disciplinary contexts or problem cues, fostering transfer of thatknowledge across disciplines.2) An Epistemology DiagnosisProviding an alternative to the content-focused perspectives on transfer, another perspective focuses onknowledge activation and transfer as related to individuals’ epistemologies (or views on the nature of knowledgeand knowing.) Hammer, Elby, Scherr, and Redish (2005) argue that what has been described as transfer is theactivation of similar knowledge resources in various situations, and that this activation depends not only oncontent knowledge and problem features, but also on epistemological stances towards what kinds of knowledgeare appropriate in different situations. For example, they describe two students taking different approaches toanswering the question of how a scale reading of a person’s weight changes in a moving elevator. Hammer et al.argue that one student’s epistemological stance supported a formal computational approach to this problem,because she started by listing all the numerical quantities in the problem, apparently preparing for a calculation.Another student interrupted by asking, “Do we even need to do all that calculation?” and proceeded to describeher physical sense of how the elevator floor is falling away from the person as an elevator is acceleratingdownwards. This second student’s interjection was a challenge not to the correctness of the numerical valueslisted, but to whether this kind of approach was necessary. Hammer et al. argue that this second kind ofapproach to the question stems from a different epistemological stance towards what kind of knowledge will beuseful or productive here.While this example might suggest that these students have fixed epistemologies that can only supportone type of reasoning or activity, other research shows that individuals have access to many differentepistemological stances, of which different ones can be cued in different moments to support different kinds ofreasoning (Hammer & Elby, 2003; Rosenberg, Hammer, & Phelan, 2006). In this section, we argue that Will’sdifferent epistemological stances towards the two problems support his two different approaches.“Logical Reasoning” Is Useful on PENDULUMIn evaluating his work on PENDULUM, Will recognizes that he would not get full credit for this explanation ifit were an answer on a test, because he expects that problems on a physics test would require precise, learnedmethods, not just guesses at the bounds. In spite of this, he still thinks that he would get some partial credit,because the “logical reasoning” that he demonstrated is valued:554 [00:42:26] W: A lot of teachers, if you put something down that sort of makes sense, if you555 put something down, and you show logical thoughts and sort of show how you got to a semi556 close answer, they'll give you like a point or two and be like, “Alright, nice try, but not evenICLS 2014 Proceedings65© ISLS557558559560561562563564565566567close.” Um, and it's a big difference again between this stuff and, like, history. This kind ofstuff you can, even if you don't know it, you can use logic and you can, uh, make connectionsand rationalize certain things and know that they're true just by looking at what you are given.You don't need to know, I mean you've learned it over the years, but you don't need to know aspecific date or a specific event to answer a question. If they ask you, you know, “What's theBattle of Hastings?” and you don't know anything about the Battle of Hastings, you're not,you can't just be like, “There were swordsmen. They fight.” You can't say that. But this oneyou could say, “Alright I don't know what this equation really means, but I'm told, and I'venever seen it before, but I do know that T should equal T when the number of, when the, um,degree of displacement of the oscillation is correct.” And you can show stuff like that. And Ithink if you show that you're willing to do that, they'll give you a little bit.Here, Will’s statements provide evidence of an epistemological stance that values “logical reasoning:” makingsense of unfamiliar ideas, building connections, and providing evidence of rational thinking. Importantly, Will’sstatements are epistemological in that he is reflecting not only on his approach to PENDULUM, but also onwhat kinds of approaches are appropriate on this type of problem. This is reflected especially in contrast to thetypes of reasoning that are appropriate for historical questions, such as, “What’s the Battle of Hastings?” whichWill says cannot be reasoned through and requires specific prior knowledge.Will’s epistemological stance here is aligned with and plausibly supports his approach toPENDULUM. If he views “logical reasoning” as appropriate on this problem, then it is reasonable that Willwould try to make sense of and explore this unfamiliar content rather than seek formal knowledge required tosolve this problem. As a specific example, Will rejects θ0 = 0 as a possible answer to the problem, arguing thatthis answer must be wrong, not through a learned fact or procedure, but rather because of an intuitive physicalinterpretation that makes that answer violate common sense. In this way, Will’s intuition-based evaluation ofθ0 = 0 aligns with his epistemological stance that such “logical reasoning” is appropriate.The “Pure Mathematical Reasoning” in ARCTAN Cannot Be Reasoned ThroughWhile attempting to recall ideas from his calculus class, Will reflects on what is difficult about ARCTAN,revealing his epistemological stance that the reasoning required for this problem is “not normal reasoning:”773774775776777778779780781782783784785786[01:03:14] W: Um, but yeah. It's 'cause I, I just don't remember those, uh, that information. Idon't think that, and I couldn't, this is, I hate, it's, that's why I hated these problems so much,that I couldn't reason through them. I couldn't think, “Oh well, infinity, you know, thishappens.” I just can't, it doesn't make any sense.I: It's not like the previous problem, is what you're saying?W: No, not at all. That's like concrete. That's like, ok, pendulum moving. I can see that.That's why I hated Taylor series so much, is 'cause you can't see it. It's, it's just, it's like puremathematical reasoning that's, like, not normal reasoning. It's, you think about it a differentway. You can't just think as a person like, “Oh yeah, it's, pendulum swings to a certain point,this happens.” You have to think about it in terms of, like, infinity and what happens whenyou go to infinity. That's like, I don't think that's like in, humans don't think like thatnaturally, so you have to learn it.I: Ok.W: So I wouldn't be able to really, I, like, I couldn't get partial credit on this problem.Here, Will describes an epistemological difference between appropriate approaches on PENDULUMand ARCTAN. The “pure mathematical reasoning” here is described in contrast to the “logical reasoning” onPENDULUM (lines 778 to 784). For Will, ARCTAN requires unnatural, formal, mathematical ways ofthinking. Again, in comparison to PENDULUM, this means that Will would not expect to get any partial crediton this problem (line 786), because he cannot replicate the canonical reasoning from calculus class. In this way,Will’s epistemological stance here is more similar to the one he takes towards a history question like “What’sthe Battle of Hastings?”Will’s epistemological stance towards ARCTAN aligns with recalling formal knowledge. It does notmake sense to attempt “logical reasoning” as he does on PENDULUM if the mathematical content on ARCTANis unnatural and cannot be reasoned through. Instead, the only productive approach would be to recall factsfrom calculus class. An epistemological stance that rejects “logical reasoning” as productive also helps explainwhy even after his initial failures to recall the relevant ideas he seeks, Will persists in recalling formalknowledge, instead of attempting the kind of making sense and exploring that he does on PENDULUM.Importantly, the epistemology diagnosis suggests one reason why content or problem feature alignmentalone may not be successful. Aligning only the content features of two problems as prescribed by the contentICLS 2014 Proceedings66© ISLSknowledge diagnosis may not be successful in fostering similar approaches to those problems if in working onthose problems one takes different epistemological stances to what knowledge and approaches are useful.3) An Accountability DiagnosisAnother approach to transfer focuses on the importance of motivational aspects: achievement goals, interest,and self-efficacy (Pugh & Bergin, 2006). In attending to these factors, we found how a sense of accountabilityto knowing and being able to recall relevant facts and approaches (and the related negative affect and feelings oflow self-efficacy when he can’t remember) can help explain Will’s persistence in trying to recall formalknowledge on ARCTAN.Will Does Not Feel Accountable for Knowing the Canonical Way of Solving PENDULUMWe argue that Will does not feel accountable for such canonical knowledge on PENDULUM, likely supportinghis making sense and exploring on PENDULUM. Through the initial interaction with the interviewer, Will’sfocus shifts from knowing the “right way” to solve the problem to expressing his own understanding andseeking a solution that makes sense to him.At the start of working on PENDULUM, Will reads the problem silently for about 80 seconds, pausingonly to confirm with the interviewer that he is not required be familiar with this type of problem already. Afterreading, Will confirms his understanding of the two expressions with the interviewer. He then starts askingabout what the problem wants him to do:484950515253[00:04:26] W: Ok. [pause] So you don't want me to calc-, you just want me to answer thequestion, right? I don't have to do anything?I: Uh, yeah. Yeah, I mean, does it make sense, what they're asking?W: Yeah, it makes sense. I mean, I can understand what they're trying to say.I: Ok.W: I haven't done oscillations, but I can understand the idea that they're trying to get through.Here, the interviewer’s redirection from what Will should be doing on the problem (lines 48 to 49) toWill’s understanding of the problem (line 50) may help shift the focus to what Will understands. Theinterviewer’s answers to Will’s earlier clarification questions may also support an interpretation of the activityas the interviewer helping him make sense of the unfamiliar problem rather than testing what he already knows.Furthermore, the uninterrupted time spent silently reading could contribute to a feeling that Will has theopportunity to make sense of an unfamiliar problem, rather than immediately having to recall an answer. In line53, he indicates that he has not “done oscillations,” positioning himself as not accountable to this content.After this excerpt, Will again spends one minute silently reading and thinking about the problem, afterwhich he again starts to ask the interviewer if his understanding of the question is correct:5455565758596061626364[00:05:47] W: Well, I would guess that these T's should be equal, right? If they're going tobe, they're both going to be accurate approximations.I: Ok.W: So at a certain point, when they're no longer roughly approximate is when your angle isgetting too big that this one [the small angle approximation] breaks down, and this is the one[series equation] you have to use. Is that correct?I: Um, well I mean, I mean, I just sort of want to figure out how you would think about it.W: Ok.I: So whether or not it's correct.W: Ok, so you want me to explain how I would think about it.I: Yeah.After this except, Will’s talk switches from asking confirmatory questions about the problem (as in lines 54 and59) to stating his understanding of the question and how he would answer it. This shift in Will’s talk suggests acorresponding shift in Will’s interpretation of the interview situation, from an evaluation of his knowledge toone where his ideas are important and worth exploring.This interpretation of the interview situation aligns with making sense and exploring on PENDULUM.If the purpose of the interview is to hear how Will would think about the problem, not holding him accountableto particular canonical ways of understanding and approaching this problem, then this would provide space andsupport for the making sense and exploring in which Will ultimately engages.ICLS 2014 Proceedings67© ISLSWill Feels Accountable for Recalling Ideas from Calculus Class on ARCTANUnlike the start of his reasoning on PENDULUM, Will does not initially approach ARCTAN by reading andmaking sense of the problem. Instead, he immediately indicates familiarity with this kind of problem:602603604605606[00:46:18] W: Um, I, don't you need to know how to formulate the Taylor series for, I don'tknow, you don't, I guess. I don't even know how to formulate the Taylor series, so it's a goodthing they kind of gave it to me. Um, ok, I absolutely hate this stuff, but I have done this onebefore. I have taken, like, calc 2, so I have done this before [Will reads the problem tohimself again].Throughout the problem, Will signals that he feels accountable for remembering the relevant calculus contentby indicating both his frustration at not being able to recall those facts as well his lower self-efficacy:701 [00:58:28] W: And it's annoying, this one's really annoying, because I definitely have done702 this or something like it, so I should know how to do this one. It's been in my mind before,703 um, but I did get a 40 on this test, so, didn't know it that well. Uh, [laughs] let me think.Unlike on PENDULUM, here the interviewer does not intervene to suggest to Will that he is notnecessarily expecting him to recall facts from class, possibly because Will doesn’t directly ask a question to theinterviewer during ARCTAN. Instead, after Will attempts to recall information and work on the problem, theinterviewer asks Will what information he would look up or ask someone, given the chance. This likelysupports an interpretation by Will that prior knowledge is important, supporting his feelings of accountability.Similarly, receiving that knowledge later on may tacitly signal that this information was crucial.At the end of Will’s work on the problem, Will presents his answer, reflecting on how he feels abouthis answer:880881882883[01:11:52] W: Um, but yeah, this one [ARCTAN] is more upsetting to me than the other one[PENDULUM], because I did actually do these kinds of problems before. And like, I don'treally have, or see how to do these right, but that's how I would do it at this point, notremembering much.Will’s sense of accountability towards knowing the canonical and correct methods and the associatedfeelings of frustration, displayed throughout his work on ARCTAN, provide another plausible support for whyWill continues to seek to recall formal knowledge, even if that formal knowledge is not obviously useful for theproblem. For example, throughout the problem he attempts to remember the general Taylor series formula, aswell as the series expansions of sine and cosine, even though these are not necessary for solving the problem. Acontent knowledge diagnosis would suggest that cuing Taylor series simply cued the recall of other Taylorseries ideas. An accountability diagnosis suggests that, on top of this, the goal of recalling facts that he learnedin his calculus class in order to demonstrate competence and relieve frustration may support persistence inrecalling formal knowledge. At the end of the interview, Will supports this interpretation when he explains whyhe tried to recall the general formula for Taylor series even though he did not use it in his answer: “I know I’ddone it before. It was just frustrating me that I didn’t remember the basic idea of it.”Importantly, this diagnosis differs from an epistemology diagnosis, because it looks beyond what kindsof knowledge and reasoning Will thinks the task requires. An accountability diagnosis also considers feelingsof being accountable for that knowledge, such that not being able to remember those ideas leads to feelings offrustration and low self-efficacy, driving persistence in attempting to recall formal knowledge.Implications of These Alternative Diagnoses for Interdisciplinary EducationAlthough research into transfer has opened up possibilities beyond the content knowledge diagnosis, it remainsa common diagnosis in interdisciplinary efforts. In this paper, we raise the plausibility of other such diagnoses,namely an epistemology diagnosis and an accountability diagnosis, arguing that efforts that focus solely onalignment of content and problem features are incomplete. Here, we discuss some possible implications of eachalternative diagnosis for interdisciplinary education efforts.The epistemology diagnosis implies that instructors should also want students to view certain differentdisciplinary problems as requiring similar kinds of knowledge and approaches. Some interdisciplinary effortshave started incorporating the epistemology diagnosis into their course goals – for example, some recent physicscourses aimed at life sciences students have the explicit epistemological goal of helping students see physicsconcepts and the associated mathematical reasoning as relevant and useful for understanding biology and haveshowed preliminary success in achieving these goals (Meredith & Bolker, 2012; Redish et al., in press).Although these courses do align particular topics to build connections between physics and biology contentICLS 2014 Proceedings68© ISLSknowledge, they simultaneously aim to help students view physics knowledge and ways of reasoning asproductive for understanding biological problems, to support future transfer of physics into biology.We have also shown that, for Will, feelings of accountability, with the associated low self-efficacy andnegative affect, lead to brittle transfer of prior knowledge from his calculus class and persistence inunproductive approaches on ARCTAN. Although there have not been similar interdisciplinary reforms inresponse to an accountability diagnosis, some related research offers possible treatments. Elliott and Dweck(1988) mitigated the negative affect and low self-efficacy associated with “helplessness” by emphasizing thelearning goals of an activity over goals of demonstrating competence. This led to both increased willingness tomake public mistakes and improved performance over time. It is possible that deemphasizing performancegoals could have similarly helped Will try different approaches on ARCTAN related to making sense andexploring. Interdisciplinary courses could aim to emphasize learning goals over performance goals, in order tocounter low-risk/performance-oriented attitudes that may impede novel transfer across disciplinary courses (aswell as to counter feelings of low self-efficacy, frustration, and helplessness that can impede learning moregenerally).Our goal is to raise awareness of these multiple diagnoses of why transfer across disciplines may fail.Although we advocate for the inclusion of alternate diagnoses, we do not wish to downplay the importance ofthe content knowledge diagnosis, nor do we mean to suggest that these diagnoses are mutually exclusive.Surely, instruction that attends to only epistemology or only the low self-efficacy and negative affect related tofeelings of accountability will be as incomplete as sole attention to content knowledge. Rather, enriching ourunderstanding of the multiple reasons why transfer across disciplines can fail has the potential to lead toimprovements in current interdisciplinary efforts. Additionally, it is possible that these multiple diagnoses canenrich our understanding of why current interdisciplinary efforts succeed, illuminating epistemological,affective, or motivational benefits of approaches derived purely from content considerations.ReferencesAl-Holou, N., Bilgutay, N. M., Corleto, C., Demel, J. T., Felder, R., Frair, K., … Wells, D. L. (1999). First-YearIntegrated Curricula: Design Alternatives and Examples*. Journal of Engineering Education, 88(4),435–448.Dunn, J. W., & Barbanel, J. (2000). One model for an integrated math/physics course focusing on electricity andmagnetism and related calculus topics. American Journal of Physics, 68(8), 749–757.Elliott, E. S., & Dweck, C. S. (1988). Goals: an approach to motivation and achievement. Journal of personalityand social psychology, 54(1), 5–12.Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12(3), 306–355.Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15(1),1–38.Hammer, D., & Elby, A. (2003). Tapping Epistemological Resources for Learning Physics. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 12(1), 53–90.Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005). Resources, framing, and transfer. In J. Mestre(Ed.), Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective (pp. 89–120). Greenwich, CT:Information Age Publishing.Meredith, D. C., & Bolker, J. A. (2012). Rounding off the cow: Challenges and successes in an interdisciplinaryphysics course for life science students. American Journal of Physics, 80(10), 913–922.Plomer, M., Jessen, K., Rangelov, G., & Meyer, M. (2010). Teaching physics in a physiologically meaningfulmanner. Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research, 6(2), 020116.Pugh, K. J., & Bergin, D. A. (2006). Motivational Influences on Transfer. Educational Psychologist, 41(3),147–160.Redish, E. F., Bauer, C., Carleton, K. L., Cooke, T. J., Cooper, M., Crouch, C. H., … Turpen, C. (in press).NEXUS/Physics: An interdisciplinary repurposing of physics for biologists. American Journal ofPhysics.Reed, S. K., Ernst, G. W., & Banerji, R. (1974). The role of analogy in transfer between similar problem states.Cognitive Psychology, 6(3), 436–450.Reeves, L. M., & Weisberg, R. W. (1994). The role of content and abstract information in analogical transfer.Psychological Bulletin, 115(3), 381–400.Rosenberg, S., Hammer, D., & Phelan, J. (2006). Multiple Epistemological Coherences in an Eighth-GradeDiscussion of the Rock Cycle. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(2), 261–292.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by a sub-award under NSF-CCLI-0941191. We thank the TRUSE conferenceorganizers for their support, Angie Little for her contributions to this research project, and Andy Elby, AyushGupta, Gina Quan, Joe Redish, and Vashti Sawtelle for thoughtful feedback on previous versions of this work.ICLS 2014 Proceedings69© ISLS