Modeling the Construction of Evidence through Prior Knowledge andObservations from the Real WorldLauren Barth-Cohen, Daniel Capps, Jonathan Shemwell, University of Maine, Center for Research in STEMEducation, 5784 York Complex #1, Orono, ME 04469Email: lauren.barthcohen@maine.edu, daniel.capps@maine.edu, jonathan.shemwell@maine.eduAbstract: Evidence is key to many scientific practices including argumentation. For learnersengaged in scientific practices, we aim for them to recognize scientific evidence fromobservations in the natural world. Here, we provide an early depiction of evidenceconstruction, namely how evidence is constructed from one’s prior knowledge and one’sobservations. We illuminate instances of teachers constructing evidence while engaged in aprofessional development workshop where they are tasked to reconstruct the geologicalhistory of a national park. We illustrate four cases, some of which involve the successfulconstruction of evidence and some of which involve embedded challenges with constructingevidence, such as difficulties with background knowledge and individuals “seeing” differentinformation in the same phenomena. This analysis illustrates the role of prior knowledge inscientific practices that rely on evidence construction in field-based complex environments.IntroductionA central focus of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) is engaging students in the learning ofscientific practices, such as argumentation and modeling. Here we focus on evidence construction, which weargue is important for many of these scientific practices. Science education research discusses the importanceof evidence in the scientific process and in students’ engagement in these practices in the classroom. However,less frequently discussed in this literature is research on how learners develop evidence from their immediateexperience of phenomena. Possibly this issue is overlooked because often learners that are engaging inscientific practices are provided with evidence a priori. Here we use theoretical machinery from coordinationclass theory (diSessa & Sherin, 1998) to show how learners constructed evidence from their prior knowledgeand observations of the world. The learners were middle school earth science teachers who observed thegeology of an area and constructed evidence for the relative ages of the rocks and other features based on theirobservations and prior knowledge.Evidence and Evidence Construction in Scientific PracticesEvidence is at the core of knowing and doing in science. No idea or explanation can be accepted if it fails tosquare with the “facts of the matter.” Ironically, the origins of evidence construction—where the “facts” comefrom—are complicated. Fundamentally, evidence consists of straightforward observations dependent upon thefive senses (i.e., perception). However, what is perceived depends upon the knowledge and expectations of theobserver (Chalmers, 1999). To put it another way, the “facts” of any “matter” are never directly apprehended;they are constructed in the mind of the observer. Science educators acknowledge this fact along with itsimplications for learners engaged in scientific inquiry. For instance, Duschl (2003) described how learnersbegin with observation and end with explanation as they move through a series of transformations on anevidence-explanation continuum. The learner begins with the transformation from data to evidence, then goesfrom evidence to patterns and models, and finally moves from patterns and models to explanations.Science education standards (e.g., NGSS, 2013) emphasize that evidence is paramount to studentunderstanding of science. The 2007 National Academy Press report describes that students who understandscience should be able to generate and evaluate scientific evidence (Duschl, Schweingruber, & Shouse,2007). In the Framework for K-12 Science Education, a commitment to evidence is foundational for developingfurther claims and for engaging in many scientific practices, such as explanation, argumentation, and modeling(NRC, 2012). When constructing scientific explanations, using appropriate evidence is key for thoseexplanations (McNeill & Krajcik, 2007). In argumentation, evidence is one of the pillars of the widely usedToulmin Argumentation Pattern (e.g. Erduran, Simon & Osborne, 2004). In modeling, the science content andrelevant data is centrally important because a model needs to be of something (Lehrer & Schauble, 2006).Construction of evidence from interactions with the natural world has rarely been the focus of researchon the use of evidence in science education. In many studies, evidence has been provided to students as thestarting point for the instruction process. Studies of this type have shown that students have difficulties bothusing appropriate evidence (McNeill & Krajcik, 2007; Sandoval, 2003) and understanding what counts asevidence (Sadler, 2004). These challenges are also prevalent in adults (Kuhn, 1991). McNeill and colleagues(McNeill et al., 2006; McNeill & Krajcik, 2007) conducted a series of studies in which learners constructedscientific explanations using claims, evidence, and reasoning. The data students used as evidence in theirICLS 2014 Proceedings325© ISLSexplanations were derived from either chemistry investigations or observations or reading materials. Bell andLinn (2000) presented the results of a student debate about how far light travels. The debate was scaffoldedthrough an argument building software called SenseMaker where students were presented with 13 pre-existingitems of evidence, but they had the option of adding unique evidence. From another perspective, research usinga technology supported curriculum called Explanation Constructor had students construct and evaluate scientificexplanations for natural phenomena, mainly the natural selection of finches in the Galapagos Islands (Sandoval,2003; Zembal-Saul et al., 2002). Built into the curriculum was a database of information such as field notesabout bird behavior and environmental factors (e.g. numbers of plants and animals in a given season). Thestudents could query the data, and the software automatically generated graphs to scaffold the data analysisbeing easily connected to explanations. Studies like these have led to a line of research that focuses ondeveloping and implementing curricula where students are asked to reason with evidence and ground theirexplanations and arguments in evidence (e.g. Zembal-Saul, et al., 2002).Studies in the broader learning sciences literature have grappled productively with how learners mightinteract with phenomena to construct evidence. Goodwin (1994) proposed that “nature is transformed intoculture” (p. 607) through processes of coding, highlighting, and representation. His point was that theseprocesses, involving interactions with people and tools, organized learners’ perceptions of nature to developcategories of importance needed for “practices of seeing” (p.608). He illustrated the processes with archeologygraduate students learning to distinguish and interpret different colors and patterns in dirt. In an example ofhighlighting, an archeologist drew a circle around an area of colored soil to indicate to others where an ancientwooden post had been. Coding occurred when students learned to compare the colors of dirt on a trowel to thoseof a standard color chart, where the color of dirt on the trowel never quite matched any color on the chart. In areview of the literature, Mogk and Goodwin (2012) described how geology graduate students in a field camplearned to “construct and ‘read’ the story of the Earth” (p. 145). The authors described how students, guided bytheir professor, scrutinized minute changes in the size, shape and distribution of rock to select and make crucial“first inscriptions” (p. 145). However, the authors did not go deeply into how evidence construction occurredexcept to make the general point that it was mediated by the professor’s guidance, tools, and interactions withpeers.Evidence construction in this type of natural world setting is important because there is a wide-rangingspace of potential evidence that a learner needs to sift through and that sifting process may support learning.Geologists have long recognized the importance of field experience in geology education. Thus, it is notsurprising that researchers in geocognition have begun studying learning in the field (e.g. Petrocovic, Libarkin,& Baker, 2009).Studies in the literature on expertise have shown how experts construct evidence. For experts,constructing evidence is nearly automatic because they are so familiar with the phenomena they encounter. Thatis, experts’ evidence is largely pre-constructed, in memory. This point is illustrated by Eberbach and Crowley(2009). Reviewing the work of Alberdi, Sleeman and Korpi (2000), Eberbach and Crowley described howbotanists compared features of plants. The botanists fluidly identified the relevant parts of plants and theirfeatures in order to identify similarities and differences between different organisms. Similarly, Knorr-Cetinaand Amann (1990) presented an ethnographic study of how visual evidence was constructed by a community ofmolecular geneticists who were discussing a film. The translation of this visual film into data and then evidencewas again a fluid process involving jointly produced talk by the scientists as they were interacting with eachother and the object in question. However, needed are studies that illuminate how this process of constructingevidence unfolds with learners.Our data was collected as part of a multiple-day geologic field experience in which learners madeobservations of the bedrock, and those observations had the potential to be constructed into evidence forcomplicated historical events. The current study builds off geocognition literature on learning in the field bydescribing learners’ construction of evidence as they developed models of historical geology. We present datafrom a teacher professional development (PD) workshop where participants were engaged in modeldevelopment and model revision in the field. Although a PD workshop is not inherently a naturalistic setting,this course primarily occurred outside in a complicated field geology environment where there was a large spanof phenomena that the teachers could focus on while constructing evidence. Thus, our research setting was astep toward the type of real world settings that have been less frequently focused on in the broader scienceeducation literature. Our research goal was to begin conceptualizing learning in this complicated field geologyenvironment, where there was a wide range of approaches and reasons for how evidence was constructed.The contribution of this paper is to show how the evidence construction process unfolds from thelearners’ sensory perception of phenomenon in natural settings to their conception of the phenomena asevidence in relation to a claim. Both perception of phenomena and conception of evidence are inherentlyknowledge-dependent (Chalmers, 1999; Metz, 2000), therefore, our model focuses on learners’ knowledge asthey construct evidence in this complex environment.ICLS 2014 Proceedings326© ISLSData Collection ContextData were collected during a three-day (17 hours) PD workshop for experienced sixth grade earth scienceteachers. The workshop focused on evidence-based modeling activities to support the implementation of theNGSS (2013). The workshop focus was reconstructing the geological history of the Schoodic Peninsula inAcadia National Park. During the workshop the teachers made observations and drew surface maps and crosssections of the bedrock at three locations, while learning about geological principles. Over the course of theworkshop, the teachers developed a series of increasingly sophisticated drawings, or models, of the SchoodicPeninsula at three points in time based on the geological features they observed. The oldest feature theyobserved was the granite bedrock of the area (~400 million years). Next were a series of ~200 million olddiabase dikes. Diabase, an igneous rock similar in composition to basalt, forms as magma flows into fissures insurrounding rock (granite in this case) and cools. Figure 1 shows several teachers sitting on a large dike. Figure2 shows a series of small dikes that are a few centimeters wide. The third set of features that teachers observedwere remnants from the most recent glaciation (~20,000 years ago) including glacial erratics, which are rocksthat have been transported by glaciers, and markings in the bedrock, such as chatter marks, striations, andcracks. Figure 3 shows an example of the striations that the teachers observed. Teachers’ models from the firstday of the workshop focused on diabase dikes and glaciation at Schoodic point, which is on SchoodicPeninsula. The models from the second day were more complicated due to additional observations of chattermarks, striations, and cracks from a new location on the same peninsula, Fraser point. The models on the thirdday were even more sophisticated as teachers added information about tectonic plates from geologic maps andsimulations. The workshop instructor was one of the authors and there were two geologists and three educationresearchers, including another author, supporting the instruction and data collection.Data consisted of video and audio recordings from both fieldwork and classroominstruction. Additionally, the data corpus included all drawings and notes created by the teachers andresearchers field notes. Initially we open coded the data (Charmaz, 1995). Open coding led to focused codesrelated to geological content (e.g. diabase dikes, glacial erratics, chatter marks) and aspects of argumentation(e.g. rebuttal, claim).Figure 1. Several of the teacherssitting on a diabase dike.Figure 2. An example of adiabase dike.Figure 3. An example of glacialstriations on diabase.Model of How Evidence Was Constructed from Observations of the Real WorldWe use coordination class theory to show how learners constructed evidence in natural settings from theinteraction of human sensory data with prior knowledge. The use of coordination class theory was motivated byrecognition that during the PD workshop the teachers explored a set of geological features which many of themhad seen before (all teachers lived in the area and had visited the park in the past, many had even participated infield trips led by park naturalists), but teachers also commented about seeing new things (“It looks the same, butI’m noticing more though.”) since the last time they visited the location. These comments raised questionsabout “seeing.” What did it mean to “see” new things even if you have literally “seen” the same thingbefore? How did what someone “saw” relate to the geological models they constructed?Coordination class theory is an outgrowth of Knowledge in Pieces, which is an epistemologicalframework and analytical perspective on learners’ prior knowledge (diSessa, 1993; diSessa & Sherin, 1998).One research direction focused on the nature of knowledge structures that underlie conceptual understanding.Coordination class is a model of a particular type of concept that is common in physics. Prototypical examplesinclude force and acceleration (diSessa & Sherin, 1998). Recently, the coordination class model has beenapplied to other concepts, including probability (Wagner, 2006) and oscillatory motion (Parnafes, 2007).Coordination classes were originally built to capture conceptual learning, but here we apply a subset of thetheoretical machinery to evidence construction. We present what diSessa (1991) referred to as a mini-model,which is a type of localized theory, aiming to get at the essence of a phenomenon and address “why questions.”In this case, we present a model for how teachers constructed evidence, based on their in-the-moment,observations of bedrock geology, in order to support subsequent claims.According to coordination class theory, there are phenomena in the world that have the potential to beICLS 2014 Proceedings327© ISLS“seen”—they can literally be read out [observed] of a situation. To read things out of a situation one needs astrategy, or a way of perceiving the phenomenon that determines what is attended to. This is known as a readoutstrategy. The observation generated by the readout strategy is the readout. There are many possible readoutstrategies, and they can involve perception with the eyes or other senses. The causal net is the entire knowledgesystem, composed of both knowledge and strategies that will help determine how the information—that ismomentarily read out—relates to the overall knowledge system. When one uses readout strategies to read out[interpret] information in the world there is an instantaneous interaction between the information that is read outand specific knowledge pieces within their causal net. This instantaneous interaction is referred to as aninference as it functions as the link between the observable information and the determination of things that arenot as easily observable. One or many inferences together become evidence. This model can be illustrated withan example: suppose an individual is making observations of a diabase dike that is cross-cutting granite whileconstructing evidence for a claim about the granite being older than the diabase. The individual might read outspecific information about the granite cracking in linear patterns and the darker diabase exhibiting a circular orswirling pattern within those cracks (see Figures 1 and 2). Instantaneously, the information that is read outmight be combined with prior knowledge into a subsequent inference about the molten diabase having flowedinto the existing cracks in the solid granite. This inference (possibly combined with other inferences) thenmight function as evidence for a claim about the diabase being younger than the granite because the granitewould have had to already exist when the diabase intruded. However, it is also possible that an individual mightonly read out the type of rock, granite or diabase, and then not go any farther to connect what they observe withany scientific claims. In that case they have made observations of the rocks, but they have not constructedevidence. Another possibility is that an individual might read out information and decide that it is unrelated. Forinstance, an individual might read out that lichen is growing on the rock, but their prior knowledge would guidethem to instantaneously decide that lichen, which is biological, is unrelated to the claim about the rocks relativeages. In the moment their prior knowledge would attune those readouts such that some become inferences thatthen turn into evidence for subsequent claims and irrelevant readouts would be discarded.We used coordination class theory to illustrate four cases of teachers constructing evidence frombedrock as they attempted to reconstruct geologic history of Schoodic Peninsula. In the first case, the teachersfocused on cracks in granite where diabase crosscut the granite. This case illustrates how the teacherssuccessfully constructed evidence for the relative ages of the rocks—granite being older and diabase beingyounger—based on the read out information as it is connected to their prior knowledge and subsequenceinferences. Similarly, the second case illustrates a teacher successfully coordinating multiple sources ofevidence into a series of claims. In the third case, teachers focused on marks in the bedrock that may or may nothave been chatter marks. The teachers lacked sufficient background knowledge to make conclusive inferencesabout the chatter marks, and therefore were hindered in constructing evidence for glaciation. In the fourth case,several teachers discussed whether or not diabase dikes extended below the surface. Individual teachers haddifferent answers to this question depending on what they read out in the situation. This case illustrates thatindividuals read out different information from the same phenomena, and these different readouts could lead tothe same phenomena being construed as evidence for different claims. The third and fourth cases were similaras both identify challenges in constructing evidence.Case I: Successful Evidence Construction about Diabase Dikes Crosscutting GraniteThis is a case of unproblematic evidence construction as a teacher was able to draw on her prior knowledge withrelative ease. This case came from the first day of the professional development workshop when two teachers,Barbara and Naomi spent 20 minutes discussing diabase dikes. Instructionally, we aimed for the teachers tofirst, see the diabase dikes as cutting through the granite (Figures 1 and 2) and second, use the geologicalprinciple of cross-cutting relationships to deduce that the diabase was younger than granite. Teachers wereasked to construct surface and cross-sectional maps to support their thinking.The teachers were reading out information about the granite cracking in relatively straight lines andconnecting that information with their prior knowledge to make inferences about the diabase filling in theexisting cracks in the granite. Barbara claimed that granite was older and diabase was younger (“I think whathappened is that the granite was here first and that was the oldest and the black came up through the cracks fromthe mantle.”). Meanwhile, the instructor asked the two teachers to consider the alternative, granite beingyounger and diabase being older. In response, Barbara constructed evidence from her observations for her claimthat granite was older and diabase was younger. She read out information about the two rocks exhibitingdifferent visual patterns: the granite appeared to crack or fractures in straight lines and the diabase had a curvyor flowing appearance (see Figure 2). Barbara’s prior knowledge may have directed her to pay attention tothese visual patterns, which were then instantaneously read out and became an inference that the diabase flowedinto the granite. This inference, for her, was evidence in support of the claim that diabase was younger thangranite.ICLS 2014 Proceedings328© ISLSBarbara:It just seems like the black [diabase] flowed around because, when you look at thestripes going up, like, this one here. To look at that, it looks like that kind of filledin a crack that was already in the granite. As opposed to, if it was going anotherway I don't see the black splitting like that, as well, because it looks like it doesn'tsplit like that as much. When you look at the rock [diabase] itself, it doesn't nothave those clean sort of fractures that you see in, the granite seems to have those.Instructor: So, I hear you telling me that you are seeing the black stuff seems to cut into thegranite.Barbara: Yeah, looks very different // Instructor: So // I feel like it filled into a fracture thatwas there in the granite, the granite fractures nicely like that. Where as, I don'tknow if this [black rock] does as much, I mean this seems to flow around, in it'spattern too, it seems like it flowed around things and fills in cracks that werealready in the granite, its kind of flowing in.Barbara read out that the “granite fractures nicely” and generated an inference about the motion of the diabasewhen it was a melt. The diabase “fills in cracks that were already in the granite” and “it just seems like the black[diabase] flowed around.” Diabase is a solid rock, but her inference was about its historicalmotion. Additionally, she read out information that refuted an alternative inference that the diabase did notcrack in a way that was similar to granite. “When you look at the rock [diabase] itself, it does not have thoseclean sort of fractures that you see in, the granite seems to have those.” Using the patterns she read out from therock, combined with her prior knowledge, Barbara produced evidence to support her claim that granite wasolder. The evidence also refuted the alternative inference, that the diabase was older. These claims were alsosupported by another inference and relevant readout about the light colored rock as granite and the black rock asdifferent from granite. In addition to the claim about relative ages of diabase and granite, there was also aproximate claim about diabase having flowed in the past.In summary, Barbara read out information about (1) the granite “cracking,” and (2) the diabase havinga particular pattern with none of the clean cracks of granite. Barbara generated an inference that the diabaseflowed around the granite. This inference was taken to be evidence for the claim that the granite was older thanthe diabase. This case illustrates successful construction of evidence based on the information that was read outand connected to their prior knowledge and supported inferences about the diabase flowing, which in turnfunctioned as evidence for the claim that granite was older than diabase.Case II: Incorporation of Multiple Pieces of Evidence into a ModelThis is a case of a teacher successfully incorporating multiple pieces of evidence into a model. At the end of themorning of the first day, the teachers were asked to construct models of what was happening geologically atthree points in time based on prior observations. Barbara mentioned information that she read out from the rocksand several inferences functioned as evidence for her claim about granite being older than diabase.Barbara: It appeared that the granite was kind of fractured, very straight lines. And that the,diabase, if it was it diabase, I have to find out about that. It appeared that the blackrock [diabase], was probably the middle age rock, warm and molten, like it musthave flowed through the cracks and crevices. And went around things. Looking atit, in places where it was swirling, from places where it was being cooled. So wethought it was middle. And then the glacial erratics, which we didn't see any in thatarea, but the one I had seen on the other side, was definitely. And, I had said itwas the youngest rock, but then Naomi brought up, well said it was may not havebeen the youngest but newest arrival, to this area. So, it was somewhere else andthen just brought here. So I think that was...Gina:You don't know what it was made of?Barbara: It looked like granite, but different. I don't know if it was Lucerne Granite, but Idon’t know. It was all grey and white as opposed to the pink granite that we wereseeing.Geologist: What about the very bottom there? What did you all…?Barbara: Glacial erratic were sitting on top of both rock layers. It was just seeing like it wasdropped there. You know, it didn't look like anything else, and it was this roundedrock that didn't fit in with sharp edges of granite that we were seeing around it.Barbara discussed her evidence for granite being older than diabase. She read out information about thestraight-line fractures in the granite, which supported her inference that the molten black diabase flowed throughthe existing cracks and crevices in the granite while it cooled. This inference then became evidence for theICLS 2014 Proceedings329© ISLSdiabase being middle aged (200 million years old) and the granite being older.Then, Barbara switched to discussing glacial erratics. She mentioned having seen a glacial erratic,which suggests that she had read out the features of a particular rock and connected them with relevant priorknowledge in order to identify that rock as a glacial erratic. The glacial erratic was taken to be evidence of theyoungest rocks; we do not know why, likely, she had prior knowledge of the recent glaciation period, which wasdiscussed elsewhere in the workshop. Gina asked Barbara about the composition of the glacial erratic. Barbaramentioned that it looked like granite, which implies that she read out information from the rock and connectedthat to her prior knowledge to determine that the specific rock was granite, but she was unsure about whether ornot it was a particular kind of granite, Lucerne Granite. This provisional identification was made from herhaving read out information about the color of the rock. It looked grey and white, instead of pink, which was thetypical color of the surrounding rock. At the end, one of the geologists asked her about glacial erratics. She thengenerated an inference in which glacial erratics were sitting there, possibly dropped there. She may have readout information about how erratics looked different from surrounding rock; the surrounding granite had sharpedges while the erratic was rounded. Accordingly, Barbara constructed a series of claims, granite as the oldestrock, diabase as the middle aged rock, and glacial erratics as the newest arrival. In generating these claims sheconstructed evidence for why granite was older than diabase, it appeared that the molten diabase flowed intoexisting cracks in the granite, and why the glacial erratics, which were composed of ancient granite, were newerarrivals to the local area than the granite bedrock.Case III: Problematic Evidence Construction due to Uncertainty about Chatter MarksThis is a case of problematic evidence construction as the teachers lacked sufficient knowledge to determine thenature of the markings they were observing. This case came from the second day of the workshop when Barbaraand Naomi discussed marks in the bedrock that may or may not have been chatter marks. They madeobservations of glacial markings at Fraser Point in order to develop a second round of models for the threepreviously mentioned time periods. Based on their new observations, Barbara and Naomi were unsure ofwhether the specific marks they were “seeing” were chatter marks or not. Chatter marks are evidence ofglaciation and have a characteristic quarter moon shape that is aligned with the direction of glacial travel. Thetwo teachers discussed several alternatives, perhaps these marks were cracks, striations or scratches, and theydiscussed how they might know if these marks were chatter marks or not. This conversation occurred over sixminutes, one small excerpt is presented below. Throughout the conversation the teachers wrestled with whetherthe different markings they were observing on the rock were chatter marks or not. The issue of chatter markidentification was not resolved. Therefore, this is a case of trying to construct evidence, but there was littlesuccess due to uncertainty in determining chatter marks.Naomi and Barbara read out several markings in the bedrock and the information read out as combinedwith their prior knowledge influenced them when trying to decide what kind of markings they were. Naomi firstread out information about a marking when she asked Barbara if the markings were striations (“I haven't seenactual striations in a long time, could this be?”). Barbara responded with a possible inference about chattermarks (“Looks like chatter marks, it could be thought, going in the right direction?”) and included informationabout why these markings might be chatter marks: they are going in the right direction. Barbara drew on priorknowledge about direction being important and she read out both the marks and their direction. Naomi agreedwith the directionality, but had a concern about what was causing the chatter mark (“Could be something elsedragging it.”). Then Barbara read out new information about the depth of the marking (“It could have been,doesn't look like it was that deep, you know.”) At this point they had read out some markings that might bechatter marks, but had not made a solid inference about if these were or were not chatter marks. Then, theconversation switched to a different mark in the rock and Barbara again asked about the identification (“Whatdid they say, about these here? These cracks? Did they say that they are striations?”). In response Naomi said,“I've seen striations before. I've had them pointed out to me by a geologist, and I didn't think. That looks morelike a crack to me.” Here she was explicit about her relevant knowledge, having had striations pointed out toher in the past, she was uncertain about whether these were striations. Barbara then agreed, and Naomicontinued to explain why this one was not a chatter mark (“Cause this should be more like a scratch.”) Again,the conversation switched to a different mark in the rock, and this time Barbara was more convinced of it beinga chatter mark (“There is some down there. It seemed like it was better, looks like chatter marks.”) Naomi andBarbara again read out information about directionality and decided that these were more likely to be chattermarks (“they chatter marks were going in that direction. Kind of like that. I bet that’s what they are”). Thisconversation stretched on while they continued to observe and try to identify additional markings.Both teachers accessed some prior knowledge about identifying chatter marks as connected to glacialdirectionality. They read out specific markings in the rock including details about depth and shape, whichimplied direction. These readouts were connected with relevant prior knowledge while they tried to generate aninference about whether or not specific markings were or were not chatter marks, and they also discussedalternatives. In a short time period they looked at several markings with varying degrees of confidence. TheICLS 2014 Proceedings330© ISLSinferences were tentative because the teachers were unable to decide if the markings were or were not chattermarks and they were unable to make a clear argument for their uncertainty. This tentativeness might have been amanifestation of a lack sufficient prior knowledge. The lack of a solid inference that could have lead to evidenceis important because chatter marks are generally evidence of glaciation, and thus they did not construct evidencefor glaciation in these moments. Another factor is that the specific markings at this location were not ideal casesof chatter marks, and we would expect this to cause ambiguity for learners. This case illustrates thatconstruction of evidence can become problematic when one either does not have sufficient prior knowledge or acertain kind of prior knowledge or when the readouts are ambiguous.Case IV: Different Readouts of Whether or not Dikes Extend Below the SurfaceSimilar to Case III, this is a case of a challenge with constructing evidence, namely conflicting readouts leadingto different claims. This case took place on Day 1 of the workshop when the teachers were in the field makingobservations of the bedrock, and they constructed three models, one for each time period. The instructor aimedfor the teachers to see the dikes as cutting through the granite and running for a significant distancehorizontally. In this instance, a small group of individuals discussed the question of whether the dikes extendedbelow the surface or not. One possibility was that dikes seen on the surface extended below the surface invertical columns. Another possibility was that dikes were inclusions, or chunks of rock, stuck in the middle ofthe granite and did not extend below the surface. Settling this question was important because two differentconclusions could be reached based on one's interpretation of the evidence. If the dikes were viewed as crosscutting the granite this would be used as evidence of dikes being younger than granite. On the other hand, if thedikes were viewed as inclusions in the granite, than the diabase would be older than the granite.The teachers were asked to draw cross-sections to show the relationship between the rocks below theEarth’s surface. Initially, teachers had trouble drawing what was below the surface. The instructor suggested theteachers should find a place where the rock was cut so they could see a cross-sectional view beneath theirfeet. The instructor directed the group to look below and asked if the dikes extended below the surface. (“Youmight have to look around a bit. But you might find a place where it was cut and you can look below. But,would you assume, like, coming over and looking at this. Would you assume that this is going to be really,really deep?”) In response he heard both “yes” and “no,” which prompted the next conversation about whetherthe dikes extended below the surface or not. Gina was not reading out information about the dikes goingunderneath (“You don't see if from down there, there isn't anything that comes out from underneath.”) Thissupported the inference that the dikes did not extend below the surface. Lisa and Kelly both read outinformation about the dikes that supported a different inference: dikes extending below the surface. “Lisa: No,but it could go down there. It is going down there instead, so it’s vertical. That doesn't mean that it doesn't standup and (muffled argument). Kelly: Could be a big column.” Then, Carol, similar to Gina, also read out the dikesas a chunk (“I think of it as a chunk of“) and inferred that it did not extend below the surface.This case is interesting because the teachers were likely all looking at the same rocks, but not readingout the same information. From different readouts we would expect them to draw different inferences, andconstruct different evidence. Lisa and Kelly generated an inference that the dikes continued below the surface,which could be taken as evidence for a claim about dikes being younger as they cut through the granite. Ginaand Carol generated an inference that the dikes did not continue below the surface, which led to differentinferences, evidence, and claims than Lisa and Kelly. Another possibility that cannot be ruled out is that theywere drawing on different prior knowledge, however, given that the teachers appear to “see” different thingsfrom the same apparent rock, there is an indication of them having different readouts and not only differentknowledge. Reading out the pertinent information is important in evidence construction, and this case suggeststhat one challenge in constructing evidence is what information one reads out of a situation.Discussion and ConclusionIn this paper we used coordination class theory to show how learners constructed evidence in the field as theirprior knowledge interacted with their observations. Cases one and two illustrated successful construction ofevidence while cases three and four each illustrated a challenge with constructing evidence, includingdifficulties with background knowledge, and individuals having conflicting readouts. Coordination class theorywas useful in describing these examples because it provided a way to conceptualize successful evidenceconstruction and what can be problematic, both of which may impact how individuals learn. As we pointed outin our review of the literature, evidence construction is currently under-conceptualized. Thus, our work providesan early depiction of what evidence construction might look like in a field-based setting. Current research ingeoscience education recognizes the importance of field experience. Studies on expertise have shown howexperts construct evidence, but our work goes a step beyond this by beginning to elucidate how evidence isconstructed in a field setting. We also see our work as generally applicable to the science education community.Evidence construction is a major part of many of the scientific practices highlighted in the recently releasedNGSS. Thus, understanding both the process and the difficulties learners might encounter in evidenceICLS 2014 Proceedings331© ISLSconstruction should inform the development of heuristics that can support learners in successfully constructingevidence as they engage in the learning of science.ReferencesAlberdi, E., Sleeman, D. H., & Korpi, M. (2000). Accommodating surprise in taxonomic tasks: The role ofexpertise. Cognitive Science, 24(1), 53-91.Bell, P. & Linn, M. C. (2000). Scientific arguments as learning artifacts: Designing for learning from the webwith KIE. International Journal of Science Education, 22(8), 797-817.Chalmers, A. F. (1999). What is this thing called science?. Univ. of Queensland Press.Charmaz, K. (1995). Grounded theory. In J.A. Smith, R. Harre, & L. Van Langenhove (Eds.), Rethinkingmethods in psychology (pp. 27–49). London: SagediSessa, A. A. (1991). If we want to get ahead, we should get some theories. In Proceedings of the 13th annualmeeting of the North American Chapter of the International Group for the Psychology of MathematicsEducation (Vol. 1, pp. 220-239).diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10(2-3), 105-225.diSessa, A. A., & Sherin, B. L. (1998). What changes in conceptual change? International Journal of ScienceEducation, 20(10), 1155-1191.Duschl, R. A. (2003). Assessment of inquiry. Everyday assessment in the science classroom, 41-59.Duschl, R. A., Schweingruber, H. A., & Shouse, A. W. (Eds.). (2007). Taking science to school: Learning andTeaching Science in Grades K-8. National Academies Press.Eberbach, C., & Crowley, K. (2009). From everyday to scientific observation: How children learn to observe thebiologist’s world. Review of Educational Research, 79(1), 39-68.Erduran, S., Simon, S., & Osborne, J. (2004). TAPping into argumentation: Developments in the application ofToulmin's argument pattern for studying science discourse. Science Education, 88(6), 915-933.Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.Knorr-Cetina, K., & Amann, K. (1990). Image dissection in natural scientific inquiry. Science, Technology &Human Values, 15(3), 259-283.Kuhn (1991). The Skills of Argument. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Cultivating model-based reasoning in science education. CambridgeHandbook of the Learning Sciences, 371-388.McNeill, K. L., Lizotte, D. J., Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. W. (2006). Supporting students' construction of scientificexplanations by fading scaffolds in instructional materials. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(2),153-191.McNeill, K. L., & Krajcik, J. (2007). Middle school students' use of appropriate and inappropriate evidence inwriting scientific explanations. Thinking with Data, 233-265.Metz, K. E. (2000). Young children’s inquiry in biology: Building the knowledge bases to empowerindependent inquiry. In J. Minstrell & E. H. van Zee (eds.), Inquiry into Inquiry Learning andTeaching in Science (pp. 371-404). Washington DC: American Association for the Advancement ofScience.Mogk, D., & Goodwin, C. (2012). Learning in the field: Synthesis of research on thinking and learning in thegeosciences. Geological Society of America Special Papers, 486, 131-163.National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Parnafes, O. (2007). What does "fast" mean? understanding the physical world through computationalrepresentations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(3), 415-450.Petcovic, H. L., Libarkin, J. C., & Baker, K. M. (2009). An empirical methodology for investigatinggeocognition in the field. Journal of Geoscience Education, 57(4), 316-328.Sadler, T. D. (2004). Informal reasoning regarding socioscientific issues: A critical review of research. Journalof Research in Science Teaching, 41(5), 513-536.Sandoval, W. A. (2003). Conceptual and epistemic aspects of students’ scientific explanations. The Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 12(1), 5–51.Wagner, J. F. (2006). Transfer in pieces. Cognition and Instruction, 24(1), 1-71.Zembal-Saul, C., Munford, D., Crawford, B., Friedrichsen, P., & Land, S. (2002). Scaffolding preservicescience teachers' evidence-based arguments during an investigation of natural selection. Research inScience Education, 32(4), 437-463.AcknowledgementsThis work has been supported by NSF Grant no. DUE-0962805.ICLS 2014 Proceedings332© ISLS