Designing Collaborative Learning Activities for Two Outcomes:Deep Structural Knowledge and Idea GenerationRachel J. Lam, Arizona State University, Tempe Campus, Tempe, AZ, 85287, Rachel.Lam@asu.eduAbstract: Four versions of a collaborative activity were designed by manipulating twofactors: cognitive engagement and preparation to collaborate. The activities were implementedin real classrooms where students worked in pairs. Findings showed a benefit of preparationon deep knowledge, regardless of how students were instructed to engage. However, discoursedata revealed that only students in the “constructive” engagement conditions generated ideasbeyond the target concepts. The implications for classroom practices are discussed.Introduction and PurposeTo extend the work on the Interactive-Constructive-Active-Passive (ICAP) framework and the Preparation forFuture Learning (PFL) paradigm, this work drew from the theoretical assumptions of each model to investigatehow a collaborative learning activity implemented in introductory psychology courses at a community collegewould impact deep understanding of concepts of memory. Both models support the notion that students will bemore likely to acquire structural understanding of a topic (i.e. build more accurate mental models) when theyhave the opportunity to struggle with existing knowledge because it allows them to fill gaps and resolveinconsistencies in thinking (Chi, 2000; Schwartz, Sears, & Chang, 2007).The ICAP framework differentiates how student overt behaviors link to underlying cognitive processes(Chi, 2009; Menekse, Stump, Krause, & Chi, 2013). For example listening to a lecture constitutes Passiveengagement and aligns to the process of storing knowledge. Copying a teacher’s notes from the board during thelecture makes engagement Active, linked to assimilating knowledge. To be categorized as Constructiveengagement, students would have to create knowledge such as through generating explanations or questions intheir own words. Interactive engagement links to co-creating knowledge, where discussion would lead to sharedmeaning. Since we know that students do not always interact effectively nor engage in dialogic behaviors thatfacilitate mutual meaning-making (Barron, 2003; Volet, Summers, & Thurman, 2009), researchers continue tosearch for ways to improve collaborative activities. The current study aimed to address whether collaborating ona constructive version of a task compared to an active version would improve student interactions to lead todeeper learning. In other words, would a task designed specifically to elicit constructive cognitive engagementhelp students to collaborate more effectively for learning?The PFL paradigm offers a dual phase instructional model where students first “prepare” theirknowledge through a difficult open-ended learning activity, and then consolidate knowledge through a “future”lecture (Schwartz & Bransford, 1998; Schwartz & Martin, 2004). For the current study, the same premise wasused to create a collaborative task that could provide a preparation-of-knowledge period and a consolidation-ofknowledge period. In this case, students first worked on the task alone to prepare knowledge, then completed thetask with a partner to consolidate knowledge through discussion. This aimed to address the question of howcollaboration, rather than a form of direct instruction, could serve in the consolidation phase of a PFL model.Thus, by using ICAP and PFL as instructional design tools, this work aimed to create a collaborative task thatcould present the opportunity to struggle with knowledge through constructive engagement during“preparation,” and then to consolidate knowledge during “future” collaboration to lead to deep learning.MethodsThe study used an experimental design in authentic classroom settings, preserving internal validity by equallyrepresenting all conditions in each classroom and randomly assigning students to conditions and partners(N=90). It occurred over the course of one week and included a pretest to assess prior knowledge, the learningactivity, and a posttest to assess structural knowledge. The students participated in the study as part of theirregular curriculum, with the study activities replacing the instructors’ original instruction for the topic ofMemory. The learning materials were equivalent in content and time-on-task was equalized across conditions.The four conditions were as follows: Prep/Constructive, Prep/Active, No Prep/Constructive, No Prep/Active. Inthe Prep conditions, students worked on the task alone for part of the class and then completed the task with apartner. In the No Prep conditions, students worked jointly the entire time. In the Constructive conditions,students were asked to invent concepts after examining data from real-world experiment scenarios. In the Activeconditions, students were given the concepts to study and then asked to apply them to the (same) real-worldscenarios. Structural knowledge was measured by a posttest that required students to predict the results of newexperiments based on the target concepts of the learning activity. Student work was scored using a rubric thatwas developed a priori. For a secondary analysis, a subset of student pairs were audio-recorded during theactivity (N=15). These data were used to examine the ideas students generated throughout discussion.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1667© ISLSUtterances were segmented and coded by content to separate single and distinct idea units (Chi, 1997). Thenumber of target concepts and novel concepts (i.e. those not embedded in the learning materials) were recorded.Results and InterpretationsA dyadic analytic technique was used to account for subject dependency to evaluate the structural knowledgeoutcomes. Contrary to the hypothesis that there would be an advantage of the constructive version of the task,students in both Prep conditions equally outperformed the No Prep groups by approximately a letter grade,F(1,41.1)=5.79, p<.03. Thus, it appears that collaboration can sufficiently replace lecture as a “future” task (withregard to PFL) but that the preparation need not be constructive (with regard to ICAP). However, there was anobservable benefit of the constructive version of the task in the discourse data; only the pairs in the constructiveconditions generated any novel ideas beyond the target concepts. Thus, the added benefit of interacting on aconstructive compared to an active collaborative task that also includes a preparation period is that students areable to generate new ideas without impairing targeted learning. Findings are summarized below.Table 1: Comparison of outcomes: deep knowledge and discussion of target versus novel conceptsMeasured:Occurred:Completed:Instructional ConditionsPrep/ConstructivePrep/ActiveNo Prep/ConstructiveNo Prep/ActiveTotal possibleNPosttestDeep knowledgeAfter learning activityIndividuallyDiscourseTarget conceptsNovel conceptsDuring learning activity During learning activityCollaborativelyCollaborativelyM = 75.00M = 76.17M = 66.67M = 61.17100%90 studentsM = 3.25M = 7.33M = 4.00M = 6.758 concepts15 pairsM = 3.50M = .0M = 4.50M = .50N/A15 pairsDiscussionThis work tested four versions of a collaborative learning activity implemented in authentic classrooms toinform on the usability of combining two cognitive frameworks for instructional design. It extended the PFLmodel to show that preparation as individual work followed by collaboration as a future task can benefit deeplearning. Future work will examine how collaboration compares to direct instruction in the consolidation phase.Although no differences in deep learning were detected between the active versus constructive tasks, this workexpanded upon the ICAP framework to show that collaborating on constructive tasks leads students to generatenovel ideas during discussion, whereas collaborating on active tasks limits discussion to the concepts explicitlystated in the learning materials. With regard to instructional practice, teachers can use these two cognitiveframeworks together to design collaborative learning activities that both improve deep knowledge and facilitateidea generation during discussion.ReferencesBarron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.Chi, M.T.H. (2000). Self-explaining expository texts: The dual processes of generating inferences and repairingmental models. In R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in Instructional Psychology (pp. 161-238). Mahwah, NJ:Erlbaum.Chi, M.T.H. (2009). Active-Constructive-Interactive: A conceptual framework of differentiating learningactivities. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(1), 73-105.Menekse, M., Stump, G.S., Krause, S. & Chi, M.T.H. (2013). Differentiated overt learning activities foreffective instruction in engineering classrooms. Journal of Engineering Education, 102(3), 346-374.Schwartz, D.L. & Bransford, J.D. (1998). A time for telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 475-522.Schwartz, D.L. & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for future learning: The hidden efficiency ofencouraging original student production in statistics instruction. Cognition and Instruction, 22(2), 129184.Schwartz, D.L., Sears, D., & Chang, J. (2007). Reconsidering prior knowledge. In M. Lovett & P. Shah (Eds.)Carnegie symposium on cognition, (pp. 319-344). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Volet, S., Summers, M., & Thurman, J. (2009). High-level co-regulation in collaborative learning: How does itemerge and how is it sustained? Learning and Instruction, 19, 128-143.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1668© ISLS