Bidirectional Analysis of Creative Processes:A Tool for ResearchersAlecia Marie Magnifico, University of New Hampshire, alecia.magnifico@unh.eduErica Rosenfeld Halverson, University of Wisconsin–Madison, erhalverson@education.wisc.eduChristopher T. Cutler, Independent Software Developer, ctcutler@gmail.comTJ Kalaitzidis, University of Wisconsin–Madison, kalaitzidis@wisc.eduAbstract: Young peoples’ creative production combines such activities as analysis of existingforms and genres; participation in processes including drafting, journaling, and modeling;sustained work on a particular idea; and mentor critique. In our work with a variety of settings,we have found that young artists’ progress depends on their engagement in all of these tasks,and that analysis of this work depends on looking across and through these varied practices.While typical descriptive analyses of such processes move forward, we have found thatmoving bidirectionally—from final product backward and from initial idea forward—betterhelps us to understand participants’ learning. We use examples from two creative productioncontexts to describe a technological tool developed for bidirectional artifact analysis byoutlining its features, affordances, and constraints.Why Analyze Creative Process?In recent years, new literacies research has begun to re-focus the meaning of “literacy” and “multi-literacies”(e.g. Cope & Kalantzis, 2009; Moje, Overby, Tysvaer, & Morris, 2008). Beyond the comprehension andproduction of texts, “being literate” in a particular content area has come to describe fluency in specific“constellations” (Steinkuehler, 2007) of practices, modes, and ways of knowing. By producing content, learnersuse medium-appropriate tools to create artifacts and develop metarepresentational competence, anunderstanding of what tools are useful for expressing which ideas (Halverson, 2013). These understandings ofliteracy have particular purchase in digital environments and creative arts education, where interactions areoften shaped by the production and critique of artifacts for a responsive audience.Reframing literacy and learning in terms of how students use tools to communicate ideas requires anemphasis on measuring the process and the products of learning (Halverson, 2012). As researchers in thelearning sciences, we seek to understand and design learning environments that support these complex practices.In order to do so, we must construct methods that help researchers describe the processes of creative productionand the creation of successful literacy artifacts. We need analytical lenses that take the complexities of creativeworks themselves—from online video to school essay to multimedia collage—as units of analysis and tracethese works through creation, drafting, and revision. Thus, we need tools that enable such analyses.Because these social, artifactual, and often multimodal processes extend over varying periods of time,it is difficult to capture them using existing methods and tools for qualitative analysis. While our prior work hasfocused on the development of tools for analyzing youth-made films (Halverson, Bass, & Woods, 2012), thesetools do not generalize to creative processes more broadly, nor do they capture the process of creation. Rather,they afford final product analysis. Altogether, creative production combines such activities as engagement withexisting genres, problems, or frameworks; participation in interlaced processes (drafting, journaling, modeling,etc); sustained work on a particular idea; and audience-based critique (Barrett, 2000; Soep, 2006). In our workwith young artists, media, and settings, we have found that their progress depends on their participation in all ofthese tasks—as well as ongoing engagement with their audience(s) (Magnifico, 2010, 2012; Halverson, 2012).In other words, the analysis of creative process depends on not focusing on particular types or genres of work,as in discourse analysis or artifact analysis, but looking across and through varied practices.We first developed methods for understanding creative production processes (Halverson & Magnifico,2013). We now have developed a tool to look across and through full trajectories of art development. UsingJavascript, HTML 5, SVG, and CSS technologies, we present an alpha version and examine its affordances fordata analysis and sense-making. We need such a tool to document creative practices, examine the origins ofparticular ideas and critiques, and trace how artists take up these concepts (in future drafts or more broadly).This year’s ICLS theme, “Learning and Becoming in Practice” highlights learning trajectories over time: waysin which learners adopt certain kinds of practices and become certain kinds of people (e.g. Duncan & HmeloSilver, 2009). Our tool helps streamline the analysis, visualization, and representation of the learning involvedin creative production. As a field, the learning sciences value theory-building and technological design aroundsuch questions, and we are eager to participate in such ongoing conversations and inquiry.Here, we use examples from two creative production contexts—creative writing and mobile gamedesign—to describe our tool for bidirectional artifact analysis. We outline its features and offer suggestions forusing the tool in other research contexts that value the role of process in understanding learning.ICLS 2014 Proceedings839© ISLSAudience as Fundamental to Learning Through ProductionMuch of the original literature that developed and documented rhetorical (e.g. Ong, 1975) and cognitive (e.g.Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987; Flower & Hayes, 1981) viewpoints on audience implicitly assumes that whenwriters write with an audience in mind, these imagined readers have a measurable effect on the writing. Thisassumption is rooted in ethnographic and expert-novice research on how writers think and how writers write,and has been documented repeatedly with different kinds of writers. Understandings of audience andcollaboration have broadened, however, as new media have pushed writers and artists into spaces where theymay create, read, and view “among the audience” (Lunsford & Ede, 2009). This shift can transform writers intospeakers, readers into critics, and both into collaborators. Within online and face-to-face artistic communities, itis increasingly plausible to think of readers and viewers in terms of Ong’s (1975) “collectivity, acting... on oneanother and on the speaker [or writer, or artist] as members of an audience do” (p. 11).Considering how feedback guides artistic process suggests that audiences for creative work may playboth a cognitive role in artistic production, in that sharing work forces creators to consider readers, and a socialone, in that creators define themselves as community members by the work that they share (Magnifico, 2010). Ifwe extend the metaphor of literacy from producing text to creating artifacts using various multimodal tools formeaning making, we can apply the same insight about audience to creative processes in general. Audience iscentral to the learning of creative production, not an afterthought. As a result, analyses of creative productionprocesses must include an understanding of audience feedback and interaction as a core part of tracing learning.The Role of Representation in Creative ProcessesdiSessa (2004) argues that representation design is a creative endeavor, “a venue in which creative and artisticskills are at a higher than normal premium” (p. 300). Thus, observing creative production helps us understandthe role of external representation in learning (e.g. Eisner, 2002). “Getting smart” in the context of producing art“means coming to know the potential of the materials in relation to the aims of a project or problem” (Eisner,2002, p. 72). The capacity to build representations from different materials for multiple situations is a marker ofcreative expertise (Hayes, 1989), and has been called “essential in investigations of creativity” (p. 262) (Hasirci& Demirkan, 2007). Since creative production requires creative representation, young artists must learn toconstruct and evaluate multiple representations. We have called this process “the representational trajectory”and its outcome the development of “metarepresentational competence” (Halverson, 2013).The representational trajectory describes how producers focus on a central idea or concept, use thisidea to motivate the development of skills and tools to represent their concept, and design a product that reflectsthis relationship between concept and tools. To study and describe this learning process requires multiple formsof evidence at multiple points in time, often with the engagement of multiple peers and mentors (Halverson,2013). Creative production settings often encourage novices to use several media to produce their art. Whilerepresentations may shift and ideas may transform through drafting, feedback, and revision, understanding howthese artifacts contribute to the final “text” is necessary to understand the processes that producers employ.Bidirectional Artifact AnalysisTo address this methodological need, we developed bidirectional artifact analysis (BAA), an analytic methodfor understanding creative production that employs ethnographic observations of participants, artifacts theycreate, and interviews over time (Halverson & Magnifico, 2013). A key component of BAA is this concept oftime. Most education research moves forward in time because learning continually builds up from priorknowledge. Our concept of time is grounded in Enyedy’s (2005) description of bidirectionality: “go[ing]‘backwards’ in time in an attempt to trace the origins of this intervention and ‘forwards’ in time to examinewhat subsequent impact it had on the way other students reasoned” (p. 437). Moving bidirectionally helps usunderstand the role of social, collaborative feedback and audiences in young peoples’ learning. By turning theanalytical lens, we see how learners’ reflections on past representations become shared prior knowledge.BAA involves three steps: 1) identifying learner-created artifacts; 2) documenting relevant data aroundartifacts; 3) constructing threads across the data types to trace the final product’s core ideas and tools backthrough their development. We have used this method to understand various forms of production in differentcontexts including school writing (Magnifico, 2012), online creative writing (Magnifico, 2013), extracurriculardigital art-making (Halverson, 2012), and radio documentaries in a college class (Bass & Halverson, 2012).While technology has played a large role in documenting and capturing relevant data, we have foundthat we need a technological solution to this complex methodological problem: How can we construct threadsacross data types that allow us to “see” backwards and forwards across time, as BAA requires? Since the threadsmay include artifact analysis, multimodal analysis, and discourse analysis, we needed a way to identify, track,and compare narrative and artifactual threads both within a process (or draft) and across processes (or drafts).To address these needs, we have built a tool that aims to solve this problem. In the following sections, wedescribe the key features of the tool, highlighting potential affordances, constraints, and uses.ICLS 2014 Proceedings840© ISLSThe Development of a Bidirectional Artifact Analysis ToolTechnical DetailsThe tool that we are developing, currently code-named Cotswold, is a javascript program that runs in a webbrowser. It uses the D3.js data visualization library to render its internal model of artifacts, their attributes andtheir relationships. D3.js uses a functional (as opposed to imperative) approach in which data structures arebound to a document object model and the appropriate rendering of the model is described in general withoutrequiring code that iterates over individual data elements. Cotswold uses D3.js to produce a series of HTML andSVG documents that, when layered on top of one another in the top level HTML document, render the artifactswith all of their relationships and attributes. Every time the user makes a change, Cotswold updates its internalmodel, serializes it to a JSON string and stores the JSON on the user's computer using HTML5's local storagefeature. In this way, the program remains entirely client-side. It does not store the user's data on a server in thecloud and in fact does not require an internet connection to run—only a web browser.Cotswold is being developed in Google Chrome. It should work in any standards-compliant webbrowser but, as it is a working prototype, it has not yet been thoroughly tested. Currently, it lacks many featuresrequired for ongoing usability, but is an effective tool for idea generation. We are developing a variety offeatures and we anticipate that a beta will be available for sharing and testing at ICLS in June, 2014.Features and Case ExamplesHaving established the importance of thinking bidirectionally, we turn to the decisions that we made whiledesigning Cotswold, as well as the key features that enable data analyses and theory development. In manyways, Cotswold replicates the tools that we have used before. Like spreadsheet or transcript analysis programs,it allows open-ended coding and annotation. Like paper and colored pencil, it enables flexible multimediatimeline building and connection drawing. At the same time, the tool offers the ability to build persistent,manipulable visualizations of the ways in which artistic concepts evolve through formal critique, socialconversation, mentorship, reflection, and ongoing revision. While paper and spreadsheet constructions mayrequire several levels of abstraction and modeling to capture, code, and understand artistic drafting and critiqueprocesses—particularly when multiple media are involved—this tool uses the natural logic of such situationsand processes to map and annotate them visually.In short, the features capture how producers look backwards and forwards across their work in order tocritique and revise. As we continue to develop Cotswold and use it to analyze datasets from multiple creativespaces, we anticipate examining larger questions, as well. For instance: Do commonalities in process existacross these environments? Do certain kinds of questions and interactions inspire creators to revise and rethink?How might these patterns be useful in designing learning situations that better support creative development?In this section, we describe three central features of the tool and discuss their affordances for processcentered, holistic data visualization and analysis. We then explore potential constraints of this approach andconsider how ongoing tool development will contribute to our analytical techniques and theory development.Example DataIn order to define and explain Cotswold’s features, we have drawn small samples of data from two previousstudies that illustrate the features, affordances, and constraints of this tool. All names are pseudonyms.Melanie's StoryThe creative writing data are drawn from Magnifico’s 2010 study of an extracurricular writing camp where highschool writers in an urban area of the Midwestern United States worked on creative writing, workshopped theirwriting with peers and local writers (“writing coaches”), and performed their works in a final “showcasereading.” Data collected includes observational field notes, interviews with young writers and writing coaches,recordings of “writers’ circle” critique sessions, participants’ writing notebooks and their stories. Each day, theyoung writers wrote during “sacred writing time” and participated in writers’ circles. Melanie’s story, excerptedhere, was typical in length (900-word final draft) and genre (realistic fiction). She wrote 4 drafts during camp, aswell as a 750-word anthologized version that she read at the showcase. In writers’ circle, Melanie explained thather story was inspired by her mother’s reading of The Nine and their resulting dinner-table discussion of JusticeO’Connor’s retirement from the Supreme Court to care for her Alzheimer’s-afflicted husband.ARIS Design MemosData from the ARIS Game Design project are drawn from Halverson and Kalaitzidis’s 2013 study of anundergraduate course entitled “Digital Media and Literacy.” This course engaged students in digital mediaproduction processes including the design of an augmented reality mobile game using the ARIS platform (seehttp://arisgames.org/ for details). Students created games over the course of 6 weeks; during this process, theywrote design memos at the end of every week regardless of the progress they had made. Kristina described herICLS 2014 Proceedings841© ISLSgame as a guided tour of her local city, “focused on calmness and the artistic inspiration that can come from aninvested sense of place” (final design memo). In order to understand how undergraduate students developedmetarepresentational competence, we collected and analyzed these weekly design memos as well as all theartifacts they created during the course of the ARIS project: paper prototypes and design cards, screenshots ofback end coding, and screenshots of versions of their mobile games.Feature 1 — New Analytical Metaphors: Timepoints and TrajectoriesFeature DescriptionCotswold’s organization creates a timeline metaphor for data analysis. Often, analytical frameworks rely oncoding, sorting, and categorizing utterances or activities. In a classroom study, researchers might separatelygroup and analyze all of the instances where teachers teach full-class lessons and instances where students workin small groups. Creative process work, however, must examine the multiple activities that comprise theproduction cycle (Halverson, 2012) of a particular piece—steps that go into the story of that piece’s creation.In other words, for us to understand the process of creation and all of its expected (and unexpected)developments in settings like creative writing workshops (Magnifico, 2012) and youth media organizations(Halverson, Bass, & Woods, 2012), we must examine full narratives of creative production. We initially beganthis work by adapting tools such as spreadsheets, paper, and colored pencils to view these large progressions,but such models are unwieldy and not easily revise-able. Thus, we designed Cotswold to digitally group artisticactivities by trajectory and process.AffordancesChanging analytical metaphors allows researchers to organize collections of pedagogical activity, artifactproduction, and critique by time rather than by type or code. Building timeline-based collections allows us toorganize how we see and analyze various points on the timeline, and to examine multiple transcripts ofparticipants’ talk and drafts of media artifacts in the same space. For example, Melanie began her story with ashort vignette. In writers’ circle, she noted that “I only got a paragraph done [in sacred writing time]... it’s not avery good paragraph.” She explained that she didn’t know where to start and read the paragraph that introducedher main character’s central dilemma: A husband who has been diagnosed with dementia and is beginning todevelop severe symptoms. This draft (“Draft 1”) is the leftmost timepoint, marked in Figure 1 in light blue.Figure 1: Timelines and timepoints place drafts in sequence and in context.In the critique that followed (the middle timepoint, “Writers’ Circle Feedback”), the writers’ circle began todiscuss what readers might need to know to understand the main character’s difficult domestic situation. Leanneinitially suggested beginning the story earlier “so that we [the readers] can get a sense of the wife.” Sarafurthered this suggestion by adding potential details, thinking about “start[ing] when he does something weird”ICLS 2014 Proceedings842© ISLSand pointing back to the text, where Melanie has discussed the husband’s risk of developing symptoms like“peculiar eating habits.” She considered how to pull readers in by helping them “guess” the storyline.Continuing her earlier suggestion, Leanne proposed a structure wherein Melanie might include flashbacks to“start earlier on” while maintaining a sense of the present. In the third “Draft 2” timepoint in Figure 1, markedin darker blue, Melanie reworked the opening to portray her main character speaking with an assisted livingnurse, trying to place her husband in a supportive home. Later, the character flashes back to her first experiencesof her husband’s deteriorating condition.At first, the two drafts look so different that it might be difficult to recognize them as drafts of the samestory without the critique. The tool, however, allows researchers to mark and characterize differences betweendrafts; to view these artifacts in the context of creation, critique, and revision; and to visually represent changesacross timepoints. Such time-based analytical structures make it possible to see the relationships among theartifacts and media that are constructed during creative production—a key to understanding these processes.Feature 2 — Conceptual Coding: Multimedia Selection and AnnotationFeature DescriptionWorking within the timeline metaphor, bidirectional artifact analysis relies on the in-context categorization ofdata such as transcripts of work sessions, critiques, and drafts of artifacts. While interpreting these data issimilar to the general processes of qualitative research, the presence of multimedia artifacts complicatesanalyses. In response, Cotswold allows researchers to place textual and visual artifacts side by side in timelinesand to annotate these elements to create codes, categories, and interpretations without separating this text fromthe overall context. (In future releases, we hope to incorporate video- and sound-based artifacts as well.)Such annotation and interpretation is important because ideas, questions, and critiques often cyclethrough several drafts of a creative piece or across several members of a production environment. For example,in previous analyses, we have shown that asking an artist to consider the effect of a particular choice on readersor viewers—critiques that make audience involvement clear—often lead to revisions (Magnifico, 2012).Similarly, a particular motif may be introduced to a draft artifact after comments from readers or mentors.Because Cotswold can highlight words, phrases, and image fragments, as in Figure 2, it is easy to visually groupsuch elements for analysis and write short memos about how such elements should be categorized. As codes andconstructs are revised, it is possible to reorganize and rework the visual representation of these categories.Figure 2: Highlighting and annotating talk and image side by sideAffordancesRegardless of whether such annotation captures micro or macro trends in the data, it occurs within the contextof the timepoints and timeline so that researchers can perform artifact-based tracing without losing sight ofbroader narratives and trajectories of learning. Thus, the design of this feature affords a persistent visual,annotated instantiation of the revision and reflection that occur over a creative production cycle. Cotswoldadditionally allows this conceptual coding and annotation across multiple media. Researchers may place artifactICLS 2014 Proceedings843© ISLSdrafts next to transcripts of feedback and visually represent the threads of conversation connecting thesetimepoints. Such flexibility, shown in Figure 2, is useful for constructing timelines that capture creativeproduction environments where young artists employ several media in their drafts. Such representations mayreveal clear progressions of meaning even though the concepts look very different across media such astranscripts, sketches, and production prototypes.Figure 2 shows Kristina’s progress through the planning and development of an augmented-reality tourof her city, which figures prominently in the “development of her own identity.” In the first two timepoints—design documents from Kristina’s work on this tour—she considers her ideas about “how identity can be formedthrough experiencing a place” and describes wanting others to experience her city as she sees it. (Design Memo#2). In the textual Design Memos, she discusses the purpose of her game: A tool for players to capture (throughphotographs, video, or poetry) similar experiences and emotions. The two screenshots in timepoint three showhow she translates these ideas to the screen in her ARIS game, which asks players if they “see, hear, or feelsomething here” and draws connections between her city’s locations and similar locations “in your own past.”Despite differences in narrative and image-based instances of such meanings, Cotswold allows researchers tolink them through color (blue represents “identity” in Figure 2, and green represents “place”) and drawn lines.Feature 3 — Interpretation: Connecting FragmentsFeature DescriptionCotswold’s connection feature, shown in Figure 3, enables an interpretive phase of drawing connections andestablishing threads of meaning across production activities. As previously noted, cycles in different creativeenvironments might include such elements as sketching or drafting in multiple media, social conversation,reflection, critique, and performance. Once researchers have ordered the activities represented by the timelineand created coding categories to mark up the timepoints (using highlighting and annotation tools), they mayinterpret and trace artistic choices through artifacts and conversations. This feature allows researchers to connectfragments to each other (within and across timepoints) while remaining within the natural logic of creativedrafting and production. It is also possible to note patterns, and annotate these connections for analysis andinterpretation. Drawing interpretive connections and coding data in context enables researchers to performdetailed analyses while staying close to the process and the narrative of each creative piece.Figure 3: Tracing the development of story drafts through critique and connectionsAffordancesIn the course of creative production, critique often serves as ongoing, developmental conversation, so it makessense for the tool to allow us to look backwards and forwards to annotate and connect key moments of insightwithout losing a sense of the overall context and activity. We return to the example from Melanie’s story toshow a different, more complex analysis of the relationships between her first draft, writers’ circle critique, andsecond draft. As discussed above in Figure 1, Melanie revised her story almost completely between Draft 1ICLS 2014 Proceedings844© ISLS(timepoint 1) and Draft 2 (timepoint 3). In Figure 3, we examine how the feedback that Melanie received fromher writers’ circle centered on two concepts—structure and audience—that directed this significant revision.The connection tool is useful here because it reveals how Melanie’s revisions and additions are linkedto the critique that she received in writers’ circle. Without examining the critique transcript, however, it isdifficult to understand why she revised as she did because her revision is so complete. As previously noted,Leanne, Sara, and Rica agreed that Melanie should revise her story’s beginning scene to place her maincharacter at the center of the story’s action. Using the highlighting and connection tools, we traced theprogression of two major concepts raised in this critique. In the middle timepoint of Figure 3, “Writers’ CircleFeedback,” Melanie first directs the critique (highlighted in blue) by requesting feedback on where the story’saction should begin. Leanne suggests a structural revision to begin the action of the story “earlier on.” Thisstructural comment is highlighted green and connected to the Draft 1 text to show that “earlier on” means beforethe Alzheimer’s diagnosis. Leanne looks back to Melanie’s Draft 1 and discusses why a change is useful: If “we”“the readers” get to know the main character first, it will be “more dramatic” as her husband’s behaviordeteriorates and leads to this diagnosis.Other members of the writers’ circle reiterate this idea about structure and suggest possible revisions,such as adding flashbacks or clarifying the Alzheimer’s diagnosis (all highlighted in green and annotated asstructural suggestions in Figure 3). These critiques employ similar justifications for revision: Readers mustmake sense of the story and characters. These comments are yellow-highlighted and annotated as invocations ofaudience. In Draft 2, the rightmost timepoint, green highlights and connection lines interpret Melanie’s adoptionof these suggestions. Instead of beginning by “telling” readers the diagnosis, Draft 2 begins with a conversationbetween the main character and a nursing home aide and then propels the story back in time with a flashback.Using Cotswold, researchers may highlight a range of related fragments and add connections betweenthem. This interpretive analytical phase thus builds evidence for understanding revision motivations, as well aswhether revisions are tied to particular critiques or pedagogical elements. Two fragments can only be connectedto each other once, but any fragment can be connected to multiple other fragments. One piece of feedback maybe the root of several revisions, as with Leanne’s suggestion, and each of these can be linked to its root. As withselection and highlighting, researchers can use colored connections to code particular kinds of interpretations.Constraints of this ApproachWe have discussed the many affordances of using Cotswold for bidirectional artifact analysis—which represent,of course, reasons why we attempted the challenge of designing this tool. At the same time, this timeline-basedand qualitative-coding-inspired view of creative process analysis constrains our sense of the data.When we conceptualized BAA, we wanted to articulate “relationships between processes and products”and to examine “drafts as representations that grow and change as a result of individual cognitions, mentorresponses, and social reflections” (Halverson & Magnifico, 2013, p. 406). By setting up timelines and markingartifacts and conversations as production timepoints, the tool forces researchers to examine data within its broadcontext and narrative arc. Writing about the patterns of a full production cycle, though, requires microexamination of young artists’ draft artifacts, critiques, reflections, and revisions. Cotswold is particularly usefulin these fine-grained analyses, enabling us to see textual and imagistic changes and to trace them.Constraints emerge because this analytical tool begins to dissect process in order to impose codedstructures; it returns researchers to breaking creative production into pieces in order to document patterns. It ispossible that looking for general patterns necessarily requires us to take such actions, but we cannot help butnote that such decontextualization pushed us to develop a holistic view of creative process in the first place.Conclusions and ImplicationsUnderstanding creative production processes is a complex endeavor that requires researchers to parse macrolevel and micro-level data and, often, to combine data drawn from multiple media and creative activities. BAAoffers a way forward by articulating a framework that combines methodologies for conducting inquiry withsuch qualitative datasets (Magnifico & Halverson, 2013), and Cotswold helps us track and document thisinquiry without losing sight of the broader narratives and contexts in which learning occurs. While the toolcurrently enables the analysis of relatively small-scale textual and image-based datasets, we plan to expandthese capabilities both in terms of scope and in terms of media range. As we continue to develop these methodsand use the tool to analyze creative spaces, we anticipate examining larger questions, as well. We areparticularly interested in learning whether creative processes seem to exist across these environments and howthese patterns could potentially be useful in designing learning situations to support creative development.We believe that BAA, and Cotswold as a tool for such analysis, has particular relevance to the learningsciences because of the field’s interest in considering learners’ individual content knowledge, their adoption ofcertain kinds of practices, and their becoming certain kinds of people as a result of their engagement in designedenvironments or problems. Many studies have established that using tools and making artifacts are keycomponents of knowledge (Halverson, 2012; diSessa, 2004; Eisner, 2002). This framework and tool, in effect,ICLS 2014 Proceedings845© ISLShelps researchers to map and document the learning progressions in which young people participate in situ (cf.Duncan & Hmelo-Silver, 2009). We focus on artistic and creative production in our own work, but there arestrong cross-content implications for this analytical approach. When we conceptualize learning as thedevelopment of representational competence that may be measured through individual cognitions, mentorresponses, and social reflections (Halverson, 2013), bidirectional analysis becomes a possibility forunderstanding students’ learning through experience and artifact, as well as contributing to ongoing curriculumalignment, assessments, and standards.ReferencesBarrett, T. (2000). Studio critiques of student art: As they are, as they could be with mentoring. Theory IntoPractice, 39, 29–35.Bass, M.B. & Halverson, E.R. (2012). Representation radio: Digital art-making as transformative practice in thecollege classroom. Pedagogies: An International Journal, 7(4), 347-363.Bereiter, C. & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (2009). ‘Multiliteracies’: New literacies, new learning. Pedagogies: An InternationalJournal 4, 164-195.diSessa, A. (2004). Metarepresentational competence: Native competence and targets for instruction. Cognition& Instruction, 22(3), 293-331.Duncan, R.G. & Hmelo-Silver, C. (2009). Learning progressions: Aligning curriculum, instruction, andassessment. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 606-609.Eisner, E. (2002). The arts and the creation of mind. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.Enyedy, N. (2005). Inventing mapping: Creating cultural forms to solve collective problems. Cognition &Instruction, 23(4), 427-466.Flower, L. & Hayes, J. R. (1981). A cognitive process theory of writing. College Composition &Communication, 32(4), 365-387.Halverson, E.R. (2013). Digital art making as a representational process. Journal of the Learning Sciences,22(1), 121-162.Halverson, E.R. (2012). Participatory media spaces: A design perspective on learning with media andtechnology in the 21st century. In C. Steinkuehler & K. Squire (Eds). Games, Learning, & Society:Learning and Meaning in the Digital Age. New York: Cambridge University Press.Halverson, E.R., Bass, M. & Woods, D. (2012). The process of creation: A novel methodology for analyzingmultimodal data. The Qualitative Report, 17, 1-27.Halverson, E.R. & Magnifico, A.M. (2013). Bidirectional artifact analysis: A method for analyzing digitallymediated creative processes. In R. Luckin, S. Puntambekar, P. Goodyear, B. Grabowski, J. Underwood,& N. Winters (Eds.), Handbook of Design in Educational Technology (p. 406-416). New York:Routledge.Hasirci, D. & Demirkan, H. (2007). Understanding the effects of cognition in creative decision making: Acreativity model for enhancing the design studio process. Creativity Research Journal, 19(2-3), 259271.Hayes, J. R. (1989). Cognitive processes in creativity. In J. A. Glover, R. R. Ronning, & C. R. Reynolds (Eds.),Handbook of creativity. New York: Plenum.Lunsford, A.A. & Ede, L. (2009). Among the audience: On audience in an age of new literacies. In M.E. Weiser,B.M. Fehler, & A.M. Gonzales (Eds.) Engaging audience: Writing in an age of new literacies. (pp. 4269).Magnifico, A.M. (2012). Audience effects: A bidirectional artifact analysis of adolescents’ creative writing. In J.van Aalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.), The Future of Learning: Proceedings ofthe 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2012) (Vol. 2, pp. 411-415). Sydney,NSW, Australia: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Magnifico, A.M. (2010). Writing for whom: Cognition, motivation, and a writer’s audience. EducationalPsychologist, 45(3), 167-184.Moje, E. B., Overby, M., Tysvaer, N. & Morris, K. (2008). The complex world of adolescent literacy: Myths,motivations, and mysteries. Harvard Educational Review 78(1), 107-154.Ong, W. (1975). The writer's audience is always a fiction. PMLA, 90(1), 9-21.Soep, E. (2006). Critique: Assessment and the production of learning. Teachers College Record, 108(4), 748777.Steinkuehler, C. (2007). Massively multiplayer online gaming as a constellation of literacy practices. E-learningand Digital Media, 4(3), 297-318.ICLS 2014 Proceedings846© ISLS