Communities of Learning Practice: Balancing Emergence andDesign in Educational SettingsFilitsa Dingyloudi and Jan-Willem Strijbos, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Department ofPsychology, Leopoldstr. 13, 80802Email: Filitsa.Dingyloudi@psy.lmu.de, Jan-Willem.Strijbos@psy.lmu.deAbstract: This paper explores the aspects of emergence and design in the theoretical notionsand models of Communities of Practice (CoPs) and Communities of Learners (CoLs), alongwith the potential of a new notion and model to epitomize emergent communities in aneducational setting. The need for a new notion and model emerged from a longitudinal studyof communities in higher education that, among others, aimed to explore the communities’design principles and stages of development. The characteristics of emergent communities inan educational setting were not fully congruent with either CoP or CoL and their theoreticalprinciples. This paper delineates the need for an emergent notion and model, termed“community of learning practice”, which incorporates elements from both CoP and CoL, butsimultaneously aims for balance between emergence and design in an educational setting to anextent that allows communities to grow through members’ voluntary participation andnegotiated community structure.IntroductionA number of notions, including communities of practice, communities of learners, knowledge buildingcommunities and learning communities, have been introduced by theoreticians and researchers in the fields ofeducation and knowledge management since the late 1980s and early 1990s to describe social settings withinwhich individuals share and co-construct knowledge, expertise and learning experiences towards a sharedenterprise (e.g., Barab & Duffy, 2000; Bielaczyc & Collins, 1999; Brown, 1992; Brown & Campione, 1990;Lave & Wenger, 1991; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994; Wenger, 1998a). Although it would have been insightfulto theoretically analyze all existing community concepts and their principles, for the purposes of this paper onlythe concepts of Communities of Practice (CoPs) and Communities of Learners (CoLs) are considered giventheir increasingly dominant profile supported by theoretical claims in contemporary research literature. Manycontributions refer to the notions of CoP and/or CoL, but refer less consistently to the model and underlyingtheoretical framework that they represent.CoPs were originally coined as an analytical notion by Lave and Wenger (1991) to describe alreadyexisting phenomena in craft production within a situated learning framework. A theoretical analysis of theconcept was further developed by Wenger (1998a) highlighting the foundational principles of its meaning,structure and value. The popularity of the concept and its overuse both by researchers and practitioners indifferent contexts – although not always consistent with its foundational principles and initial conceptualization– has led to conflicting, contradictory, misleading or at least superficial treatment of the term on a theoreticaland implementational level (Kimble, 2006; Roth & Lee, 2006; Wenger, 2010). This has contributed either to aninstrumental interpretation of the concept used to design educational or organizational settings, or one-way-fitall interpretations of the term to refer to groups of learners or co-workers (Hughes, 2007; Kimble, 2006; Roth &Lee, 2006; Vann & Bowker, 2001; Wenger, 2010). Wenger (2010) also reflected on the status of the communityof practice concept, realizing that it is out of control, since practitioners and researchers have been using itwithout taking into consideration its theoretical framework and principles.Apart from CoPs, the notion of CoLs has been also widely used by educators and researchers to refer tocommunities that aim for the advancement of knowledge and learning how to learn on the classroom level ineducational settings (Bielaczyc, Kapur & Collins, 2013; Brown, 1992; Brown & Campione, 1990). Its initialconception by Brown and Campione (1990) aimed to describe the practical implementation of a set oftheoretical principles in classrooms, based upon Vygotskian premises and Dewey’s (1897) discovery learning,towards a reform movement in education through an innovative classroom design (Brown & Campione, 1994).CoLs in education are associated with a shift of the students’ role in schools from passive knowledge recipientsto active co-constructors of knowledge, while being responsible for their own learning and its design (Brown,1992). Therefore, CoLs have been used as an educational technique to enhance knowledge sharing anddistribution of expertise and responsibility among students and teachers aiming to build a collective learningculture in which students respect and value each other’s contributions (Bielaczyc, Kapur, & Collins, 2013;Brown & Campione, 1994, 1996).According to the foundational theoretical principles of the notions of CoP and CoL, the importance thathas been attached to the aspects of emergence and design varies across the two community notions and models.CoPs are built on the idea of self-generation, self-directedness and voluntary participation, drawing their energyICLS 2014 Proceedings761© ISLSand motivation from within the community itself (Janson, Howard, & Schoenberger-Orgad, 2004), whereasCoLs are designed and facilitated by educators, researchers or a combination, and typically applied into aclassroom setting with fixed participants (i.e., students and teachers/adults) and pre-defined pedagogicalobjectives based on the curriculum (Rogoff, 1994). This paper aims to examine the emergence and designaspects in both community notions and models, which are represented in different ways in each one of the twomodels, and introduce the need for a new model to describe communities that emerged in an educational settingthrough the voluntary participation of learners, while recombining elements from both existing models – yet notfully fitting to either of both precursors.Before the recombinant model can be discussed, it is of vital importance to understand the theoreticalframework from which both community notions emerged and which elements are represented in the theoreticalprinciples of both concepts. Despite the differences between both notions of communities, which will beexplored later in this paper, they share similar theoretical underpinnings grounded in sociocultural approaches tolearning.Sociocultural Approaches to Learning: Situated Learning and SituatedCognitionSociocultural approaches to learning gained increasing attention in the 1980s by researchers to explorealternative ways of understanding learning beyond behaviorism and cognitivism (John-Steiner & Mahn, 1996;Wertsch, 1991, 1998). Sociocultural approaches to learning are often associated with Lev Vygotsky and hiscollaborators’ works on learning and development of human behavior in the 1920s and 1930s (Vygotsky, 1978).Vygotsky, in his conceptualizations of development, learning and knowledge construction from a socioculturalperspective, emphasized the dynamic interdependence of socially shared activities and internalized processes inthe co-construction of knowledge, since the internalization that takes place is situated within socially sharedactivities (John-Steiner & Mahn, 1996).Situated learning and situated cognition developed as sociocultural approaches from Vygotsky’ssociocultural theory. Both approaches emphasize that learning is a socially situated practice and learning,thinking, and knowing constitute relations among individuals, who engage in authentic collective activities, andarise from the surrounding sociocultural setting (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Lave, 1988, 1990; Lave &Wenger, 1991). Yet, they differ with regard to how they could be implemented in educational settings.Situated LearningSituated learning is interconnected with the notion of CoP and refers to learning as “not merely situated inpractice – as if it were some independently reifiable process that just happened to be located somewhere;learning is an integral part of generative social practice in the lived-in world” (Lave & Wenger, 1991, p. 35).The constituent characteristic of engagement in social practice, within which learning occurs, is legitimateperipheral participation (LPP) and refers to the process by which newcomers move towards becoming morecentral participants of a CoP (Lave & Wenger, 1991). According to Anderson, Reder and Simon (1996), thefoundational claims of situated learning are often misimplemented in educational settings, however, Lave andWenger (1991) specifically highlighted that“(…) legitimate peripheral participation is not itself an educational form, much less apedagogical strategy or a teaching technique (…) this view makes a fundamental distinctionbetween learning and intentional instruction (…) this is very different from attributing aprescriptive value to the concept of legitimate peripheral participation and from proposingways of “implementing” or “operationalizing” it for educational purposes.”. (Lave & Wenger,1991, pp. 40-41)This quote depicts that situated learning’s constituent characteristic of legitimate peripheralparticipation cannot be operationalized as an instructional approach with pre-defined educational purposes.Situated CognitionSituated cognition, proposed by Brown, Collins and Duguid (1989), argues that meaningful learning can onlyoccur when embedded in the social context within which it is used to “(…) enculturate students into authenticpractices through activity and social interaction” (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989, p. 37). Situated cognition,as a theoretical model, can be translated into educational practice through the instructional approach of cognitiveapprenticeship, and aims to foster learning in a domain by promoting students’ knowledge acquisition anddevelopment through the use of cognitive tools in authentic activities (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Collins,Brown, & Newman, 1989). Therefore, situated cognition positions itself closer to innovative educational reformand intentional instructional approaches, and is implicitly connected – through their focus on instructionalpurposes – with the notion of CoL.ICLS 2014 Proceedings762© ISLSTwo Contemporary Notions of CommunitiesOver the past two decades, the notions of CoP and CoL have flourished in research, and educational and workplace settings. Despite their popularity, their slightly different theoretical foundations have slipped out of focus.The following section will describe both notions of community – in close alignment to their foundationalelements and theoretical principles – and the degree of emergence and design.Communities of PracticeWithin the framework of sociocultural theory and situated learning, Lave and Wenger coined the multifacetedconcept of CoP to refer to “(…) a set of relations among persons, activity and the world, over time and inrelation with other tangential and overlapping communities of practice” (Lave & Wenger, 1991, p. 98). In otherwords, a CoP is formed by individuals who have a common interest in a domain of human endeavor andmutually engage in a process of social learning, working together and sharing ideas in order to collectively solveproblems and co-construct knowledge over a period of time (Wenger, 1998a).CoPs share a common structure, which is constituted of three elements: domain, community andpractice (Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder, 2002). The element of domain refers to a shared domain of interestthat matters to members (Wenger, 1998a), contributes to the identity of the community which reflects “a set ofissues, challenges and passions through which members recognize each other as learning partners” (Wenger,White, & Smith, 2009, p. 5). Individuals’ membership in a CoP is related to their dedication to that domainalong with a communal competence that diversifies the members of the community from others, withoutnecessarily requiring high expertise in a specific field (Wenger, 1998a). Members of the community tend toappreciate their collective competence and learn together, even though people outside of the community mightnot value or identify with their collective experience (Wenger, 1998a). The element of community is evidentwhen individuals engage in joint activities and discussions, help each other, and share information, whilebuilding relationships that enable members to interact and learn from each other (Wenger, 1998a). This does notimply that members of a CoP work together on a consecutive basis, although interactions are essential in theconstitution of a CoP (Wenger, 1998a). The element of practice refers to a shared repertoire of resources, likeexperiences, tools and ways of addressing issues (Wenger, 1998a). Hence, a CoP should not be conceptualizedmerely as a community of people with common interests, but rather as a community whose members develop ashared practice. The process of a sharing practice requires time and interaction and seems to be a more or lessself-conscious process (Wenger, 1998a). Wenger (1998a) further defined the relationship between practice andcommunity, within the framework of CoPs, by three core dimensions: mutual engagement, joint enterprise andshared repertoire (see Table 1).Table 1: Dimensions of practice as the property of a communityCore dimensionMutual engagementDescriptionEngagement incollectively negotiableactionsJoint enterpriseNegotiated response toaddress their commonsituationDeveloped routines,activities, artifacts andstoriesShared repertoireImplicationDoes not implyhomogeneity as aprerequisite for communitydevelopmentMoves beyond a commongoal to involve relations ofmutual accountabilityCan be used as referencepoints for negotiation ofmeaningValueRecognition of theimportance of others’competences, knowledge andcontributionMutual negotiation of actionsand sharing responsibility forthe common enterpriseNegotiation of new meaningand dynamic developmentThe mere existence of these dimensions does not imply a coherent community, but rather whether theyare collectively used by the participants for a common enterprise (Wenger, 1998a). The major challenge of aCoP is to collectively identify the community, continuously negotiate the reasons of its existence and sustain asocial space for learning along with being involved and committed over time (Wenger, Trayner, & DeLaat,2011).Emergence and Design in CoPsCoPs do not constitute formal structures among individuals, but informal entities within the minds of itsmembers, built around the relationships that members develop with each other while sharing common problemsand interests (Ardichvili, Mauer, Li, Wentling, & Stuedemann, 2006). As Kirschner and Lai (2007) explain,CoPs are not things, but processes in which social learning takes place. A CoP is perceived as a self-generatedand self-organized system, an organism or an autonomous group that needs time to form itself, exists for thebenefit of its members, and may continue its existence even after the completion of a project or task (Lave &ICLS 2014 Proceedings763© ISLSWenger, 1991; Kimble, 2006; Wenger, 1998a; Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder, 2002). According to Wenger(1998b), communities go through various stages of development characterized by different kinds of activitiesand different levels of interaction among community members. Therefore, a CoP differentiates itself from othersets of people who operate in groups, because it neither starts its existence and its action the exact moment that atask or project starts, nor disappears at the end of it (Wenger, 1998a).Since learning occurs in the sphere of experience and practice, CoPs cannot be designed in the sense ofproducing an “organizational unit” or being implemented as a pedagogical technique (Wenger, 1998a, p. 228),but they can be “recognized, supported, encouraged, and nurtured” (Wenger, 1998a, p. 229). However, asWenger (2010) explains, “(…) it is indeed difficult to find the right balance between enough formality to givethem legitimacy in the organization and enough informality to let them be peer-oriented, self-governed learningpartnerships” (¶ A co-opted concept: on the instrumental slippery slope). In contrast to self-generated and selfdeveloped CoPs, the emergence and design of CoLs in educational settings underlies intentionality andparticular objectives.Communities of LearnersBased upon the premise of sociocultural theory and situated cognition, the conception of CoL emerged in theearly 1990s as part of the Fostering Communities of Learners project by Brown and Campione (1990), whichaimed to transform traditional classrooms into innovative learning environments that foster the distribution ofexpertise among adults and children underlying a need for educational reform (Brown, 1992, 1994; Brown &Campione, 1996). According to Rogoff (1994), learning emerges in CoLs when individuals participate in sharedenterprises with others by having active, but often different, roles in sociocultural activities. According toRogoff, Goodman-Turkanis and Bertlett (2001), a community is constituted of relationships among individuals,who collectively try to accomplish common enterprises, while being stably involved, and considering thosemultifaceted relationships as fundamental for the evolution of the community. The aim of a CoL moves beyondsuccessfully accomplishing tasks to developing collective practices that transcend the particular individualsinvolved (Rogoff, Goodman-Turkanis, & Bertlett, 2001).A variety of CoL models have been operationalized and implemented by researchers over the years(Bielaczyc, Kapur & Collins, 2013; Brown, 1992; Brown & Campione, 1996; Rogoff, 1994; Rogoff, GoodmanTurkanis, & Bertlett, 2001; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994). Regardless of the differences in operationalizationand implementation of the models, which move beyond the scope of this paper, they share several underlyingprinciples. According to Bielaczyc, Kapur and Collins (2013), the constituent characteristics of CoL models are:diversity of expertise among participants through valued contributions, a shared objective of developingcollective knowledge and skills over time, learning how to learn, and mechanisms for sharing. The mainobjective of a CoL is to promote a learning culture, in which individuals and the community as a whole arelearning how to learn and develop disciplinary knowledge, while respecting and valuing different contributionsof its members (Bielaczyc, Kapur, & Collins, 2013).Emergence and Design in CoLsCoLs have been used as a community-based instructional approach by educators who aim to foster studentcentered learning, therefore CoL is associated with a shift in the learners’ role in schools from a passiveknowledge recipient to an active co-constructor of knowledge responsible for their own learning (Brown, 1992).Intentional CoLs by educators often start with a course, operate on the classroom level, assume that theclassroom is one community, and the participants are students whose individual achievement is evaluated andrewarded and prioritized over the collective success (Barab, Kling, & Gray, 2004; Roth & Lee, 2004). CoLs aresupported and guided by a teacher-facilitator or other adults (Brown, 1992). However, the implementation of theCoL notion by educators in classrooms has been a challenging process and often misrepresented the notion itself(Barab, Klinf, & Gray, 2004), which has been often employed by educators “(…) as a slogan rather than as ananalytical category” (Barab, Kling, & Gray, 2004, p. 3).A Recombinant Model of Communities: Communities of Learning PracticeDespite the differences between the notions of CoP and CoL, their commonalities have contributed totheoretical and implementational confusion. In an attempt to clarify theoretical contradictions in the notion ofCoP, Roth and Lee (2006) claim that “(…) the notion of community in the context of classrooms isinappropriate or even false – unless the students concretely realize the collectively defined motive and havesome choice and control in the matters” (p. 32). Indeed, it is misleading to consider whole classrooms as CoPs,because the notion of CoP entails emerging elements and not pre-defined, forced attributes to students inclassrooms. However, several CoPs may exist within the context of the classroom or the broader educationalsetting, in the same way that they may exist in any other social context. In contrast, CoLs have been used ineducational settings as an instructional approach by educators to foster students’ control and responsibility incollectively developing knowledge through sharing of contributions, which are respected and valued by othersICLS 2014 Proceedings764© ISLS(Rogoff, 1994). Therefore, classrooms were transformed into CoLs as part of an educational reform movement.The CoL notion does not include emergent elements, but instructionally designed and defined ones. Is thereroom for a middle path between those two notions by employing theoretical values from both? What could amiddle path be for a community model to emerge in an educational setting and be “designed” to an extent thatsuch a “design” does not interfere with its underlying “emergent” values and principles?Communities of Learning PracticeDuring a longitudinal study in higher education, in which we explored the aspects of design and emergence,developmental stages (Dingyloudi & Strijbos, 2014), sharing practices and value creation in multiple extracurricular emergent communities in parallel to a Learning Sciences master’s program, we initially expected tobe able to describe our communities under study by either adopting the CoP or the CoL model. However, as ourresearch progressed it proved impossible to provide a description of our emergent communities that would becompatible with either the CoP or CoL model. How our communities under study emerged, were structured andevolved generated the need for a new conceptual descriptor, which operates in-between and beyond the existingmodels. This third notion aims to describe emergent communities by incorporating elements from both CoP andCoL models, but simultaneously creating a unique profile without being a mere variation of either of the twomodels.We have termed this third notion “Communities of Learning Practice” (CoLP) (See Figure 1). Theinclusiveness of this notion is initially depicted by using the terms “learning” and “practice” in its conception.The relationship between learning and practice seems to be realized at two levels in the CoLP model. It can beeither perceived as (a) “learning how to practice” (e.g., academic skills) that has the potential to contribute to thebroader educational context, or (b) “practicing how to learn”, through the practice of skills within thecommunity setting. How participants may experience the relationship between learning and practice may vary,as well as how they value this relationship.Community ModelsCommunities of PracticeCommunities of LearningPracticeCommunities of LearnersOrganizational EnvironmentExtracurricular environmentClassroom environmentPractitioner membersJust Plain PeersStudent membersOldtimer coordinatorParticipatory facilitatorTeacher/Adult facilitatorDistributed responsibilitiesShared with participatoryfacilitatorGuided responsibilities byteacher/adult facilitatorPublic and private spacePublic and private spacePublic spaceOpen lifespanCourse-based lifespanCourse-based lifespanSelf-formationVictual formationPre-defined formationSelf-structureNegotiated with participatoryfacilitatorPre-defined structureVoluntary participationVoluntary participationPre-determined participationFigure 1. A recombinant model of Communities of Learning Practice (CoLP)CoLPs derive from and operate in educational settings, and in parallel with – but not integrated into thecurriculum – by having no pre-defined pedagogical objectives. Therefore, CoLPs are extra-curricular entitiesthat emerge from students’ common needs and are not used as an instructional approach by educators,ICLS 2014 Proceedings765© ISLSresearchers or stakeholders to foster curricular learning objectives. With respect to the environment withinwhich communities grow, CoLPs and CoLs are both formed in an educational setting, but the CoLP lives inparallel as opposed to in the curricular setting. Although CoPs could also be formed in educational settings,they typically find better ground for development in organizations in an attempt to contribute to organizationalsuccess through transfer of professional skills and profitable work place practices (Wenger & Snyder, 2000).The potential participants of CoLPs are peers, who are students in the broader educational setting, andgather together to address identified common needs (e.g., academic challenges) that derive from the broadereducational setting. Their participation throughout the CoLP lifespan is voluntary and members are free towithdraw whenever the value of their participation fades away. CoLPs are open to any student who wishes toact as a peer among peers and share, negotiate and co-construct learning experiences through the sharingmechanism of peer feedback. The participants of CoLPs can be described as Just Plain Peers (JPPs) as acontext-specific instantiation of the term “Just Plain Folks” (JPFs) introduced by Lave (1988). FollowingBrown, Collins and Duguid (1989), the issues and problems that Just Plain Folks face “(…) arise out of, aredefined by, and are resolved within the constraints of the activity they are pursuing” (p. 35). Table 2 provides asummary of the features characterizing JPFs/JPPs, students, and practitioners. CoLs typically involve studentsas participants, although CoLs are designed to enhance a shift in students’ activity in classrooms and movebeyond laws, symbols and fixed meanings. CoPs may have as participants either practitioners or JPFs. The JPPsin a CoLP resemble the activity of practitioners, although JPPs are more closely related to everyday activity.Table 2: JPFs/JPPs, Students and Practitioners (adapted from Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989)reasoning with:acting on:resolving:producing:JPFs/JPPscausal storiessituationsemergent problems anddilemmasnegotiable meaning andsocially constructedunderstandingStudentslawssymbolswell-defined problemsPractitionerscausal modelsconceptual situationsill-defined problemsfixed meaning andimmutable conceptsnegotiable meaning andsocially constructedunderstandingCoLPs act as a support structure for students, are generated by the students themselves but facilitatedby a participatory facilitator, who is neither an expert nor a peer-member. The participatory facilitator and theJPPs share responsibility for coordinating and co-structuring the public space and reinforcing social interactionsin the private space. The public space refers to informal events which are open to community members toexchange ideas, and find solutions to their problems, attributing a ritualistic and substantive dimension to thecommunity by offering its members the experience of participation and meeting other members. The privatespace refers to a web of relationships among members who can be involved into one-to-one informaldiscussions that inform any design decision of the public space (Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder, 2002). Incontrast, the facilitator in CoLs is the teacher or another expert (Brown & Campione, 1996), whereas in CoPsthe coordination role can be taken on by any of the community members (Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder,2002). CoLs and CoPs further differ regarding the spheres within which they operate, since the CoL operates inthe public space (e.g., classroom) whereas the CoP operates in both the public and private space.CoLPs are victually formed, since the participatory facilitator communicates the invitation for a CoLPto be initiated (if relevant to the JPPs) to the potential JPPs. The participatory facilitator also supplies thecommunity with ritualistic sustainability (i.e., a consistent rhythm of public community events), enhances theinformality of the public community events, facilitates the “learning how to practice” and “practicing how tolearn” aspects of the community on a public level, and builds private social bridges with the JPPs with the aimto reinforce community aliveness (Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder, 2002). Therefore, the community formationis not entirely self-generated (as is the case for a CoP), but there is a victual approach to this formation by theparticipatory facilitator, i.e. supplying the community with mechanisms that facilitate community sustainabilityand members’ social bounding. Along with the victual formation, the structure of the community is alsonegotiated among the JPPs and the participatory facilitator. Structure refers to the ritualistic and structuraldependence of the members on each other, which is negotiated throughout the lifespan of the CoLP. Contrastingthe formation and structure of CoLPs with both two existing community models – CoLs are instructionally predefined, pre-structured and guided, whereas CoPs are self-formed and self-structured – it becomes evident thatthe aspects of emergence and design in CoLPs do not reflect either the CoL or CoP model, and move beyondthem by employing a balanced approach to emergence and design.The lifespan of CoLPs is course-based, given the broader socio-educational context within which theyevolve. Since the relevance of forming the CoLP derives from the broader educational context, this contextconstitutes the defining element of its lifespan as well. However, the CoLP might regenerate or transform itselfICLS 2014 Proceedings766© ISLSas long as the JPPs continue to identify potential values of participation in their CoLP. Regarding lifespan theCoLP resembles a CoL and differentiates a CoLP from a CoP, which does not start or end with a task or project(Wenger, 1998a).Balancing Emergence and Design of CommunitiesThe rationale for another community notion relies on the need for balancing emergence and design of acommunity in an educational setting. According to Wenger (1998a), the balance between emergence and designin the community context is depicted in the paradox that “(…) no community can fully design the learning ofanother (…) no community can fully design its own learning.” (p. 234). The emphasis expressed by “fully” inWenger’s statement is what makes the relationship between emergence and design complex and asks for anequilibrium between the two.Wenger, McDermott and Snyder (2002) suggest a set of design principles that could foster a sense ofcommunity aliveness without designing an intervention to achieve this. Hence, designing a CoP would becontradictory with the underpinning theory of self-organized systems. In contrast, CoLs do not allow for muchfreedom on behalf of the community members, since the participation and objectives are pre-defined and prestructured for pedagogical purposes. Therefore, in an attempt to achieve an equilibrium between emergence anddesign – without being conflicting or incompatible with any of the CoL and CoP notions – the CoLP constitutesa middle path that incorporates community values from both notions and stands on its own as well.Implications and ConclusionThis paper explored the aspects of emergence and design that are attached to the dominant notions of CoP andCoL and presented the need for a new community notion to characterize emergent communities in education.This new notion of “Communities of Learning Practice” (CoLP) emerged from our longitudinal study onemergent communities in higher education, during which we aimed to achieve a balance between emergenceand design. CoLP incorporates elements from both community models, constituting an entity in-between andbeyond them. Metaphorically, this resembles the reproduction of living organisms, in which a new living entityis generated by recombining different chromosomes from two other living organisms.The emergence of the CoLP notion has theoretical and practical implications. First of all, theemergence of the notion by itself calls researchers’ and educators’ attention to the aspects of emergence anddesign within either the CoP or the CoL model, highlighting the importance of considering them beforeattributing the label of CoP or CoL to the communities under study or being implemented, to avoid theoreticalmisinterpretations. In addition, a CoLP and the community model it represents, offers a theoretical model for acommunity that is neither self-generated and self-developed, nor instructionally designed and pedagogicallyguided. This model has the potential to describe emergent communities in educational settings that movebeyond the curriculum and the constraints of the classroom supported by a participatory facilitator. With respectto the practical implications in education, CoLPs suggest an even more autonomous community modelcompared to the CoL that educators should allow to emerge out of the voluntary participation of the studentsand let them be JPPs for their own emergent needs and problems, which might not necessarily be addressed inthe curriculum. A CoLP model cannot be used as an instructional approach, but it should be provided theground, space and time, to flourish.ReferencesArdichvili, A., Mauer, M., Li, W., Wentling, T., & Stuedemann, R. (2006). Cultural influences on knowledgesharing through online communities of practice. Journal of Knowledge Management, 10, 94-107.Barab, S. A., & Duffy, T. M. (2000). From practice fields to communities of practice. In D. H. Jonassen & S. M.Land (Eds.), Theoretical foundations of learning environments (pp. 25-55). Mahwah, NJ: LawrenceErlbaum Associates.Barab, S. A., Kling, R., & Gray, J. H. (Eds.) (2004). Designing for virtual community in the service of learning.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Bielaczyc, K., & Collins, A. (1999). Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of educationalpractice. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm ofinstructional theory (pp. 269-292). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Bielaczyc, K., Kapur, M., & Collins, A. (2013). Cultivating a community of learners in K-12 classrooms. In C.E. Hmelo-Silver, A. M. O’Donnell, C. Chan & C. A. Chinn (Eds.), International Handbook ofCollaborative Learning (pp. 233-249). New York: Taylor & Francis.Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141-178.Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1990). Communities of learning and thinking, or a context by any other name.Contributions to Human Development, 21, 108-125.ICLS 2014 Proceedings767© ISLSBrown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.),Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229-270). Cambridge,MA: MIT Press.Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learningenvironments: On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovationsin learning: New environments for education (pp. 289-325). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated learning and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18, 32-42.Collins, A., Brown, J. S., Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading,writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning and instruction: Essays in honorof Robert Glaser (pp. 453-494). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Dewey, J. (1897). My pedagogical creed. School Journal, 54, 77-80.Dingyloudi, F., & Strijbos, J. W. (2014). Evolution of communities of learning practice in higher education:Collective unites of analysis. In Proceedings of the ICLS 2014 conference “Learning and becoming inpractice”. Boulder, CO: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Hughes, J. (2007). Lost in translation: the journey from academic model to practitioner tool. In J. Hughes,Jewson, N., & L. Unwin (Eds.), Communities of practice: critical perspectives. New York: Routledge.Jackson, J. (2008). Language, identity and study abroad: Sociocultural perspectives. London, UK: Equinox.Janson, A., Howard, L., & Schoenberger-Orgad, M. (2004). The odyssey of Ph.D. students becoming acommunity of practice. Business Communication Quarterly, 67, 168-181.John-Steiner, V., & Mahn, H. (1996). Sociocultural approaches to learning and development: A Vygotskianframework. Educational Psychologist, 31, 191-206.Kimble, C. (2006). Communities of practice: Never knowing undersold. In E. Tomadaki & P. Scott (Eds.),Innovative approaches for learning and knowledge sharing: EC-TEL workshop proceedings (pp. 218234). Knossos, Crete: Sun SITE Central Europe.Kirschner, P. A., & Lai, K.-W. (2007). Online communities in education. Technology, Pedagogy and Education,16, 127-131.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Rogoff, B. (1994). Developing understanding of the idea of communities of learners. Mind, Culture, andActivity, 1, 209-229.Rogoff, B., Goodman-Turkanis, C., & Bartlett, L. (2001). Learning together: Children and adults in a schoolcommunity. New York: Oxford University Press.Roth, W.-M., & Lee, Y.-J. (2006). Contradictions in theorizing and implementing communities in education.Educational Research Review, 1, 27-40.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 3, 265-283.Vann, K., & Bowker, G. (2001). Instrumentalizing the truth of practice. Social Epistemology, 15, 247-262.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Wenger, E. (1998a). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Wenger, E. (1998b). Communities of practice: Learning as a social system. System Thinker, 9, 1-5.Wenger, E. (2000). Communities of practice and social learning systems. Organization, 7, 225-246.Wenger, E. (2010). Communities of practice and social learning systems: The career of a concept. RetrievedNovember 8, 2010, from http://wenger-trayner.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/09-10-27-CoPs-andsystems-v2.01.pdfWenger, E., McDermott, R., & Snyder, W. M. (2002). Cultivating communities of practice: A guide tomanaging knowledge. Boston: Harvard Business School.Wenger, E. C., & Snyder, W. M. (2000). Communities of practice: The organizational frontier. HarvardBusiness Review, Jan-Feb, 139-145.Wenger, E., White, N., & Smith, J. D. (2009). Digital habitats: Stewarding technology for communities.Portland, OR: CPsquare.Wenger, E., Trayner, B., & De Laat, M. (2011). Promoting and assessing value creation in communities andnetworks: A conceptual framework. Heerlen, the Netherlands: Ruud de Moor Centrum.Wertsch, J. V. (1991). Voices of the mind: A sociocultural approach to mediated action. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings768© ISLS