Combining Video Games and Constructionist Design to SupportDeep Learning in PlayNathan Holbert, David Weintrop, & Uri Wilensky, Northwestern UniversityEmail: nholbert@u.northwestern.edu, dweintrop@u.northwestern.edu, uri@northwestern.eduPratim Sengupta, Stephen Killingsworth, Kara Krinks, & Doug Clark, Vanderbilt UniversityEmail: pratim.sengupta@vanderbilt.edu, skillingsworth@vanderbilt.edu, kara.krinks@gmail.com,doug.clark@vanderbilt.eduCorey Brady, Inquire Learning LLC, cbrady@inquirelearning.comEric Klopfer, MIT, klopfer@mit.eduR. Benjamin Shapiro, Tufts University, ben@cs.tufts.eduRosemary S. Russ, University of Wisconsin-Madison, rruss@wisc.eduDiscussant: Yasmin B. Kafai, University of Pennsylvania, kafai@gse.upenn.eduAbstract: In recent years much research has explored the potential of using video games ineducation. This effort has produced many interesting games though it is unclear if“educational video games” have achieved their promise. Similarly, for many yearsconstructionists have engaged children in learning across a variety of contexts, including gamedesign. While these programs have been successful, their exploratory nature leads to concernsabout content coverage. In this symposium we discuss the potential of blending these twodesign traditions. Constructionist video games infuse traditional game structures withconstructionist ideals to create gaming experiences that encourage exploration while ensuringengagement with desired content. This symposium presents the constructionist video gamesconstruct and showcases empirical research on the use of such games in both formal andinformal contexts.Session SummaryIn this symposium we bring together researchers from the educational games and constructionist designcommunities to discuss empirical work highlighting the value and challenges of merging these two designtraditions.Recent data suggests 97% of all children play video games daily (Lenhart et al., 2008). As a nearlyuniversal experience for American youth, video games offer an exciting design opportunity with the potential ofhaving immense impact. In the past decade there has been a large influx of effort and money to take advantageof this opportunity and design video games that offer powerful educational experiences. This effort hasproduced many interesting products that wrap school-sanctioned content inside traditional game mechanics andstructures allowing learners to interact with targeted lessons in a highly engaging format. While there has beenconsiderable enthusiasm for this program of research and the results suggest learners improve on metricsdirectly aligned to in-game action, learners often fail to acquire a deep understanding of embedded content thatthey can apply in alternate contexts (Annetta, 2008; Barab et al., 2007; Clark & Martinez-Garza, 2012).At the same time, researchers firmly rooted in the constructionist design tradition (Harel & Papert,1991; Papert, 1980) have produced a host of environments that allow children to create games of their owndesign (Caperton, 2010; Kafai, 1995). This work has proven successful at achieving deep learning in a widevariety of domains, but is often hampered by its own commitment to openness when attempting to focuslearners on specific ideas or content. The challenge, referred to by Noss and Hoyles (1996) as the “playparadox,” is to create an effective balance between designs that force learners to confront targeted content(which in turn may reduce the feeling of play), versus those that provide complete freedom in exploration(sacrificing assurances that learners will always encounter the targeted content).The blended genre of constructionist video games has been proposed as an approach that can overcomethe challenges faced by each design perspective in isolation. Constructionist video games (Weintrop, Holbert,Wilensky, & Horn, 2012) infuse traditional video game structures with constructionist ideals and mechanics tocreate gaming experience that encourage exploration and experimentation while ensuring players’ engagementwith prescribed ideas and content. This design approach is particularly suited to deepen learners’ experienceswith mechanics in educational video games though it also shows potential for streamlining exploration in fullyICLS 2014 Proceedings1388© ISLSconstructionist spaces. In this symposium we present the constructionist video games construct, discussing bothits historical roots as well as areas were we believe the construct forges new territory, and showcase empiricalresearch on the use and potential of such games in both formal and informal contexts.The symposium will consist of four presentations. Nathan Holbert, David Weintrop, and Uri Wilenskywill open the session by presenting the constructionist video games construct. This talk will highlight thevarious principles important to the design of constructionist video games and showcase findings from two suchgames, RoboBuilder and Particles!, that highlight the potential of this design for producing powerful playexperiences that result in deep learning. Pratim Sengupta, Stephen Killingsworth, Kara Krinks, Corey Brady,and Douglas Clark will present SURGE, a game for exploring Newtonian Mechanics that blends the importantpractice of scientific modeling with video game play. This talk reports findings from a study of 7th gradersplaying SURGE to show how interactions with the constructionist designs in the game supported students asthey made sense of Newton’s 1st and 2nd laws. In the third talk, Eric Klopfer presents a new massivelymultiplayer constructionist game, Radix, for learning science and math and shows how the open nature of Radixsupports learners as they engage in authentic science inquiry. In the final presentation of the symposium, R.Benjamin Shapiro and Rosemary S. Russ, describe how cognitive clinical interviews enabled an evaluation ofthe design of a constructionist video game designed to engage players with issues of sustainability. Shapiro andRuss present evidence from a series of clinical interviews conducted with game players showing thatparticipants often reevaluated their assumptions about sustainable framing practices through the new perspectiveacquired from game mechanics. Finally, acting as the session discussant, Yasmin Kafai will bring her expertiseboth as a leading constructionist theorist and designer as well as her many years studying how children learnwhile playing and making games to review some of the overlapping issues brought up by session presentationsand to highlight the potential advantages and disadvantages of this design approach.Constructionist Video Games: Creating Educational Video Games thatEmpower Players to Construct New KnowledgeNathan Holbert, David Weintrop, and Uri WilenskyObjectiveThis talk will lay the theoretical groundwork for the design genre of constructionist video games and, usingenvironments of the authors’ designs, discuss the major features and principles of this class of learningenvironment. As described in the session summary, constructionist video games merge features of video gamedesign with educational theory and design principles from the constructionist tradition to form a medium thatsupports meaningful exploration and learning while also providing a motivating, structured learning context(Weintrop, Holbert, Wilensky, & Horn, 2012). By blending these two design traditions we address what Noss &Hoyles (1996) call the ‘play paradox’; the tension between allowing open, learner-directed exploration and thedesire on the part of the designer for the learner to engage with the content designed into the environment.We define constructionist video games as: Designed computational environments in which playersconstruct personally meaningful and shareable artifacts to overcome artificial conflict or obstacles resulting ina quantifiable outcome. To aid in the construction of these games, we offer four key design principles:1. Constructionist video games include sufficiently expressive construction tools with which players canengage in personally meaningful ways.2. Game goals and construction tools encourage exploration and discovery during play.3. Constructionist video games provide a public forum for players to share constructed artifacts withothers.4. Learners engage with and employ one or more powerful ideas to advance through the game.We have been motivated by the sense that traditional educational video games often focus too intentlyon delivering content, and not enough on empowering players to construct new knowledge that they findpersonally meaningful. As knowledge construction is a strength of the constructionist program, we have workedto find innovative ways to bring constructionist principles to the design of educational video games. In this talk,we present two such attempts: RoboBuilder and Particles! (Figure 1.). Using these games as “objects-to-thinkwith” (Papert, 1980) we will elaborate on the four design principles central to creating constructions videogames. We will then briefly report findings from two empirical studies to show how these principles providedopportunities for learners to engage deeply with target concepts intentionally embedded in the games as well asevidence indicating that players gained new knowledge resources for thinking and reasoning outside of thegame.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1389© ISLS(b)(a)Figure 1. In Particles! (a) players design molecules for blocks that can be added throughout the game to changethe emergent physical properties of objects in the game world. In RoboBuilder (b) players construct a robotstrategy in a block-based language then watch their robot enact it in competition.Theoretical FrameworkThe constructionist video game construct is rooted in the constructionist design approach (Harel & Papert, 1991;Papert, 1980) and engages players in the construction of personally meaningful artifacts. This constructionprocess facilitates the development of internal cognitive structures and brings learners into a closer relationshipwith explored ideas, phenomena, and systems (Papert & Harel, 1991; Wilensky, 1991). We also draw from thegrowing literature on the use of video games as contexts for learning, including their potential as motivatingenvironments, their alignment with youth identity and norms, and their potential to enable new, interactiveengagement with concepts (Annetta, 2008; Barab et al., 2007; Gee, 2003). To evaluate the formation andcharacter of constructed knowledge structures, we draw heavily from the knowledge-in-pieces theory ofcognition which views cognition as an emergent process heavily determined by the tools, resources, and impliedperspectives provided by the situational context (diSessa, 1993).Methods and DataThis talk will incorporate data from two separate studies of participants playing an author-designedconstructionist video game. In the first study, we draw on data collected from a study of 15 programmingnovices playing RoboBuilder (Weintrop & Wilensky, 2013). In RoboBuilder, players write small programsusing a domain-specific, visual programming language to control an in-game character as it does battle. Duringgameplay, subjects were instructed to think-aloud and were asked summative questions by the researcher abouttheir experience at the conclusion of game play. Additionally, artifacts constructed in-game were collected forlater analysis. Data from the study in the form of vignettes, programs constructed, and post gameplay interviewswill be presented to show how RoboBuilder’s construction primitives allowed players to externalize their designideas for further evaluation and debugging.In the second study we present data from nine children, ages 11-4 playing Particles! (Holbert &Wilensky, 2012). Particles! is a platformer game intended to help players see how the properties of objects inthe world emerge from the arrangements and structures of atoms and molecules. In Particiles! players are giventhe opportunity to modify game levels as they play through them by dynamically designing the molecular-levelstructures that make up game blocks which in turn leads to blocks with new emergent properties. Players wereinterviewed before and after playing the game about the properties of real world objects. An analysis of playerresponses will be used to show how Particles! players drew on in-game representations to provide more preciseand complex explanations for the causes of material properties.ResultsIn our presentation we will outline the central characteristics of the constructionist video game genre and showhow each feature was incorporated into RoboBuilder and Particles!. We will then show how these featuresbecame the central mechanism by which players encountered targeted concepts and used these concepts both inand outside of the game to think and reason about related phenomena.In the case of RoboBuilder, this takes the form of players developing an understanding of centralprogramming concepts through their iterative development of in-game robot strategies. Over the course ofgameplay, data shows the novice programmers constructing strategies of increasing size and sophistication asthey progress through the game. Further, in analyzing the interviews, we find evidence of players engaging withthe concepts designed into the game, including the relationship between the programs and the resultingbehavior, and the ways conditional logic, iteration, and state can be used to create desired in-game behaviors.For Particles!, pre- and post-game interviews reveal players shifting from attributing object propertiesto the identity of the substance the object is made of to descriptions that attend to the arrangement and structureICLS 2014 Proceedings1390© ISLSof the particles that make up each object. These more complex and precise descriptions of the cause of objectproperties were paired with references to in-game construction tools indicating these shifts were likely due tointeractions with the constructionist features of the game.SignificanceGiven the prevalence and popularity of video games in youth culture, the potential impact of fun, engaging, andmost importantly, effective educational video games grows. Built off a firm theoretical grounding and backed byevidence of the successes of environments designed in this genre, the spread of constructionist video games hasgreat potential for influencing the designers of learning environments and enabling deep, meaningful learning tohappen through the increasingly popular act of playing video games.Integrating Modeling with Games for Learning Newtonian MechanicsPratim Sengupta, Stephen Killingsworth, Kara Krinks, Corey Brady, and Doug ClarkIntroductionModeling is the language of science, and development of scientific expertise is inseparably intertwined with thedevelopment of epistemic and representational practices such as modeling and graphing (Giere, 1988; Lehrer &Schauble, 2006; Nersessian, 1992). In this paper, we focus on the integration of modeling with digital games forlearning physics. We show how the integration of graphing and modeling with SURGE as core gaming activitiespositively effects students‘ learning of concepts related to Newton’s first and second laws that have beentraditionally challenging for novices to learn (Halloun & Hestenes, 1985; Larkin et al., 1980; Dykstra & Sweet,2009).Modeling and Graphing in SURGESURGE (Figure 2) supports students’ game play as an iterative process of modeling. In order to make Surgemove along a path, the learner creates a predictive model of the trajectory, by placing impulses along the targetpath. The learner then deploys his or her model by playing the level, which simulates the behavior of Surge onscreen. Feedback enables learners to refine and revise their initial models.In addition, a graphing environment enables real-time construction of representations based on periodicsampling of measures of SURGE's motion (including total displacement; signed x- and y-componentdisplacements; total velocity; and signed x- and y- component velocities). A slider-bar on the x-axis allows thestudent to rewind and replay the completed level.Figure 2: SURGE’s world (on the right) and the graphing environment (on the left)The Study and FindingsWe conducted a study in which four sections of 7th grade students in a public school in Nashville interactedwith SURGE. Students within each class were randomly assigned to one of two graphing conditions (grapher vs.no grapher) and one of two collaboration conditions (collaborative vs. non-collaborative). Repeated-measuresANOVAs were conducted for each of three question groups (Newton's 1st Law Questions, Newton's 2nd LawQuestions, and Graphing Questions). Across the between-subjects conditions, the analysis showed significantpre-post gains for the Newton's 1st Law, F(1, 96) = 87.42, p < .0001, = .47, and for the Newton's 2nd Lawquestions, F(1, 96) = 6.05, p = .02, = .06. There were not significant gains overall for the graphing questions,F(1, 96) = .51, p = .48, = .01, but there was a marginal interaction between graphing condition and testICLS 2014 Proceedings1391© ISLSadministration for questions on Newton’s 2nd Law questions, F(1, 96) = 2.87, p = .09,= .03. This interactionsuggests that the graphing activity may have allowed students to perform better on 2nd Law questions (Mgain =11.1%, SDgain = 25.3) than without the grapher (Mgain = 3.1%, SDgain = 27.0). We will also present qualitativecase studies of students based on video data, which illustrate the process through which this improvement mayhave occurred.Scholarly SignificanceGiven that models and modeling are central to informal game play (Gee, 2006), we present a pedagogicalapproach in which modeling and graphing can be integrated as core game-playing activities to supportconceptual development in physics. Our findings highlight the importance of supporting the development ofstudents’ representational competence central to Newtonian mechanics in order to support their conceptualdevelopment.Constructivism, Constructionism and The Radix EndeavorEric KlopferObjectiveFor years the Scheller Teacher Education Program (STEP) has been developing constructionist environments topromote STEM learning. These environments have included tools for developing 3D games and simulations(StarLogo TNG). In recent years work has focused on combining game development and simulation use(Klopfer et al. 2009). However, these open-ended tasks often face an implementation challenges in classrooms.In parallel STEP has been developing educational games that embody some of these same characteristics. Thelatest game, The Radix Endeavor (Radix), is a Massively Multiplayer Online Roleplaying Game (MMO), whichallows players to be self-directed, while bounding their actions and focusing them on mastery of science andmath concepts.PerspectiveA radical constructionist (Papert & Harel 1991) game is hard to conceive, at least by many definitions of gamesthat imply particular goals and constraints. But different games can include components of constructionistdesign in interesting ways. MMOs, in which players explore a large world, obtain a variety of quests that theycan complete in increasingly more complex chains, and center around tool use allow for a great deal of playerchoice and customization. This design is consistent with Experiential Learning (Kolb 1984) in whichlearners/players have experiences (engage in game play), reflect on those experiences (often through lulls in thegame between increasingly challenging quests – sometimes with other players in the world), abstract those ideas(in order to be able to apply them in new situations) and test them (through the next task).MethodsPlayers in Radix choose a character that either pursues the biology line or the mathematics line. The premise ofthe world is that in a renaissance era earth-like world, math and science are being kept from the people by anevil ruler. The player takes on the role of an apprentice in an underground society attempting to bring thisknowledge back to the people to help with a variety of world issues. Players obtain quests in the world, whichrequire no previous knowledge but relate to core concepts in each of the associated domains.The key“weapons” that players have are scientific tools associated with each of the quest lines. Advancing in questlines provides players with more sophisticated tools. In many of the quests they are changing the world throughenvironmental improvement or constructing buildings.Data SourcesAs players proceed through quests in the world, data is tracked from each of their tasks, noting how often theytry a task, and diagnosing where they succeed and fail. The game provides feedback to the players about wherethey are struggling, but does not provide direct instruction. In this study, data is obtained from both in gamedata, and external content assessments aligned with state standards.Results and SignificancePlayers in Radix have shown a propensity for exploring many of the more open-ended areas of the world, evenwhen the game provides little to no direction in that exploration. The quest design and tool use havesuccessfully embodied the experiential learning approach.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1392© ISLSCognitive Clinical Interviews for Studying Thinking in Constructionist VideoGamesR. Benjamin Shapiro and Rosemary S. RussSupporting the development of robust, multi-faceted understandings of sustainability along with the systemlevel dynamics and individual-level choices that give rise to it is a difficult design research problem (Goh et al.,2012; Eberbach et al., 2012). One element of this challenge is that sustainability is a compound outcome; it canbe quantified as a weighted sum of environmental, social, and economic sustainability, measures that themselvesexist at both local and global levels of scale (Gratton, 2011). Additionally, the measures are interdependent; anindividual farm that minimizes adverse environmental impact cannot be said to be sustainable if the meansthrough which it does so render it economically insolvent.Role-playing video games, essentially participatory simulations (Wilensky & Stroup, 1999) with aplayful, role-based twist, provide opportunities for players to learn interconnections between individual choicesand local/global sustainability processes and outcomes. We created a multi-player video game in whichparticipants role-play as farmers by making choices about what biofuel crops to plant in their fields over timegiven shifting market conditions (Figure 3 shows a screen shot of the most current version of the game).Throughout multiple “years” (rounds) of play, farmers design and tinker with their fields based on theirunderstanding of how the global system works and how to succeed in that system. That is, they make decisionson how to construct their overall farm (i.e. the ways that particular fields are planted, fertilized, or left fallow)based on their interpretations of the external, shared representations of the global environmental and economicsystem. It is in this sense that the game reflects the principles of constructionism (Papert, 1990; Shaw, 1996).Figure 3. Screen shot of player “DannyBrown”’s farm after 7 “years” of playing the game.We conducted game-play sessions in undergraduate classrooms to investigate how game play,combined with peer and whole class discussions enabled learners to reason about the system dynamics of thesimulated game world, and how individual’s choices could respond to or shape them. These sessions mirroredhow we expect the game will typically be used in schools, and so were of 1-2 hours in duration. Consequently,students were only able to play through a limited number of scenarios, limiting our ability to observe howstudents might reason about and respond to important conditions.Therefore, play sessions were followed by cognitive clinical interviews (Ginsburg, 1997) that askedparticipants to explain how individual choices or aggregate patterns cause various non-game-based scenarios, orto explain what they would do in various scenarios, and why. Our choice to use cognitive clinical interviews toassess learning was deliberate; they offer the opportunity to probe the structure and robustness of learners’conceptual models developed through constructionist game play.Analyses of these interviews revealed that participants generally understood causal mechanismsembedded in the game’s simulation, connecting soil health, short- and long-term profit, the impacts of bioenergyproducing crops, supply and demand, and how individual values shape choices. Some participants explainedways in which their own beliefs about those value-laden priorities shifted as a result of game play anddiscussion, and how those shifts were operationalized in their game play choices. Finally, participantssuccessfully transferred their newly developed understanding of bioenergy farming sustainability dynamics tohypothetical scenarios outside of the game context. Many of these nuanced understandings were not apparentduring the limited time that game play was possible in a classroom setting, and so could not be observed throughplay alone. By using cognitive clinical interviews we were able to develop insights into student thinking thatwould otherwise have been invisible.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1393© ISLSReferencesAnnetta, L. A. (2008). Video games in education: Why they should be used and how they are being used.Theory into practice, 47(3), 229–239.Barab, S., Zuiker, S., Warren, S., Hickey, D., Ingram-Goble, A., Kwon, E., … Herring, S. C. (2007).Situationally embodied curriculum: Relating formalisms and contexts. Science Education, 91(5), 750–782. doi:10.1002/sce.20217Caperton, I. H. (2010). Toward a theory of game-media literacy: Playing and building as reading and writing.International Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations, 2(1), 1–16.Clark, D. B., & Martinez-Garza, M. (2012). Prediction and explanation as design mechanics in conceptuallyintegrated digital games to help players articulate the tacit understandings they build through gameplay.In Games, learning, and society: Learning and meaning in the digital age. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10, 105–225.Dykstra, D. I., Jr. & Sweet, D. R. (2009). Conceptual development about motion and force in elementary andmiddle school students. American Journal of Physics, 77(5), 468-476.Eberbach, C., Hmelo-Silver, C., Jordan, R., Sinha, S., & Goel, A. (2012). Multiple trajectories for understandingecosystems. In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.), The future of learning:Proceedings of the 10th international conference of the learning sciences (ICLS 2012)Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: PalgraveMacmillan.Gee, J. P. (2008). Learning and Games. In: Salen, K (Ed.), The Ecology of Games: Connecting Youth, Games,and Learning. The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Series on Digital Media andLearning. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 21–40. doi:10.1162/dmal.9780262693646.021Giere, R. N. (1988). Explaining Science: A Cognitive Approach. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Ginsburg, H. (1997). Entering the child's mind: The clinical interview in psychological research and practice.Cambridge University Press.Goh, S., Yoon, S., Wang, J., Yang, Z., & Klopfer E. (2012) Investigating the relative difficulty of variouscomplex systems ideas in biology. In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.),The future of learning: Proceedings of the 10th international conference of the learning sciences (ICLS2012)Gratton, C. (2011) Sustainability Index Tool. Presentation at the 2011 Wisconsin Bioenergy Summit.http://issuu.com/wi_bioenergy/docs/gratton_wbi_talkHalloun, I.A., & Hestenes, D. (1985a). Common sense concepts about motion. American Journal of Physics, 53,1056-1065Harel, I., & Papert, S. (Eds.). (1991). Constructionism. Ablex Publishing.Harel, I., & Papert, S. (1991). Software design as a learning environment. Interactive Learning Environments, 1,1–30.Holbert, N., & Wilensky, U. (2012). Particles! Evanston, IL: Center for Connected Learning and Computerbased Modeling.Kafai, Y. B. (1995). Minds in play: Computer game design as a context for children’s learning. Hillsdale, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Klopfer, E., Scheintaub, H., Huang, W, Wendel, D., Roque, R. (2009) The Simulation Cycle - CombiningGames, Simulations, Engineering and Science Using StarLogo TNG. Journal of E-Learning andDigital Media, 6(1) 71-96.Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development. New Jersey:Prentice-Hall.Larkin, J. H., McDermott, J., Simon, D. P., & Simon, H. A. (1980). Expert and novice performance in solvingphysics problems. Science, 208, 1335-1342.Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006a). Cultivating model-based reasoning in science education. In R. K. Sawyer(Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 371–388). New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Lenhart, A., Kahne, J., Middaugh, E., Macgill, A. R., Evans, C., & Vitak, J. (2008). Teens, Video Games, andCivics. PEW Internet & American Life Project.National Research Council. (2008). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching science in grades K–8.Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Nersessian, N. J. (1992). How do scientists think? Capturing the dynamics of conceptual change in science. InGiere, R. N. (ed.) Cognitive Models of Science. University of Minnesota Press. Minneapolis, MN. 3-45.Noss, R., & Hoyles, C. (1996). Windows on mathematical meanings: Learning cultures and computers.Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Press.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms. New York: Basic Books.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1394© ISLSPapert, S. (1990). Introduction: Constructionist Learning. Idit Harel (ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT MediaLaboratory.Shaw, A. (1996). "Social Constructionism and the Inner City." In: Y. Kafai & M. Resnick (eds),Constructionism in Practice: Designing, Thinking, and Learning in a Digital World. Mahwah, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Weintrop, D., Holbert, N., Wilensky, U., & Horn, M. (2012). Redefining constructionist video games: Marryingconstructionism and video game design. In Proceedings of Constructionism 2012. Athens, Greece.Weintrop, D., & Wilensky, U. (2012). RoboBuilder: A Program-to-Play Constructionist Video Game. In C.Kynigos, J. Clayson, & N. Yiannoutsou (Eds.), Proceedings of the Constructionism 2012 Conference.Athens, Greece.Wilensky, U. (1991). Abstract Meditations on the Concrete and Concrete Implications for MathematicsEducation. In I. Harel & S. Papert (Eds.), Constructionism. Norwood N.J.: Ablex Publishing Corp.Wilensky, U., & Stroup, W. (1999, December). Learning through participatory simulations: Network-baseddesign for systems learning in classrooms. In Proceedings of the 1999 conference on Computer supportfor collaborative learning (p. 80). International Society of the Learning Sciences.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1395© ISLS