Teaching Struggling Middle School Readersto Comprehend Informational TextDonna Caccamise, Angela Friend, Christine Groneman, Megan Littrell-Baez, and Eileen KintschUniversity of Colorado, Boulder, Institute of Cognitive Science, 1777 Exposition Dr., Boulder, Colorado 80301Email: donna.caccamise@colorado.edu, angela.friend@colorado.edu, christine.groneman@colorado.edu,megan.littrellbaez@colorado.edu, eileen.kintsch@colorado.eduAbstract: This project involves developing a reading comprehension curriculum based on theConstruction-Integration model (Kintsch, 1998) and implementing a pilot efficacy study inmiddle-school classrooms. The curriculum (BRAVO) explicitly defines the cognitiveprocesses involved in skilled reading, teaching students how to establish local and global textcoherence and use background knowledge to create a mental model – the prerequisite to deep,meaningful learning. A crucial and unique component is the use of sequenced texts related to asingle over-arching topic, enabling students to use their expanding prior knowledge whilereading complex expository texts. BRAVO, consistent with Common Core State Standards,bridges the divide between grade-school narratives and secondary-level textbooks.IntroductionThis report describes an ongoing project to develop a reading comprehension curriculum targeted to middleschool children and aligned with Common Core State Standards (CCSS) for comprehending informational texts.Drawing on current cognitive theory and research on comprehension and the limited results of classroom- andlab-based studies, the Boulder Reading Intervention (BRAVO) offers a detailed, content-based literacycurriculum. BRAVO is being employed in classrooms as part of the language arts curriculum in participatingschools. Most of the instructional components are familiar to educators; what is new here is that the componentsare organized and motivated by an explicit theory, the Construction-Integration model of comprehension(Kintsch, 1988; 1998). What the theory offers, thus, is a narrative that makes sense of literacy instruction. Ourgoal here is to figure out just how the various components of the theory need to be integrated and presented sothat future teachers can use them creatively and effectively in their work, and not just vainly attempt to follow ascript.Significance of the ProjectThe BRAVO curriculum addresses an important and widely recognized problem in education, namely, that:many children in America read well below national standards. Based on the CI Model, BRAVO helps studentsunderstand difficult content-rich, informational text, teaching them to detect and remedy comprehensionfailures, overcome misconceptions, understand the text meaning and build knowledge. Using middle schoolscience content, students learn how to form coherent and cohesive understandings of the ideas in a text, whileintegrating the new content with prior knowledge to build rich and flexible knowledge of the topic. Strategyinstruction in BRAVO takes place as students work through a graduated series of texts of increasing complexityall related to a single, important theme. They learn appropriate mental processes by means of concrete, targetedactivities to help them unlock the meaning of new text while drawing on their growing repository of knowledgeabout the topic. They work with the new content in various ways so that it becomes integrated in their existingstore. This principled approach with its joint focus on comprehension and knowledge building, is whatdifferentiates BRAVO from other reading programs.BackgroundThe importance of improving reading achievement is not in dispute (e.g., Biancarosa & Snow, 2004). It iscritical to address this problem if we are to prevent students from dropping out of high school because they areunable to read well enough to learn from the complex, content-rich materials encountered in the secondarycurriculum (Caccamise & Snyder, 2009; Carnegie Council on Advancing Adolescent Literacy (CCAAL), 2010).When students begin upper elementary school, they are expected to read content-area texts (often in the form ofa textbook); however, they are rarely provided with instruction on how to read informational texts. The result isthe well-known fourth-grade slump. Beyond Grade 4, students with inadequate reading skills have difficultycatching up (e.g., Francis & Stuebing, 1996). Even many college-bound students lack the more advancedliteracy skills needed to understand content area textbooks and to learn from what they read (Allen & Sconing,2005).The problem that many poor readers share is not their inability to read the words on a page but rathertheir inability to comprehend what they read (Biancarosa & Snow, 2004). Poor readers struggle with issuesrelated to inadequate knowledge: knowledge of content of course, but also knowledge of syntax, of syntacticICLS 2014 Proceedings1002© ISLSmarkers for logical relations and coherence, and knowledge of the diverse text structures used in expositorywriting (Hirsch, 2006; Torgesen et al., 2007). Remediation of adolescent literacy difficulties, therefore, is notsimply a matter of revisiting elementary school instruction or using easier materials. Instead, it is a matter ofproviding these readers with explicit, concrete tools for getting the meaning of what they are reading.Faulty literacy skills are only part of the problem. Building the requisite domain knowledge is alsoessential (Caccamise & Snyder, 2005; 2009; Kintsch, 1998; Kintsch & Kintsch, 2005). As Torgesen et al. (2007,p. 63) point out, there is “compelling evidence that as students improve their knowledge in any specific area,their ability to comprehend text in that area improves. Consequently, any effort to improve adolescent literacy inthe long term must focus on the efficacy of teaching essential content within and across grade levels as animportant reform goal”. BRAVO, addresses both the literacy and the knowledge problem together byembedding the instruction of explicit reading comprehension skills within content-area learning.Attributes and Shortcomings of Existing PracticeA widely used approach to comprehension instruction consists in teaching middle school studentscomprehension strategies like the ones expert readers use, to be applied in situations where comprehensionbreaks down. However, this approach also presumes that all students come adequately prepared to form theirown interpretations of informational text, that they are able to detect a failure to comprehend, and that theyknow which strategy or strategies to apply to achieve a more complete and accurate understanding. Expositorytexts are especially problematic, not only because of the unfamiliar subject matter, but due to the higher densityof ideas, lack of coherence and more complicated references employed in such texts. Hence, getting the meaningfrom assigned readings in content area classes often poses an insurmountable obstacle for these readers.Students who struggle at the text level have no basis from which to determine which strategy or strategies mighthelp them improve or expand their comprehension.Therefore, we argue that strategy instruction alone cannot meet the needs of readers withcomprehension problems, who need to learn how to connect the words, phrases and sentences and larger textsegments into coherent, comprehensible ideas — a perspective that is lacking in most comprehension strategyinterventions. Moreover, curriculum materials that typically emphasize broad topic coverage are not conduciveto building coherent subject matter knowledge that is well elaborated and integrated with personal knowledge.This kind of deep understanding, according to Kintsch (e.g., 1998; Kintsch & Kintsch, 2005), is crucial forcreating lasting, usable knowledge.A Better Pedagogical ModelAccording to Biancarosa and Snow (2004; also Caccamise & Snyder, 2009; CCAAL, 2010), direct, explicitcomprehension instruction, guided by a principled understanding of the learning process and that is focused oncontent is necessary to improve middle and high school literacy. The BRAVO curriculum provides explicitcomprehension instruction within a content-area context. The intervention is derived from Kintsch’s (1988,1998) Construction-Integration (CI) Model of Text Comprehension, which explicitly defines the cognitiveprocesses involved in successful comprehension and learning. Thus, the CI model provides the blueprint fordesigning instruction, materials, and assessments in BRAVO.Theoretical and Empirical Rationale: The CI Model of Text ComprehensionThe CI model (Kintsch, 1988; 1998), as well as other recent cognitive models (e.g., Graesser, Singer, &Trabasso, 1994; Just & Carpenter, 1987; van den Broek, Young, Tzeng, & Linderholm, 1999) mark a change incomprehension research from an earlier focus on memory representation (i.e., what readers remember after theyread) to a specification of the mental processes involved in reading (i.e., what readers do while they read). Thistheoretical direction since the 1990s has sought to understand how readers make sense of text word-by-word,line-by-line, and moment-by-moment, developing an understanding of the content as they go along, anunderstanding that is guided by top-level goals, beliefs, personal skills, and knowledge. Readers’ understandingchanges and develops as they read, based on the words on the page and on the meaning they make in their mindsfrom the text and from their own knowledge.The CI Model describes the cognitive processes of comprehension as the interaction of the textbase(ideas in the text) and the situation model (integration with own knowledge). The reader develops a textbaserepresentation from the propositions, or idea units, explicitly stated in the text, inferring information as neededto form a coherent understanding of the text content. The reader builds a situation model representation byintegrating the textbase with his or her own background knowledge that is relevant to the text or that is requiredfor comprehension (Kintsch, 1988; 1998). Developing a textbase and building a situation model are dynamicinteractive processes that happen simultaneously. Successful comprehension at both levels of processing dependon the reader’s background knowledge: knowledge about the topic, about language use, about expository textstructures, as well as knowledge about how strategic processes interact to support the construction of a coherent,accurate and personalized memory representation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1003© ISLSReaders who attend only to the words, phrases and sentences will develop a shallow understanding thatdoes not last. Building a situation model is essential for deep comprehension that is sustained over time. Asituation model enables the reader to find a place for new knowledge in the brain by linking the new informationto existing pieces of knowledge. These links in the memory network may later serve as cues for retrieving theinformation in future applications (Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995; Kintsch & Kintsch, 2005).Many factors prevent inexpert readers from comprehending text deeply, i.e., from developing acoherent and well-integrated memory representation; some are inherent in the reader, others are features of thetexts themselves. For example, readers may lack sufficient topic knowledge to realize what particular non-textknowledge or facts may be relevant to understanding the text at hand (e.g., McNamara & Kintsch, 1996; Voss &Silfies, 1996). In addition to inadequate conceptual background and vocabulary, readers may have difficultyparsing the more complex and less familiar syntactic forms and organizational structures of expository prose(e.g., Meyer, 1975). Difficult, inhospitable text characterizes many content area readings and likewise impedesunderstanding. Such text factors include the following: ambiguous or indirect references; absence of informationthat establishes an appropriate context for the content and that provides a link to existing backgroundknowledge; lack of clearly signaled connections between ideas or events; irrelevant details; and sentences with ahigh density of concepts and propositions (Best, Rowe, Ozuru, & McNamara, 2005; Britton & Gülgöz, 1991;McKeown, Beck, Sinatra, & Loxterman, 1992; McNamara, Kintsch, Songer, & Kintsch, 1996).Textbookwriting often avoids linking ideas with connectives and subordinate relationships in the interest of makingshorter sentences that conform to readability formulas (Kintsch & Kintsch, 2005). Science textbooks especiallyfeature brief paragraphs of short, choppy sentences, listing facts and definitions with little elaboration orexplanation of how they are related. Lacking knowledge of the basic coherence-making processes, strugglingreaders are unable to make sense of such materials. Short sentences may lure readers into a false sense ofunderstanding, such that they often do not even realize when their understanding is incomplete or how tobootstrap their understanding with appropriate problem-solving strategies (e.g., McNamara, 2007). However,even readers with adequate skills and knowledge, often fail to engage in the effortful, inferential processesneeded for deep understanding (Kintsch & Kintsch, 2005; McNamara & Kintsch, 1996). Thus passive,unengaged reading is also a problem for many students.The BRAVO InterventionOur project explores the notion that direct, explicit teaching and practicing of the cognitive processes ofcomprehension within the context of content learning can, in fact, enhance cognitive engagement during readingand improve comprehension of text. In accordance with the CI model’s emphasis on knowledge building asfundamental to successful comprehension, we believe that an instructional model that teaches comprehensionprocesses simultaneously with content knowledge will be more effective for readers with poor comprehension.McKeown, Beck, and Blake (2009) offer supporting evidence for this argument in their two-year study of 5thgraders comparing strategy instruction with and without content focused instruction. Consistent, though smalleffects favoring the content group were found on recall and on one transfer task. McKeown et al. (2009) arguethat although it is important to teach students about reading strategies, instruction should focus primarily on themeaning of the text: how to construct a coherent understanding of the content.This is precisely the goal of BRAVO. In BRAVO knowledge building at both the textbase and situationmodel levels is supported by working through a series of carefully sequenced texts and learning activitiespertaining to a single overarching topic. Rather than end- of-chapter questions and strategy instruction applied todifferent text genres and topics, students learn how to deeply comprehend and how to monitor and remediatecomprehension problems in the context of learning thematically related content. During the 8-week course ofinstruction students expand their knowledge of the topic, using texts that vary conceptually, structurally, andlinguistically. They become familiar with different mid-level organizing structures used in informational text,such as sequence, cause-effect, problem-solution, and compare and contrast.The curriculum is divided into four modules. In expert reading, comprehension occurs at differentlevels of processing more or less simultaneously and in an integrative fashion. However, for ease of presentationand learning the first three modules in this curriculum deal with comprehension problems that occur at eachlevel in turn, organized from easier to more difficult. The goal throughout is coherence building: within andbetween sentences in Module 1, between paragraphs and larger segments of text in Module 2, finally dealingwith inferential complexity in Module 3. In Module 4 students review these comprehension skills, whileintegrating the content across all the chapters to form a situation model of the overall theme of ecology.The texts that students read were manipulated so that students learn to recognize and repair particularproblems at each processing level. Thus the three texts for each module are sequenced to first illustrate theparticular comprehension problem, followed by “problem” texts that feature coherence gaps and diminishingtextual support. In this way, students learn to treat the comprehension of complex text as a problem-solvingactivity for which they learn the appropriate remedial strategies. The text manipulations reflect real “problems”that students encounter in “authentic” texts such as the lack of explicit signal words to indicate topic transition,ICLS 2014 Proceedings1004© ISLSor the use of pronouns and other co-referents to refer back to the subject from an earlier line/section in the text.The texts in Module 3 were manipulated to elicit deeper inferencing on the part of the reader with eachsubsequent text.An overview of the instructional curriculum is as follows:In Module 1 students learn to identify various signals to local, inter-sentential connections, forexample, by identifying the referents of pronouns and synonymous terms, identifying and filling in missingconnections (e.g., then, and so, for example, because, also, etc.), and clarifying unfamiliar vocabulary. In sodoing they become familiar with more complex sentence structures and learn to form gist statements at theparagraph level as they re-read the text chapter.Module 2 focuses on identifying textual signals to the underlying structure, (e.g., headings,subheadings, boldface terms, and global level connectives (e.g., in sum, an example of X, as a result, in contrast,etc.) that signal different kinds of mid-level and overall structures (e.g., compare-contrast, steps in a process,definition-example, problem-solution); they organize the content into graphic organizers that make the structureexplicit; they write summaries that subsume several paragraphs and the entire text chapter. As they proceedthrough successive chapters they also select key concepts to include in a concept map of the overall ecologytheme.Module 3 addresses the more effortful, inferential kinds of processes that are essential to constructingdeep and lasting, personalized memory for the material. Students learn about inferring beyond the text meaning,how to recognize when inferences need to be made and which inferences are appropriate. Appropriateinferences are ones that fill out and elaborate the author’s meaning, for example, relevant implications,predictions, self questioning and explaining, critical evaluations, stating how current text relates to previousones, and the like.Each sequenced text in Modules 1-3 introduces science concepts while also referring back to conceptspresented in previous chapters, helping students reinforce concepts and relations among concepts both withinand across texts. The single overview text in Module 4 sets the stage for integration and review, in whichstudents focus on semantically linking ecology concepts from the previous texts, while engaging in all of thecoherence building and inferential tools used by expert readers. An important activity is labeling the relationsbetween concepts in their concept maps, thereby creating an overt situation model of their understanding.Finally, students consolidate their knowledge by writing an opinion essay addressing a broad problem in thefield of ecology.Interim OutcomesIn our most recently completed Colorado implementation (AY2012-2013) to test the feasibility of BRAVO as amodel for how to improve comprehension instruction for middle school struggling readers and learners, middleschool teachers were provided with professional development and ongoing mentoring as they implemented the8-week program. Before starting BRAVO and right after completing the program, students read one of twocounterbalanced, unfamiliar expository texts followed by a written recall task. A paired-samples t-test wasconducted to compare recall performance collected before and after implementing BRAVO in the classroom.Results show a significant improvement in the scores for the posttest (M = 7.90, SD = 3.22) compared to thepretest (M = 5.73, SD = 2.54), t (44) = 4.418, p < .001. The effect size for this difference is .37. When comparedagainst the annual reading gain effect size of .24 for an average middle school student across seven nationallynormed tests, it suggests that BRAVO improved comprehension skills. Furthermore, as the students in thissample were in remedial reading support classes, the improvement in this population is quite promising. Alarger, controlled efficacy study is underway this year in both general classrooms and reading resourceclassrooms.Relevance to the Conference ThemeComprehension instruction in BRAVO focuses directly and explicitly on the mental processes that serve thecumulative building of content knowledge during reading. The conference theme, “Learning and Becoming inPractice” is realized here by developing students’ content knowledge as they learn about and practice expertcomprehension skills. Thus, at the conclusion of a lesson sequence we anticipate that students who haveexhibited poor understanding of content area reading assignments will be empowered to read complex, gradelevel informative texts, texts that they were previously unable to fathom. In the pilot study currently underwaywe expect to demonstrate (a) the feasibility of comprehension instruction based on theoretically specifiedcognitive processes within a content oriented framework; and (b) the fidelity of implementing the intervention ina typical educational setting.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1005© ISLSReferencesAllen, J., & Sconing, J. (2005). Using ACT Assessment Scores to Set Benchmarks for College Readiness. ACTResearch Report Series, 2005-3. American College Testing (ACT), Inc. Retrieved fromhttp://209.235.214.158/research/researchers/reports/pdf/ACT_RR2005-3.pdf.Best, R. M., Rowe, M., Ozuru, Y., & McNamara, D. S. (2005). Deep-level comprehension of science texts: Therole of the reader and the text. Topics in Language Disorder, 25, 65-83.Biancarosa, G., & Snow, C. (2004). Reading next: A vision for action and research in middle and high schoolliteracy: A report from Carnegie Corporation of New York. New York, NY: Alliance for ExcellentEducation.Britton B. K., & Gülgöz, S. (1991). Using Kintsch’s computational model to improve instructional text: Effectsof repairing inference calls on recall and cognitive structures. Journal of Educational Psychology, 21,333-356.Caccamise, D., & Snyder, L. (2009). Comprehension instruction in the 21st century. Perspectives on Languageand Literacy, 35, 23-26.Caccamise, D., & Snyder, L. (2005). Constructive models of reading comprehension: The situation model andrelated constructs. Topics in Language Disorders, 25, 5-20.Carnegie Council on Advancing Adolescent Literacy (2010). Time to act: An agenda for advancing adolescentliteracy for college and career success. New York, NY: Carnegie Corporation of New York.Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working memory. Psychological Review, 102, 211-245.Francis, D.J., & Stuebing, K.K. (1996). Development lag versus deficit models of reading. Journal ofEducational Psychology, 88, 3-17.Graesser, A. C., Singer, M., & Trabasso T. (1994). Constructing inferences during narrative text comprehension.Psychological Review, 101, 371-395.Hirsch, E. D., Jr. (2006). The knowledge deficit. New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin, Co.Just, M.A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1987). The psychology of reading and language comprehension. Boston, MA:Allyn & Bacon.Kintsch, W. (1988). The use of knowledge in discourse processing: A construction-integration model.Psychological Review, 95(2), 163.Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. Cambridge; New York, NY, USA: CambridgeUniversity Press.Kintsch, W., & Kintsch, E. (2005). Comprehension. In S. G. Paris & D. S. Stahl (Eds.), Children’s readingcomprehension and assessment. (pp. 71-92). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.McKeown, M. G., Beck I. L., & Blake, R. G. K. (2009). Rethinking reading comprehension instruction: Acomparison of instruction for strategies and content approaches. Reading Research Quarterly, 44, 218253.McKeown, M. G., Beck, I. L., Sinatra, G. M., & Loxterman, J. A. (1992). The contribution of prior knowledgeand coherent text to comprehension. Reading Research Quarterly, 27, 79-93.McNamara, D. S. (Ed.) (2007). Reading comprehension strategies: Theories, interventions, and technologies.Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.McNamara, D. S., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Learning from text: Effects of prior knowledge and text coherence.Discourse Processes, 22, 247-287.McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Are good texts always better? Interactions oftext coherence, background knowledge, and levels of understanding in learning from text. Cognitionand Instruction, 14(1), 1-43.Meyer, B. J. F. (1975). Identification of the structure of prose and its implications for the study of reading andmemory. Journal of Reading Behavior, 7, 7-47.Torgesen,J. K., Houston, D. D., Rissman, L. M., Decker, S. M., Roberts, G., Vaughn, S., Wexler, J., Francis, D.J., Rivera, M. O., & Lesaux, N. (2007). Academic literacy instruction for adolescents: A guidancedocument from the Center on Instruction. Portsmouth, NH: RMC Research Corporation, Center onInstruction.van den Broek, P., Young, M., Tzeng, Y., & Linderholm, T. (1999). The landscape model of reading. In H. vanOostendorp & S. R. Goldman (Eds.), The construction of mental representations during reading (pp.71-98). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.Voss, J. F., & Silfies L. N. (1996). Learning from history texts: The interaction of knowledge andcomprehension skills with text structure. Cognition and Instruction, 14, 45-68.AcknowledgementsThis project has been funded by the Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences (IES) grant #:R305A110467, Donna Caccamise, Principal Investigator. Fostering Comprehension & Knowledge-Building inMiddle School Struggling ReadersICLS 2014 Proceedings1006© ISLS