Supporting Conceptual Understandings Outdoors: Findings fromthe Tree Investigators Mobile ProjectHeather Toomey Zimmerman, Susan M. Land, Brian J. Seely, Michael R. Mohney, Gi Woong Choi, and LucyR. McClain, Penn State University, University Park, PA 16802 USAheather@psu.edu, sland@psu.edu, bjs5142@psu.edu, mrm126@psu.edu, gxc207@psu.edu, lucy@psu.eduAbstract: This design-based research project examines two iterations of Tree Investigators,which supports science learning with mobile devices in an arboretum. Researchers codedvideorecords of children and parents (n=40 people) to understand how digital augmentationsinfluenced observation and understandings about trees. In Iteration 1, learners focused on treeidentification; Iteration 2, learners focused on tree life cycles. We focus here on Iteration 2,where children completed a pre- and post-test assessment and participated in a photographiccollage task to document a tree’s life cycle. Findings suggested that a touch-screen conceptualorganizer that provided a model of the life cycle, along with text and contrastive images,supported people’s observations. The learners also collected photographic evidence of lifecycle stages in a knowledge generative task. Increases in factual and conceptual knowledge ofthe life cycle were observed pre- and post-test; however, learners did not show consistentappropriation of new scientific vocabulary.Our Tree Investigators research and design intention is to engage people in science learning during their out-ofschool time with the use of digital materials deployed on mobile computers. Our goals are to support people sothat they become (a) adept observers who can coordinate scientific knowledge with their sensory experiences inthe outdoors and (b) proficient explainers of scientific phenomena related to ecological systems based on theirinteractions with plants and animals. We adopted mobile computers given their increasing ubiquity in everydaylife (Warschauer & Matuchniak, 2010) and increasing reach of mobile computers into families of modestsocioeconomic means (Yardi & Bruckman, 2012).Theoretical FrameworkTo support learners in outdoor environments with mobile computers, our theoretical framework brings togetherresearch findings about technological supports for science learning (Chen, Kao, & Sheu, 2005; Liu et al., 2009;Rogers et al., 2004; Squire & Jan, 2007; Squire & Klopfer, 2007; Tan et al., 2007) and research findings fromplace-based education (Gruenewald, 2003; Lim & Calabrese Barton, 2006; Semken, 2005; Smith, 2002).Supporting Learners with Mobile ComputersResearchers have studied learner engagement, content knowledge acquisition, and enjoyment in outdoor settingsincluding historical locations (Tan & So, 2011), woodlands (Rogers et al., 2004), wetlands (Liu et al., 2009),parks (Tan et al., 2007), and gardens (Chen, Kao, & Sheu, 2005). We also consider findings related to learnerengagement that come from those mobile learning projects that augment real-world locations with virtual dataand gaming scenarios (e.g., Dunleavy & Dede, 2014; Klopfer, 2008; Squire & Jan, 2007). Researchers havereported design elements for mobile devices that encourage data collection (Squire & Klopfer, 2007) andengagement in discourse (Hsi, 2003; Rogers, et al, 2004; Tan et al., 2011) that support science learning.Place-Based EducationPlace-based education is a pedagogical perspective that advocates for designing learning within and about localcommunities (Greunwald, 2003; Smith, 2002; Sobel, 2004). Researchers (e.g., Lim & Calabrese Barton, 2006)use place-based education to understand the connections between abstracted, disciplinary knowledge andpeople’s local knowledge and practices (Gruenewald, 2003). Place-based education in school (e.g., Sobel, 2004)advocates designing curriculum to make school-based learning pertinent to local issues and considerations.Place-based education in out-of-school settings (e.g., Tzou, Scalone, & Bell, 2010) highlights the problems thatarise when the focus on disciplinary concepts disregards the manner in which learners’ lives are embeddedwithin local systems, histories, and interactions.Semken (2005) offers a framework for science-related place-based teaching with five aspects. Semkensuggests place-based teaching: (1) focuses on a setting’s natural history, (2) considers the varied meanings that aplace has for people who use it, (3) incorporates explorations that use authentic artifacts and representations, (4)includes ecologically and culturally appropriate pedagogy and (5) acknowledges and fosters a “sense of place”of learners, educators, and others. We adopt Semken’s perspectives on place-based education to connect out-ofschool learners using mobile computers to the outdoor settings in their communities. Specifically, we usedICLS 2014 Proceedings1067© ISLSmobile devices to connect learners to scientific practices and concepts embedded within a natural garden settingof historical and ecological importance—especially in a historically important old growth stand of trees.MethodologyWe conducted two iterations of a design-based research project at an arboretum (n=40) where we collected 7.5total hours of video. Video data were analyzed to elucidate the role of digital media deployed by mobile devicesto support people in scientific observations and explanation-building talk. Our goal was to advance theoryrelated to learning outside of school and to distill design principles related to the development of mobilecomputer apps and websites that can enhance families’ and youths’ experiences as they explore the outdoors.Research QuestionOur research investigates the following questions: How do young people and their families talk together abouttrees and life cycles while using the Tree Investigators mobile computer app? How does a knowledge-buildingphotographic collage task support the development of conceptual understandings of the stages of trees’ lifecycles for children visiting an arboretum?Design for Mobile Computers: Tree InvestigatorsIn Iterations 1 and 2 of Tree Investigators, an onsite naturalist directed the families to observe trees and tocoordinate their place-based observations with disciplinary information delivered by a mobile computer. Bothiterations included child-friendly text, consisting of short sentences; the text’s reading level was determined bythe Flesch-Kincaid rating system to be at a 3rd grade level. A Ph.D.-level botanist reviewed the tree content forscientific accuracy. The mobile computers augmented seasonally or developmentally unavailable aspects oftrees—mostly via digital photographs and descriptive text.We designed Tree Investigators in Iteration 1 as a mobile website (see Figure 1) that used augmentedreality (images and text layered onto the physical space) to support families to develop observations andexplanations related to tree biodiversity. Iteration 1 was organized by tree species with each of eight specieshaving its own online materials accessed by a QR code. We re-designed Tree Investigators in Iteration 2 as amobile app (see Figures 3 and 4) that did not rely on the Internet. Iteration 2 was organized conceptually byaspects of a tree’s life cycle in contrast to Iteration 1’s species-centered presentation of content. Learners beganIteration 2 with observing evergreen and deciduous tree in a botanical garden and coordinated this sensoryinformation with the conceptual model of a tree’s life cycle on a mobile app (Figure 3 and 4). The final Iteration2 activity included using a photographic collage app where learners collected photographic examples of thestages of a tree’s life cycle (i.e., seed, seedling, sapling, mature tree, and dead/snag tree) in a forested area.Participants and SettingAcross both Iterations, 40 people participated. The participants in Iteration 1 were 25 people from 11 familiesand the participants in Iteration 2 were 15 people from 6 families. The children were 6 to 12 years old. Giventhat we designed Tree Investigators for users of informal sites, we strategically recruited families who werecurrent users of nature centers and arboretums for intergenerational education and recreation.The research setting was the Arboretum at Penn State, which includes various groomed and curatedgardens as well as a stand of old-growth hardwood trees with a network of trails. The oldest trees in this 42acre stand pre-date the construction of the University campus in 1859. Given the logging in this area fordevelopment and for the iron industry throughout the 1800s, this old-growth stand of trees holds a protectedstatus due to the historical, scientific, and cultural value to the area. Iteration 1 used the trees in the groomedgardens while Iteration 2 used both the groomed gardens and the old-growth forested area. Inclusion of the oldgrowth forest allowed for a clearer realization of our study’s place-based education aims and for the learners tosee actual tree specimens in all stages of the life cycle (e.g., seed, seedling, sapling, mature, dead).Data Collection and AnalysisFamilies were videorecorded during a 1-hour guided tour using augmented photographic and textual elements ofTree Investigators on iPad tablet computers and iPod Internet-enabled mp3-players. Given our interest tosupport science learning in informal spaces, for Iterations 1 and 2 we employed an analytical framework ofconversation elaboration (Leinhardt & Crowley, 1998), with talk as both a product and the process of learning.We used a theoretical-driven approach to code transcripts for evidence of observational and explanationbuilding talk that was derived from Allen (2002): perceptual talk (identification, naming, and describingspecies); conceptual talk (inference, interpretation, and prediction); connecting talk (life, knowledge, and interspecies connections); and affect talk (emotional expressions of positive or negative feelings). We conducted adetailed line-by-line analysis of families’ talk using the Allen (2002) coding analysis framework.In Iteration 2, we conducted two additional analyses. First, given our interest in digital photographs tofoster the connection of local, place-based knowledge to domain knowledge in science (Land, Smith &ICLS 2014 Proceedings1068© ISLSZimmerman, 2013), the children in Iteration 2 took pictures of elements of the forest at the Arboretum and madea tree life cycle photo collage. The photo collages had empty slots for photographs, and the families were taskedto find an example of each stages of the life cycle in their collage, in effect requiring them to apply what theyhad learned to observations in the forest. We analyzed the debrief interview and the actual collage artifacts.Second, we conducted a brief (7-10 minute) pre- and post-test that was implemented as a short interview.FindingsIteration 1: Photographic Images Supporting Observations and UnderstandingsIn Iteration 1, children and their families used the Tree Investigator’s mobile media to connect their observationsof trees to new understandings of related biological concepts. Given our goals to enhance place-basedunderstandings, families used the mobile devices in the Arboretum to coordinate their on-site observations withabstracted scientific knowledge. Images and prompts (see Figure 1) that were part of a mobile website wereused to support family observational practice and to develop explanations about the differences in trees and theircharacteristics related to biodiversity. As reported in Zimmerman, et al. (2013), Iteration 1 supported learners to:(a) identify relevant aspects of the trees on-site; (b) articulate an understanding of scientifically-relevantcharacteristics of trees’ natural history (Figure 2); and (c) identify salient differences between evergreen anddeciduous trees using both mobile images and specimens at the Arboretum. Our findings suggested theimportance of augmented photographic elements of trees that were not seasonally or developmentally visible ascontrastive cases to the onsite tree specimens.Figure 1. The Iteration 1 interface for the white oak. Figure 2. Chart of types of talk from Iteration 1 families.Iteration 2: Conceptual Organizer Supporting Observations and UnderstandingsIteration 2 was designed to address limitations identified from Iteration 1 and to expand the focus to life cycleelements due to families’ observed interests. In Iteration 1, observations of characteristics of trees in theArboretum (e.g., a pine cone that was open with its seeds dropped vs. a closed pine cone on a tree) often led todiscussions of life cycle concepts. Thus, Iteration 2 focused on: (a) providing a graphic organizer (Quintana etal., 2004) of trees’ life cycle processes (see Figure 3); (b) indexing science content to local, indigenous trees(Semken, 2005); and (c) including a generative task (Land, Smith, & Zimmerman, 2013) whereby participantsused the photographic capabilities of the iPad to document the various parts of the life cycle processes in an oldgrowth forest (see Figure 5 for a participant’s life cycle collage created at the Arboretum).Figures 3, 4 and 5. Conceptual organizer screen (left); Conceptual organizer seedling (middle); Participant’s lifecycle collage created onsite with photographs taken at the Arboretum using an iPad (right).We report Iteration 2 findings from three data sources: (a) an assessment of declarative and conceptualknowledge, (b) photo collage artifacts developed by each participant, and (c) videos of participants interacting atthe Arboretum and a final interview. The participating children were given an 8-item assessment of life cyclefacts and concepts, provided in an open-ended response format, both before and immediately following thelearning activities. Learners received 1 point for each correct answer, and 0 points for an incorrect answer or noresponse, for a total possible score of 23 points. The pre-test mean score was 4.5 points (standard deviation 2.6)ICLS 2014 Proceedings1069© ISLSwhile the post-test mean was 14.3 (standard deviation 2.7) showing significant improvements (t = -8.647, p <0.001) after the exploration (see Table 1).Table 1: Paired-samples t-test of the pre- and post-test scoresMeanNPre-test scores4.50010Post-test scores14.30010***p < .001S.D.2.63522.7101T-8.647***For the photo collages, we analyzed artifacts and videorecords including: (a) the processes learnersused to create the photo collages, (b) elicitation interviews with the children about the photo collages, and (c)the actual photo collages created by the learners. An analysis of the artifacts showed that participating familiesaccurately applied what they had learned during the Tree Investigator activities to identify exemplars of thevarious life cycle stages in the old growth hardwood forest. In the video analysis, we documented that familiesshared their life cycle observations aloud with each other and with other families. For example, a mother anddaughter who found an oak seedling offered the seedling to other families to include on their photo collages.Overall, we found that the process of creating the photo collage artifacts was a collaborative endeavor betweenchildren and adults, child and child, and or child and naturalist. Some children consulted the naturalist to ensurethat they were photographing a sapling versus a seedling, as they observed tree species in the woods that theyhad not encountered during learning with mobile app (which focused on the oak tree). This sapling and seedlingdistinction was a difficult conception for children in the debriefing interviews, with many children simplystating that the sapling was a “bigger” or “older” tree than the seedling. (The seedling/sapling distinction wasalso a challenge on the knowledge assessment.) While a few science vocabulary words proved to be difficult forsome children to appropriate, the children consistently explained the life cycle conceptually during theirdebriefing interview. For example, during their interviews, often children used general terms to describe the treelife cycle— such as the seed grew in steps to become a grown tree capable of growing flowers and seed and thentrees eventually died. All participating children were able to take photographs and create a life cycle collage; infact, two learners took over 100 additional photographs while on-site during their visit. These two children didengage in learning tree life cycle concepts even while taking these extra photographs.DiscussionAs indicated by our Tree Investigators Iterations 1 and 2 preliminary findings, mobile devices can be used todeliver science content, support families’ scientific talk, provide access to related knowledge not always visiblein a place via augmentations, and create artifacts on-the-go through mobile apps. Across the Iterations of TreeInvestigators research, we found that mobile devices enabled the engagement with actual specimens at theArboretum. Researchers have expressed concern about “heads-down” technologies (e.g., Hsi, 2003), wherelearners spend time looking at the computer, rather than engaged with the scientific phenomenon. Here, wefound that the images and text, when supported by a naturalist, encouraged visitors to engage with the trees andother plants around them. Place-based educational aims (e.g., Semken, 2005) that guided our design weresuccessful in using the specific examples at the Arboretum as exemplars, as evidenced by the fact that learnerslooked for and found seeds, seedlings, saplings, mature trees, and snags (as well as fallen dead trees).ConclusionThe contribution of our design-based research study is in informing technologically-enhanced designs forlearning outside of school. While small in scope, this study suggests that place-based pedagogical efforts thatutilize mobile devices to support informal science education can enhance families’ learning experiences in theoutdoors. We advocate for additional research, based on the results from our exploratory study, on how mobiletechnologies can be used by families and other learners in out-of-school venues in relation to the creation ofphotographic artifacts, the need for scaffolding (Yoon, et al, 2012), and the role of different app structures.ReferencesAllen, S. (2002). Looking for learning in visitor talk: A methodological exploration. In G. Leinhardt, K.Crowley, & K. Knutson (Eds.), Learning conversations in museums (pp. 259-304). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.Chen, Y. S., Kao, T. C., & Sheu, J. P. (2005). Realizing outdoor independent learning with a butterfly-watchingmobile learning system. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 33(4), 395-417.Dunleavy, M., & Dede, C. (2014). Augmented reality teaching and learning. In M.J. Bishop & J. Elen(Eds.), Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and Technology (4th ed., Volume 2),pp. 735-745. New York: Macmillan.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1070© ISLSGruenewald, D. A. (2003). The best of both worlds: A critical pedagogy of place. Educationalresearcher, 32(4), 3-12.Klopfer, E. (2008). Augmented Learning: Research and Design of Mobile Educational Games. Cambridge, MA:MIT Press.Hsi, S. (2003). A study of user experiences mediated by nomadic web content in a museum. Journal ofComputer Assisted Learning, 19(3), 308-319.Land, S. M., Smith, B. K., & Zimmerman, H. T. (2013). Mobile technologies as tools for augmentingobservations and reflections in everyday informal environments. In (eds.) J. M. Spector, B.B. Lockee,S.E. Smaldino, & M. Herring. Learning, problem solving and mind tools: Essays in honor of David H.Jonassen. (pp. 214-228). New York: Routledge.Leinhardt, G., & Crowley, K. (1998). Museum learning as conversational elaboration: A proposal to capture,code, and analyze talk in museums. Report available at http://mlc.lrdc.pitt.edu/mlcLim, M., & Calabrese Barton, A. (2005). Science learning and a sense of place in a urban middle school.Cultural Studies of Science Education, 1(1), 107–142. doi:10.1007/s11422-005-9002-9Liu, T.-C., Peng, H., Wu, W.-H.,& Lin, M.-S. (2009). The effects of mobile natural-science learning based onthe 5E learning cycle: A case study. Educational Technology & Society, 12(4), 344–358.Quintana, C., Reiser, B., Davis, E., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R., Kyza, E., Edelson, D., & Soloway, E.(2004). A scaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 13(3), 337-386.Rogers, Y., Price, S., Fitzpatrick, G., Fleck, R., Harris, E., Smith, H., Randell, C., Muller, H., O'Malley, C.,Stanton, D., Thompson, M., & Weal, M. (2004). Ambient Wood: Designing new forms of digitalaugmentation for learning outdoors. Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on IDC. (p. 3-10).Semken, S. (2005). Sense of place and place-based introductory geoscience teaching for American Indian andAlaska Native undergraduates. Journal of Geoscience Education, 53(2), 149–157.Sobel, D. (2004). Place-based Education: Connecting Classroom and Community. Nature and Listening, 4.http://www.antiochne.edu/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/pbexcerpt.pdfSmith, G. (2002). Place-based education: Learning to be where we are. Phi Delta Kappan, 83, 584–594.Squire, K., & Klopfer, E. (2007). Augmented reality simulations on handheld computers. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 16(3), 371 - 413.Squire, K. D., & Jan, M. (2007). Mad City Mystery: Developing scientific argumentation skills with a placebased augmented reality game on handheld computers. Journal of Science Education and Technology,16(1), 5-29.Tan, T. H., Liu, T. Y., & Chang, C. C. (2007). Development and evaluation of an RFID-based ubiquitouslearning environment for outdoor learning. Interactive Learning Environments, 15(3), 253-269.Tan, E., & So, H. J. (2011). Location-based collaborative learning at a geography trail: Examining therelationship among task design, facilitation, and discourse type. In H. Spada, G. Stahl, N. Miyake, &N. Law (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2011 CSCL Conference (p. 41-48).Tzou, C., Scalone, G., & Bell, P. (2010). The role of environmental narratives and social positioning in howplace gets constructed for and by youth. Equity & Excellence in Education, 43(1), 105-119.Warschauer, M., & Matuchniak, T. (2010). New technology and digital worlds: Analyzing evidence of equity inaccess, use, and outcomes. Review of Research in Education, 34(1), 179-225Yardi, S., & Bruckman, A. (2012). Income, race, and class: exploring socioeconomic differences in familytechnology use. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in ComputingSystems (pp. 3041-3050). ACM. Doi: 10.1145/2207676.2208716.Yoon, S. A., Elinich, K., Wang, J., Steinmeier, C., & Tucker, S. (2012). Using augmented reality andknowledge-building scaffolds to improve learning in a science museum. International Journal ofComputer-Supported Collaborative Learning. doi:10.1007/s11412-012-9156-xZimmerman, H. T., Land, S. M., McClain, L.R., Mohney, M. R., Choi, G-W., & Salman, F. H. (2013). TreeInvestigators: Supporting Families and Youth to Coordinate Observations with Scientific Knowledge.International Journal of Science Education. Advance online publication.DOI:10.1080/21548455.2013.832437. pp. 1-24.AcknowledgementWe appreciate our partners that made this learning research possible: the Arboretum at Penn State, Shaver’sCreek Environmental Center, the Penn State Center for Online Innovation in Learning, and the Penn StateEducation Technology Services unit Teaching and Learning with Technology. We acknowledge thecontributions of our colleagues in the Augmented and Mobile Learning Research Group(sites.psu.edu/augmentedlearning/). We express our gratitude to the family participants for joining our project.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1071© ISLS