Learning Across Settings:Towards Transformative Trajectories of PracticeShirin Vossoughi, Stanford University, Graduate School of Education and SF Exploratorium,shirinvossoughi@gmail.comMeg Escudé, SF Exploratorium, mescude@exploratorium.edu 	  Fan Kong, University of Washington, fan.kong1@gmail.com	  Elizabeth Mendoza, University of Colorado, Boulder, Elizabeth.Mendoza@Colorado.eduMolly Shea, SF Exploratorium, mshea@exploratorium.eduAbstract: This symposium brings together examples of movement across space, time andcontext to understand the details of building educational settings that allow for participants tocreate connections and grapple with the contradictions that arise as they move across settings.These analyses are examples of how students appropriate tools and make connections toassemble valued trajectories of learning. Moreover the cases provide insight into howresearchers and practitioners can expand their focus on learning to include the connections andpossible coordination across educational experiences in various contexts: school, afterschoolprograms, home, museums, and community spaces. A focus on cross setting learningrecognizes all of these places as rich learning environments with their own histories andcultural practices. We are ultimately interested in how people make sense of and drawconnections across settings in order to enhance the possibilities for equity oriented andtransformative learning.General IntroductionLearning scientists are increasingly concerned with the ecologies of learning—the distributed network ofhistories, locations, relationships, and artifacts—that people work with as they appropriate new tools andpractices (Engeström, 1987; Nespor, 1994; Gutierrez et al, 2010; Leander, K. M., Phillips, N. C., Taylor, K. H.,2010; Rahm, 2012). Attention to learning as a distributed process that happens across settings and over time hasimplications for how we study learning, design expansive learning environments, and support the developmentof educators (Jurow, 2005; Hall, R., Wright, K. & Wieckert, K., 2007). Researchers, program designers, andteachers are positioned to attend to sense-making practices as they extend beyond the artificially bounded spacetime continuum of the single setting or activity. Yet, as our attention turns to cross-setting learning, we need amultiplicity of cases and examples that help illustrate what this learning looks like in practice. Deepening ourunderstandings of what takes hold as people move within and across settings (Street, 1995; Vossoughi &Gutierrez, in press) also demands a shift in focus from the individual and the singular environment to themultiple environments and the constellation of tools and relationships that arise in and across settings.To this end, the proposed symposium asks: How do ideas, tools and practices travel across settings?How might fine-grained analysis of such movement help illuminate the dynamics of appropriation as a form ofdeep learning? More broadly: what are the methodological and pedagogical implications of attending to learningacross settings? We argue throughout that tracing the appropriation of tools and practices across settings isessential for studying learning in ways that connect micro-genetic, onto-genetic and socio-cultural change (Hall,R. & Horne, L., 2012). As Rogoff (1998) argues, appropriation involves shifts in participation that contribute toand help transform the environment or practice itself. Moreover, a focus on cross-setting learning can push thefield to better understand both the interdependence and potential disjuncture of identities and learningexperiences across multiple locations of participation.Designs for learning environments are informed by our understanding of what robust learning is andhow it is cultivated. Accordingly, understanding how tools and practices move (or do not move) across settingsoffers new insights for organizing learning environments within local communities as connected to larger social,political and historical spheres of activity (Nespor, 1994; Lave, 2012). For example, supporting the kinds oflearning experiences where students are actively constructing meaning and knowledge within the context oftheir everyday lived experiences requires researchers and practitioners alike to take seriously the multiple placesand practices that students draw upon to make new ideas, dispositions, and skills meaningful. As a number ofscholars have argued, the pedagogical leveraging of everyday experience is all the more pressing for youthwhose home and community lives are treated as deficits to be overcome rather than resources to draw upon(Gonzalez, et. al., 2005; Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003). Similarly, Rahm (2012) argues that ‘while single spacebased research of informal learning is important, it rarely questions the role of such learning in a larger networkof practices and within a web of practices differentiated by power.’ From this vantage point, the institutional andpedagogical conditions that support learning across settings have the potential to disrupt and transform largerICLS 2014 Proceedings1474© ISLSsocial hierarchies.We argue that the learning sciences would benefit from a closer examination of how theseappropriations become significant and incorporated across place.Collectively, the three papers in this symposium will focus on learning in hybrid spaces that seek toconnect practices across settings and explicitly organize for transformative possibilities. Specifically, the authorstrace tools and practices as they travel and contribute to the development of hybrid spaces (Soja,1989; Gutiérrez,2008). Vossoughi, Escudé and Kong explore pedagogical practices that make explicit connections betweenafter-school, home and school to encourage appropriation. Mendoza traces how pedagogical tools serve multiplefunctions across a social design experiment and work to create multiple layers of learning and identity andutilize contradictions as a source of learning. Shea follows graduate students through a distributed network ofbusiness school activists to see how the group appropriated tools and repurposed them in their attempts todisrupt local circumstancesAll of our papers share a methodological focus on appropriating tools across settings and a sensibilitythat involves asking: who gets to introduce tools within hybrid spaces? For what purposes? In his role asdiscussant, Manuel Espinoza (University of Colorado at Denver) will use his expertise in studying the momentto-moment transformation of educational spaces through language, tools, and narrative to provide insight andcritical feedback with regards to the development of pedagogical design and imagination. His work on“educational sanctuary” is particularly relevant to our focus on hybrid spaces.Tinkering and Appropriation: The Pedagogical and Equity Implications ofLearning Across SettingsShirin Vossoughi, Meg Escudé, Fan KongThis paper looks closely at the role of cross setting learning in an after-school program organized aroundtinkering and making. This program is partnership between a science museum and two local Boys and GirlsClubs, which work to develop and implement a sustained tinkering curriculum focused on interdisciplinary andartful forms of STEM learning. In line with the philosophies of the Boys and Girls Clubs, learning is alsogrounded in youth development and play. Adults, teens and children meet in a workshop setting to design andco-create artifacts such as scribbling machines, stop-motion animation films, shadow plays, wooden pinballmachines and musical instruments.From its inception, this project has been driven by equity-oriented goals. The after-school programpredominantly serves immigrant and diasporic youth from communities with restricted access to educational andeconomic opportunities. Rather than defining equity (only) as the broadening of access to high-quality STEMeducation, we have been working to study the pedagogical “how” of equity in a tinkering context: the momentto moment practices that help build an inclusive, challenging and intellectually respectful learning environmentfor all participants (Vossoughi, et. al., 2013). In studying and defining some of the design principles thatconstitute equity-oriented practice, we have identified “connections across settings” as a core value.This paper draws on ethnographic data collected over the last year and a half to examine and illustratethe multiple meanings of cross setting learning in a tinkering context (Erickson, 1986). This ethnographic dataincludes: field notes, audio-video recordings of both whole group and small group tinkering activity,photographs of students artifacts over time, and interviews with children, parents and educators. In particular,this presentation looks closely at moments that have been coded as illustrating cross setting learning, such as:specific moves made by educators to draw on and leverage children’s repertoires of practice (Gutiérrez &Rogoff, 2003), moments within the program when participants make connections to experiences and artifactsfrom home, school and other spaces outside the after-school setting, and moments when ideas, tools andpractices “travel” from the tinkering setting to other contexts. In this vein, we have been studying the process ofappropriation both in terms of how children draw tools/practices from other parts of their lives into the tinkeringsetting and how they draw on the tools/practices developed in the tinkering setting to approach problemsencountered outside the setting in new ways, or to extend their making/tinkering practice beyond the time-spaceof the after-school program. We are interested in better understanding how these moments reflect and constitutedeep forms of learning – i.e. what they signify in terms of children’s shifting participation in and relationshipwith science-rich tinkering practices (Nasir, et. al, 2006).We argue that designing and organizing learning in ways that cultivate connections across settingssupports equity-oriented goals by widening definitions of learning, intelligence and science, recognizing andleveraging children’s strengths, and drawing meaningful connections between the scientific and the everyday(Gonzalez, et. al., 2005; Vygotsky, 1986). We also address possible tensions that emerge in this work: such asthe powerful role dominant definitions of “science” play in enabling or constraining cross-setting learning, andthe potential disjuncture between learning in a setting that feels like “play” and carrying those experiences overinto settings that feel like “school” (and vice versa). Here, we include a discussion of the kinds of reflection andopenness involved - among children, educators and researchers - in allowing the settings themselves (school,home, after-school) to learn from one another. We conclude with reflections on the specific methodologicalICLS 2014 Proceedings1475© ISLSpractices that help make the dynamics of cross setting learning visible, available for interpretation and useful forthe continuous process of design and pedagogy (Vossoughi & Gutiérrez, in press).Finally, in line with collaborative action research (Erickson, 2006) and social design experiments(Gutiérrez & Vossoughi, 2010), our research is deeply embedded in program design and implementation.Researchers and educators collaboratively design pedagogical environments and reflect on the kinds of shiftsthat emerge among participants in the after-school settings. In practice, this process of co-design involveseducators serving as contributing members of the research team, and researchers participating as co-designers ofcurriculum and pedagogy. The director and lead educator of the After-School Tinkering Program (co-author onthis paper) therefore played a central role in co-designing research questions, observational and interviewprotocols, codes and analyses, and serves as one of the authors on this paper.Mediated Boundary Crossing: Traveling with Pedagogical Artifacts acrossSpaceElizabeth MendozaIn an effort to address the enduring and pervasive division between theory and practice, this paper examines theway tools, or pedagogical artifacts, move across multiple settings to foster praxis, theoretical cohesion acrosssettings and multiple layers of learning for undergraduate and graduate students. Through the documentationand analysis of a social design experiment—which seeks to create and study change and work toward praxiswith an aim of promoting equitable practices for non-dominant students (Gutierrez & Vossoughi, 2010)—thisstudy traced tools across multiple spaces to provide insight to their potential of becoming multi-faceted.With the notion of movement as learning (Gutiérrez, 2008), theory is utilized to create robust teachingand learning spaces and practice is used to more deeply understand theory. Of import, this praxis does nothappen spontaneously or through movement alone (Engeström 2001, Engeström & Sannino, 2009). Itnecessitates intentionally designing pedagogical tools that move across each unique space, - a process ofmediated boundary crossing.I draw on data from El Pueblo Mágico, a social design experiment, that engages undergraduate studentsthrough pre-service teacher course, elementary students through an associated elementary school practicum siteand a larger research/instructional team comprised of graduate students and faculty. For this paper, I analyzeaudio data from the instructional team and video and class assignments from the undergraduate course. Withparticular attention to the learning process of the instructional team and undergraduate students, I detail the toolsutilized across spaces and analyze the shift in the role of the tool, or learning artifact, depending on the space itoccupies. Specifically, I follow the weekly response to reading assignment and Cognitive Ethnographies—undergraduate practicum site field notes—through the multiple settings including: instructional team meetings,individual writing processes and whole group class discussions. By tracing pedagogical tools in this way, Idemonstrate how each pedagogical tool was utilized uniquely, yet consistently, in each setting to deepen theunderstanding of theory and practice for all involved participants. Through the examples, I demonstrate the waycommon sense notions (Gramsci, 1999) of learning and teaching shift for undergraduates and deepened forgraduate students. In particular, I focus on the ways these pedagogical tools work to promote reflectivepractices that start to highlight the ways our everyday, moment-to-moment actions are an extension of our largersocietal common sense notions and the tensions that arise when these common sense notions are challenged bymore robust theoretical understandings learning and teaching. The contribution of this paper is to demonstratethe way that the mediating pedagogical tools have potential to promote cohesion across learning ecologies andcreate multiple layers of learning across spaces.Organizing Business for Social and Environmental Sustainability: Learning inan Emerging Field of PracticeMolly Shea“As part of changing our activity in changing circumstances, we need to consider the mostpolitically critical sites of political change, that is we need to make familiar and recognizableour own everyday possibilities for ‘revolutionary praxis’ and take them up in our researchpractices” (Lave, 2012).A growing number of thinkers have posed a challenge to the field of education researchers to considermethodological and theoretical ways to study the processes by which persons are produced and producethemselves in historical and political terms (Drier, 2008; Holland, 2008; Lave, 2012; Rahm, 2012). I studied agroup of students within a graduate school of business working to develop and re-form business expertise. Inthis context, students brought examples and arguments from other contexts—from conference talks to tripleICLS 2014 Proceedings1476© ISLSbottom line businesses—to change local business curriculum and entice the broader business community torevise or reimagine business practices. Studying learning as a means of reassembling the world for reimaginedsocial futures requires attention to collective activities that draw on ideas from multiple locations to expand thevision of learning in local settings. I foreground a group of graduate students as they move across settings tobetter understand the work to reassemble political economies of knowledge in local settings.There is an expanding network of young people interested in reorganizing business to account for thesocial and environmental affects of doing business within society. However these students enter businessschools largely focused on business practices narrowly defined by generating profits in isolation from largersocial issues. This multi-sited, human-centered ethnography explored how a group of business school studentsleveraged a larger social movement of business activists learning to reassemble knowledge and change acceptedbusiness practices in an attempt to “occupy wall street from within”. Carl, Virginia, and Emma were 3 of the 38students from the local business school who joined an international organization, Net Impact, focused onchanging the business model. They all attended the annual NI conference, engaged with NI ideas, events, andactivities in the local business school setting, and co-developed a small innovation that became an organizingidea framing local activism work.The study intentionally focused on student activity outside of formal classrooms. Rather than a moretraditional study of education that privileges learning and activity in one setting, I follow students across settingsas they interrogate the assumptions associated with the status quo curriculum of the classroom. The studentsleveraged a powerful network of reformers and activists from around the world to begin to disrupt commonlyheld practices within the discipline of business. By reaching beyond the local context, students appropriated newtools from distant places as a way to introduce new arguments and practices into their school. Movement acrosssettings introduced new tools into the local context and these examples from distant places became fundamentalto the collective activity of challenging a valued knowledge base and corresponding curricular norms withinbusiness. When the world and your local context does not look the way you would like it to, you have to drawon other places. Learning as “praxis” involves grasping for examples from history, aspirational speeches aboutthe future, or other spaces to reassemble alternative visions for valued social futures. The sense making practicesinvolved in appropriating tools as people move across place are an important mechanism for understandinglearning as organizing for new forms of learning and identity trajectories. The vision of what is possible asgroups struggle to assemble new ways of practicing within contentious spaces relies heavily on appropriatednew tools from other places.The study privileges movement through a network to explore how people learn to innovate in complexand contentious spaces where established practices are difficult to disrupt. The flows of material resources,ideas, and practices routed through the network comprising people, things, and ideas brought new connectionsinto spaces to reimagine local places and practices. The network of sustainable business facilitated themovement of ideas and tools such that people could use them to question current practices in the local setting.This paper explored a small innovation that emerged through movement across space and was collectivelyappropriated in the local setting to reimage business practices.ReferencesDreier, O. (1998). Psychotherapy in Everyday Life. Harvard University Press.Eisenhart, M. A., & Holland, D. C. (2001). Gender constructs and career commitments. Women, science, andtechnology: A reader in feminist science studies, 26.Eisenhart, M. (2001). Educational ethnography past, present, and future: Ideas to think with. EducationalResearcher, 30(8), 16-27.Engeström, Y. (2001). Expansive Learning at Work: toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization. Journalof Education and Work, 16 (1), 133-156Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and futurechallenges. Educational Research Review, 5(1), 1-24.Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching. In M. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbookof research on teaching (pp. 119-161). New York, NY: Macmillan.Erickson, F. (2006). Studying side by side: Collaborative action ethnography in educational research. In G.Spindler & L. Hammond (Eds.), Innovations in educational ethnography: Theory, methods and results(pp. 235-257). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Freire, P. (1970/2002). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Continuum.Gonzalez, N., Moll, L. C., & Amanti, C. (Eds.). (2005). Funds of knowledge: Theorizing practices inhouseholds, communities and classrooms. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Gutiérrez, K.D. (2008). Developing a Sociocritical Literacy in the Third Space. Reading Research Quarterly.43(2).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1477© ISLSGutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice.Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19-25.Gutiérrez, K., & Vossoughi, S. (2010). “Lifting off the ground to return anew”: Documenting and designing forequity and transformation through social design experiments, Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1-2),100-117.Gramsci, A (1999). Selections from the prison notebooks. New York: International PublishersHall, R., Wright, K., & Wieckert, K. (2007). Interactive and historical processes of dis- tributing statisticalconcepts through work organization. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 14(1–2), 103–127.Hall, R., & Horn, I. S. (2012). Talk and Conceptual Change at Work: Adequate Representation and EpistemicStance in a Comparative Analysis of Statistical Consulting and Teacher Workgroups. Mind, Culture,and Activity, 19(3), 240-258.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Schor, J, Sefton-Green, J. & Watkins,S. C. (2013). Connected learning: An agenda for research and design. Irvine, CA: Digital Learningand Media Research Hub.Jurow, A.S. (2005) Shifting engagements in figured worlds: Middle school mathematics students’ participationin an architectural design project. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(1), 35-67.Jurow, A.S., Hall, R., & Ma, J. (2008). Expanding the disciplinary expertise of a middle school mathematicsclassroom: Re-contextualizing student models in conversations with visiting specialists. The Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 17(3), 338-380.Lave, J., Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge.Lave, J. (2012). Changing Practice. Mind, Culture and Activity, 19(2),156-171.Law, J. (1992). Notes on the theory of the actor-network: ordering, strategy, and heterogeneity. SystemicPractice and Action Research, 5(4), 379-393Leander, K. M., Phillips, N. C., & Taylor, K. H. (2010). The changing social spaces of learning: Mapping newmobilities. Review of Research in Education, 34, 329-394.Nasir, N.S., Rosebery, A.S., Warren B., & Lee, C.D. (2006). Learning as a cultural process: Achieving equitythrough diversity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 489504). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Nespor, J. (1997). Tangled Up in School: Politics, Space, Bodies, and Signs in the Educational Process.Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Nespor, J. (1994). Knowledge in Motion. Space, Time and Curriculum in Undergraduate Physics andManagement. London, Falmer Press.Rahm, J. (2012). Collaborative imaginaries and multi-sited ethnography: space-time dimensions of engagementin an afterschool science programme for girls. Ethnography and Education. 7(2), 247-264.Soja, E.W. (1989). Postmodern geographies: The reassertion of space in critical social theory. New York:Verso.Vossoughi, S., Escudé, M., Kong, F. & Hooper, P. (2013). Tinkering, learning and equity in the after-schoolsetting. FabLearn Conference Proceedings. Stanford University. 	  Vossoughi, S. & Gutiérrez, K. (In press). Studying movement, hybridity, and change: Toward a multi-sitedsensibility for research on learning across contexts and borders. NSSE Yearbook. Designingeducational programs with children and youth: Alternative & flexible contexts for learning.Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1478© ISLSPosters