Modeling the Dynamics of Ontological Reasoning in PhysicsLele Mathis and Ayush Gupta, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742.lelemathis@gmail.com, ayush@umd.eduAbstract: The form of learners’ ontologies of physics concepts such as heat and electriccurrent is a subject of current debate within the learning sciences. In one view, there is acognitive barrier to transitioning between ontological categories; others argue that experts andnovices transition flexibly between ontological categories. In this poster, we support the latterview through arguing that experts coordinate transitions between ontological categories forheat and electric current and discuss the instructional implications of these results.IntroductionThe form of learners’ science knowledge has been a topic of much debate within the learning sciences, hingingon the level of coherence and fragmentation the different perspectives attribute to naive science knowledge(diSessa, 2006). One prominent perspective is that developed by Chi (Chi, 2005), in which experts’ and novices’reasoning about a science concept is constrained by their ontological commitments (commitments about whetherthe particular science concept can be categorized as matter/substance or a process). Once formed, thesecommitments are difficult to change except through conceptual change processes, leading to the robustness ofontological misconceptions (defined as mis-categorizations by novices). In this view, concepts such as heat,light, electric current are emergent processes and classified as such by experts. Novices tend to mis-categorizethese concepts in the substance/matter or the direct process categories either due to a commitment to thesecategories, or due to a lack of the emergent process schema.Recently, however, this view has been challenged, showing evidence that novices can and do reasonacross ontological categories (Gupta, Hammer, & Redish, 2010; Hammer, Gupta, & Redish, 2011) and thatnovices do not lack the emergent process schema (Levy & Wilensky, 2008). In this poster, we argue against thenotion of ontological commitments: we present evidence that graduate students reasoning about heat oftenswitch from speaking in terms of one ontology to another. We investigate the fine-timescale dynamics of suchswitching and posit that cues from the problem statement or interviewer, explanatory demands, learners’ in-themoment epistemological stances, and how they view the purpose of their explanation can contribute to theontology underlying their reasoning as well as to transitioning to a different ontological description of heat.Methods: Data Collection, Selection, and AnalysisThe data comes from five one-hour videotaped interviews of physics graduate students from a previous project.The interview protocol followed Chi’s and Slotta’s tasks (Slotta, Chi, & Joram, 1995) to examine physicsnovices’ and experts’ ontologies of electric current, heat, and light. As part of the first author’s high schoolmagnet research internship, the heat and electric current sections of three of the interviews were selected for thisanalysis. Selection size was based on considerations of a high-school student research project.The analysis occurred in two phases. First, transcripts of Sam’s utterances in the selected portions weredivided into 30 second segments and each segment was coded as reflecting matter or emergent-processontologies using the predicate analysis method (Slotta & Chi, 2006). Instead of doing summary counts ofpredicate use for a topic, we plotted the predicate use over time. Second, we did a fine-grained analysis of theinterviews, focusing more on segments where we noted category transitions (identified from the predicate plots).Loosely drawing on tools from knowledge analysis (Parnafes & diSessa, 2013) and discourse and framinganalysis (Gee, 1999; Tannen, 1993), we aimed at a fine-timescale account of the transitions in the use ofontological categories, taking into account the content of talk as well as gestures, gaze, and tone of voice to inferthe conceptual knowledge, epistemologies, and framings in use in the moment.AnalysisWe present excerpts of our analysis of one of the interviews. Figure 1 shows the graph for Sam’s (pseudonym)use of matter and emergent process predicates.(A)(B)Figure 1 Predicate use for Sam for the interview sections on (A) Electric Current and (B) Heat. 30-second interviewsegments are marked on the horizontal axis. Frequency of predicate use within a 30-second segment is marked onthe vertical axis. Striped bars represent emergent-process predicates. Solid Bars represent matter predicates.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1605© ISLSIn this poster paper, we present the story of how one ontological transition plays out from the electriccurrent section of the interview at the 22-nd segment. At this point, Sam was answering a question about twocircuits each with one bulb attached to a battery, identical except that one has a longer wire and so the bulb isfarther away from the battery. Sam stated that this is similar to an earlier question when she had to decide if “thecurrent starts at the battery and has to travel to the light bulb.” However, she rejected that idea, saying instead,“The potential for current is everywhere in the wire at the same time (gestures in circular motion with arms toshow the circuit). There are electrons scattered throughout that, or, not scattered. but spread throughout thatwire, so as soon as one starts moving, they all move. So they are both gonna illuminate at exactly the sametime.” Following this, the interviewer asked her which bulb is glowing more brightly. First, Sam posed thequestion “Are we assuming resistance-less wires?” to which the interviewer said, “You tell me why that wouldmatter.” Sam explained how resistance affects brightness when the wires are different lengths because“resistance saps away” voltage as “current goes through the length of wire” and so “less voltage getting put intoyour light bulb.” Her gestures confirm that she is thinking of an entity physically moving through the wire.Sam, contrary to the ontological framework of Chi and Slotta, showed no cognitive resistance toswitching between matter and emergent process categories: in the first segment, talking about long and shortwires, Sam’s explanation relies on an emergent-process understanding of current resulting from thesimultaneous motion of electrons everywhere in the wires. Moments later, explaining resistance Sam’s speechand gestures reflect a matter-view of current flow in a circuit. Also, notable is Sam’s awareness, in eachsegment of the kinds of knowledge resources available to her and carefully chooses how to answer: sheexplicitly discusses the alternative way of reasoning and rejects in the earlier segment; later, even beforeanswering she is aware that her answer would depend on whether wires have resistance or not and seeks toclarify that. Her responses here indicate some level of metacognitive awareness (what kind of knowledge isavailable to me) and epistemological evaluation (what kind of knowledge is relevant in this particular context).Summary and ImplicationsIn this poster, we present our results (using fine-grained video analysis as well as verbal protocol analysis) thatgraduate students in physics can and do transition between ontological categories in their explanations ofphenomenon related to heat and electric current. We show that such transitions are often influenced by theparticular problem context (the specific phenomenon being explained within the larger category of heat andcurrent) as well as metacognitive and epistemological evaluations. We argue that the target of ontologicalexpertise should not be ontological conceptual change, where a concept is supposed to be re-categorized withinit’s correct ontological category. Our results indicate that there might not be one “correct” ontological category(at least as reflected in experts’ behaviors); nor do we see a cognitive barrier to flexibly transitioning betweencategories. Rather, the target of ontological expertise might lie in an awareness of all the knowledge resourcesthat could potentially be relevant to a particular situation and in developing metacognitive and epistemologicalresources to figure out what is the most productive way to reason in a given context.ReferencesChi, M. T. . (2005). Commonsense conceptions of emergent processes: Why some misconceptions are robust.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 161–199.diSessa, A. A. (2006). A History of Conceptual Change Research: Threads and Fault Lines. In The Cambridgehandbook of: The learning sciences (pp. 265–281). New York, NY, US: Cambridge University Press.Gee, J. P. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method. Routledge.Gupta, A., Hammer, D., & Redish, E. F. (2010). The Case for Dynamic Models of Learners’ Ontologies inPhysics. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(3), 285–321.Hammer, D., Gupta, A., & Redish, E. F. (2011). On Static and Dynamic Intuitive Ontologies. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 20(1), 163–168. doi:10.1080/10508406.2011.537977Levy, S. T., & Wilensky, U. (2008). Inventing a “Mid Level” to Make Ends Meet: Reasoning between theLevels of Complexity. Cognition and Instruction, 26(1), 1–47. doi:10.1080/07370000701798479Parnafes, O., & diSessa, A. A. (2013). Microgenetic Learning Analysis: A Methodology for StudyingKnowledge in Transition. Human Development, 56(1), 5–37. doi:10.1159/000342945Slotta, J. D., & Chi, M. T. H. (2006). Helping students understand challenging topics in science throughontology training. Cognition and Instruction, 24(2), 261–289.Slotta, J. D., Chi, M. T. H., & Joram, E. (1995). Assessing students’ misclassifications of physics concepts: Anontological basis for conceptual change. Cognition and Instruction, 13(3), 373–400.Tannen, D. (1993). Framing in discourse. New York: Oxford University Press.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the interview volunteers. We thank Renee Michelle Goertzen for conducting the interviews.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1606© ISLS