A Case Study Examining the Microdynamics of Social Positioningwithin the Context of Collaborative Group WorkLesley Dookie, University of Toronto, 252 Bloor St. W., Toronto, Canada, lesley.dookie@utoronto.caAbstract: During collaborative group work, students from non-dominant social groups can bepositioned by classmates in ways that hinder their opportunities to learn and becomesuccessful mathematics students. Drawing from an episode of videotaped collaborative groupwork, this qualitative case study examines the microdynamics of positioning and, using astimulated recall interview technique, explores how a girl who was working with a group ofboys identifies, interprets, and explains these moment-to-moment acts of positioning. Thefindings point to the strength of this methodological triangulation by further elucidating verbaland non-verbal forms of positioning. Specifically, the results illustrate how the focal studentwas prevented access to shared learning artifacts and group discussion due to her groupmembers’ (likely unintended) ‘exclusive talk’ and ‘physical blocks’. Whether and how theobserved acts of positioning are associated with social categories (i.e., gender) are discussedand implications for the implementation of collaborative learning activities are raised.Becoming successful in mathematics class is a challenging feat that is more attainable for some students thanothers. There is a growing body of work arguing that who students are influences their access to learningopportunities and the quality of their interpersonal interactions within the classroom (Gee, 2000). That is,women and students of color are negatively stereotyped and historically marginalized within the mathematicsdomain and research documents the ways in which mathematics learning is racialized and gendered (Esmonde& Langer-Osuna, 2012; Langer-Osuna, 2011; Martin, 2006). Within mathematics classrooms, collaborativelearning activities wherein girls and/or students of color work with students from dominant social groups havebeen documented as being rife with issues of power and inequity (e.g., Esmonde & Dookie, 2012; LangerOsuna, 2011; Leander, 2004). Given the trending reform movements in mathematics education that endorsemeaning-making through collaborative learning opportunities (e.g., Gutiérrez, 2002), there is a push for equityfocused research to understand not only the sociohistorical systems of power that underlie these collaborativelearning contexts, but also how this power is constructed through moment-to-moment interactions betweenstudents. This understanding can help further elucidate the subtle yet pervasive ways in which students fromnon-dominant social groups are hindered from becoming successful in mathematics class.Theoretical PerspectivesUnderstanding Learning and IdentityThis work is grounded in sociocultural conceptualizations of learning and identity. Learning, according tosociocultural theory, is mediated by interpersonal interactions and the use of artifacts (i.e., objects that havebecome meaningful over time as a result of their repeated use in goal-directed human activity, Cole, 1996;Vygotsky, 1986). Sociocultural theorists link the process of learning with identity development (Wortham,2006), positing that learning is not merely about acquiring knowledge and mastering skills, but includes shifts inidentity (Lave & Wenger, 1991) and ‘becoming’ (Nasir, 2002).From this theoretical standpoint, identity is a social construct that is fluid in nature (Nasir, 2002),emerges through interpersonal interactions (Holland, Lachiocotte Jr., Skinner & Cain, 2001), and evolves as oneconstucts a notion of self within the context of particular practices such as mathematics learning (Nasir & Hand,2008). Nasir and Hand (2008) use the term practice-linked identity to describe, “the identities that people cometo take on, construct, and embrace that are linked to participation in particular social and cultural practices”(Nasir & Hand, 2008, p. 147). There is an imaginative component to this process of identitiy development inthat, over time and repeated experiences, students in mathematics classrooms, for example, may come to seethemselves in ways that incorporate mathematics (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Nasir, 2002). For example, drawingfrom the principles of learning and identity developed by Nasir (2002), when a student comes to learn a newmathematical concept, this can offer them new ways to participate in collaborative activities which can allowthem to further develop their identities relative to the mathematics community. By providing opportunities formeaningful participation, engagement, and self-expression, practices can support the development of positivepractice-linked identities and thus faciliate learning (Nasir & Hand, 2008). At the same time, however,experiences that deny these opportunities and limit students to marginal forms of participation can lead to thedevelopment of negative practice-linked identities and hinder learning. With this in mind, the present studyseeks to better understand the social processes that serve to marginalize students within the context ofcollaborative group work.ICLS 2014 Proceedings402© ISLSTo account for the ways positive or negative practice-linked identities can develop over time throughmoment-to-moment interpersonal interactions, I draw on the notion of positional identities. Holland and hercolleagues (2001) assert that moment-to-moment interpersonal interactions position individuals in the socialworld in ways that provide them with differential access to spaces, conversations, and overall participation in apractice. Moment-to-moment acts of positioning can be implicit or explicit and intentional or unintentional. Todemonstrate the microdynamics of positioning and how it unfolds through interaction, Leander (2002) analyzedtalk and traced the physical organization of students, including their eye gaze and bodily orientation. Throughthis microanalysis, Leander was able to demonstrate how one girl was ‘silenced’ by a group of boys during aclassroom interaction. Within the context of collaborative mathematical group work, the ways in which studentsare positioned through their moment-to-moment interactions with classmates can have a profound impact ontheir opportunities to learn. For example, Esmonde and Dookie (2012) engaged in a microanalysis of studentinteractions within the context of collaborative group work to demonstrate the mechanics of marginalization andthe ways in which one student was negatively positioned by her group members through both verbal and nonverbal means. Similarly, through the application of their Differential Influence framework, Engle, Langer-Osunaand McKinney de Royston (2008) demonstrated how students become influential in collaborative group work inpart through their differential access to interactional spaces and the conversational floor. Dookie and Esmonde(2012) build on this work by demonstrating how the construction of power and influence is also shaped bystudents’ access to shared learning artifacts within the context of collaborative group work, with greater accessto artifacts facilitating more central forms of participation in the group activity.Taken together, there is a growing body of work investigating the construction of power and themechanics of positioning within collaborative learning contexts. This research is also beginning to reveal theways in which positioning is tied to social identity (i.e., social categories such as race and gender). For example,empirical studies demonstrate how students from dominant racial and gender groups have greater access tolearning opportunities within collaborative group work while the participation of students from non-dominantsocial groups is constrained (Langer-Osuna, 2011; Kurth, Anderson, & Palinscar, 2002).Student Voice as a Critical Research PerspectiveWhat is less understood is how moment-to-moment acts of positioning are experienced and interpreted bystudents from non-dominant racial and gender groups. Based on the tenets of critical race theory (LadsonBillings & Tate, 1995), it is important to employ interview methods in research involving individuals from nondominant social groups in order to provide them with voice. This perspective is essential in truly understandingthe lived experiences of those who are marginalized and oppressed by society and is particularly importantwithin the context of group work among culturally and racially heterogeneous students wherein marginalizationmay be routinely experienced by students from non-dominant social groups (e.g., Kurth et al., 2002; LangerOsuna, 2011). Furthermore, in the endeavor to better understand how acts of positioning are associated withsocial identity, it is important to gain an understanding of how these acts are interpreted by those who are on thereceiving end. For example, microaggressions (i.e., “brief and commonplace daily verbal, behavioral, andenvironmental indignities, whether intentional or unintentional, that communicate hostile, derogatory, ornegative racial slights and insults to the target person or group” Sue, Capodilupo, Torino, Bucceri, Holder,Nadal, & Esquilin, 2007, p. 273) can be conceptualized as forms of marginalization that are tied to particularsocial categories. Microaggressions manifest in everyday interracial and/or intersexual interactions and aresubtly delivered verbally and non-verbally. Particular facial expressions, gestures, tones, and utterances can bemicroaggressions depending on the context (Solórzano, Ceja, & Yosso, 2000). For example, within a workplace,if a male addresses a female subordinate as ‘sweetie’, she may experience this interaction as a microaggression.Researchers who investigate microaggressions assert that these marginalizing experiences are subjective innature, can only be identified by those who experience them, and are therefore best investigated throughinterview methods (Solórzano et al., 2000; Sue et al., 2007).Previous research investigating the mechanics of positioning involves video recorded observations ofstudent collaboration as well as microanalyses of this data. This work is limited to only what can be seen invideo data. As third party observers, there is danger in making assumptions about students’ interpretations andexperiences (e.g., Leander, 2004). The present study aims to extend previous work by adding a layer of analysisthat considers a focal student’s reaction to verbal and non-verbal forms of positioning. Specifically, focusing inon a segment of video recorded collaborative group work and using stimulated recall interview techniques, thiscase study seeks to investigate: (1) the microdynamics of positioning within the context of collaborative groupwork and (2) whether and how a focal student from a non-dominant social group identifies, interprets, andexplains these acts of positioning. This methodological triangulation can offer further insight into themicrodynamics of positioning and provide a more nuanced understanding of how students from non-dominantsocial groups experience collaborative group work.ICLS 2014 Proceedings403© ISLSMethodologyParticipants and Research ContextThe data for this qualitative case study were collected as part of a larger study investigating the role of socialidentity in mathematical group work. This case study is focused on the experiences of Heather (all names arepseudonyms), a multiracial girl, as she engaged in a collaborative learning activity with three White boys.Heather was 16 years old and enrolled in an 11th grade Advanced Functions mathematics class at a privateschool in a Canadian city. Heather identified herself as a White/Asian girl. The analysis is focused on a sessionof group work wherein Heather worked with Allen, Walter, and Paul on a set of word problems involving theuse of advanced functions. The students were given a shared worksheet listing the three word problems as wellas access to a whiteboard to record their calculations and solutions. The group membership was assigned by theclassroom teacher and the students were encouraged to collaborate. For the purposes of this case study, theanalysis was focused on a segment of video wherein the students were solving a word problem involvingstatistical probability and the use of a Venn diagram.Methods and Data SourcesThe group work activity was videotaped and brief fieldnotes were taken to complement the video footage.Immediately following the observation, the video was processed and a minute-by-minute content log of thefootage was created. The fieldnotes and video were used to identify five moments of interest in the group workactivity, including times when Heather appeared to be marginalized (i.e., prevented access to the conversationalfloor and/or shared learning artifacts) or during intergroup interactions that were deemed interesting by theresearcher.A day following the group work observation, an audio-recorded stimulated recall interview (SRI) wasconducted with Heather. Using the video footage of the group work as a prompt, she was invited to watch thevideo, stop it at any time, and share her reactions, interpretations, feelings and so forth. If Heather did notindependently stop the video to comment, the researcher did so after the segment ended and invited Heather torespond to the footage. Heather watched the five segments of video that were pre-selected by the researcher.These video segments ranged in length from about 30 seconds to 2 minutes and 30 seconds.Approximately one week following the SRI, Heather was interviewed a final time to determine hermore general feelings and experiences with group work as well as her knowledge of and experiences withmathematical achievement stereotypes. Heather was encouraged to draw on personal experiences, including theobserved episode of group work.AnalysisA context analysis (Erickson, 2006) focusing on talk, gesture, body positioning, and artifacts (i.e., the sharedworksheet and whiteboard) was conducted on the five video segments of interest using Studiocode videoanalysis software. Drawing from Erickson’s (2006) whole-to-part procedure for analyzing video, each segmentof interest was played in its entirety, multiple times with and without sound. To further section the video, majortransitions in the bodily configuration of students was marked on a video timeline. Each of these smallersections of video was then analyzed at a micro-level with a specific focus on both verbal and physical forms ofpositioning in relation to Heather. These instances were marked on the video timeline and, drawing from theanalysis of Esmonde and Dookie (2012), Heather’s subsequent verbal and non-verbal actions were coded. Afteran initial pass of marking these instances of interest on the video timeline, a system of codes was developed.The development of this coding system was an iterative process involving repeated viewing of the videosegments, multiple passes of coding, and the refinement of codes.A full description of the codebook is beyond the scope of this paper, however, in general, the codeswere used to identify verbal and non-verbal acts of positioning in relation to Heather as well as her observedresponses. Particular attention was paid to the participants’ bodily orientations and movements in space relativeto Heather and whether/how they impacted her access to the interactional space and the learning artifacts. Atranscription of the students’ talk was used to analyze whether and how Heather was given opportunities toparticipate in the group discussion (note that in the selected segment of video presented in this case study,Heather did not make any utterances and hence her talk was not part of this analysis). Examples of positioningcodes used in this analysis include ‘physical block’ (any time a group member physically blocked Heather’saccess to the worksheet or whiteboard) and ‘exclusive talk’ (any time members of the interaction physicallyoriented themselves to talk to another member of the group or verbally addressed a group member by name toparticipate in the activity). An example of a code that was used to characterize Heather’s ‘responses’ to acts ofpositioning includes ‘strain’ (any time Heather had to lean or contort herself, while keeping the trunk of herbody stationary, to better see and access the shared artifacts). Codes such as ‘access to worksheet’ and ‘writing’were used to identify Heather’s access to the shared learning artifacts.ICLS 2014 Proceedings404© ISLSThe Studiocode software facilitated an analysis of the frequency of codes used as well as the timing inwhich they were applied. This information was used to write an analytic memo for each of the five videosegments of interest. In the results section below, I will share the detailed findings pertaining to one of the videosegments of interest as well as Heather’s response to this video segment. The video segment was 2 minutes and30 seconds in length and was selected because it was representative of the group work episode and depictedseveral examples of both verbal and non-verbal forms of positioning.Together, the interviews and video data informed one another. In addition to providing the participantperspective and voice, the interviews provided further context to the episode of group work. Drawing fromAnderson (2009), a limitation of traditional analyses of positioning is that they employ an imminentist ontology(i.e., “the premise that positioning is contextually tied to the moment of interaction in which it occurs and notacross interactions or scales of activity” (p. 292) and she calls for the need to consider meso-level influences(i.e., “neither from a solely micro- nor a solely macro-social perspective”; p. 293). As such, in addition toconsidering the moment-to-moment acts of positioning and broad sociohistorical forces such as gender, thisstudy used the interview data to facilitate the investigation of some the meso-level influences (e.g., Heather’srelationship with the group members) that came to bear on the episode of group work.The interviews were transcribed and exposed to descriptive followed by thematic passes of coding.While talk involving social identity, marginalization, and stereotypes was a primary focus, themes (e.g.,friendship, dispositional characteristics of group members) also emerged from constant comparison betweendata and the gradual elaboration of open codes (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). An analytic memo was written for bothinterviews and the themes were elaborated.ResultsTo begin, a vignette is presented to illustrate the ways in which Heather was physically and verballymarginalized in the group work activity. The microanalysis of the selected video segment is then juxtaposedwith the narrative interpretation of the experience provided by Heather after she viewed the same segment ofvideo and engaged in the SRI. Following this micro-level discussion about the acts of positioning, Heather’sinterpretations and feelings about the experience are reviewed.Part I. Microanalysis of a Segment of Group WorkVignette: Observed PositioningHeather, Allen, Walter, and Paul assembled as a group and began the first of three word problems. Allen heldthe worksheet and he and the other members of the group physically oriented themselves towards the sharedworksheet as well as the whiteboard (see Figure 1, image on the left). The initial configuration of the group wassemi-circular with Heather slightly on the outskirts. This physical position left her with only moderate access tothe worksheet meaning she would have had to significantly lean and contort herself to read the word problem.She had relatively clear access to the whiteboard space wherein the problem was being solved.Allen began the collaborative group work by reading the word problem aloud. He and Walter discussedthe given information and how they would construct the Venn diagram while Paul and Heather watched on.Allen instructed Paul to begin drawing the Venn diagram and from this moment onward, each time Paul went towrite something on the whiteboard, he created a physical barrier that made it more challenging for Heather toaccess the whiteboard (i.e., the central space for the group work activity; see Figure 1, image on the right).Figure 1.The left image illustrates the original configuration of the group, depicting, from left to right: Allen,Walter, Heather, and Paul. The right image illustrates how Paul blocks Heather each time he writes on theboard.Allen and Walter continued to reread the problem aloud as Paul filled in the given information on the Venndiagram. Once the given information was plotted and the discussion about how to solve the problem became thefocus, Walter gradually positioned himself more square in line with the whiteboard and thereby further blockedHeather from the center of the group work activity. Together, the body positioning and physical movements ofPaul and Walter served to physically box Heather out of the activity (see Figure 2, image on the left).Towards the latter half of the video segment, once the physical blocking became most prominent,Heather appeared to strain herself (i.e., lean in, angle her head) to better see the worksheet and what was beingICLS 2014 Proceedings405© ISLSwritten on the board. After a few moments, Heather walked to a new position in the group wherein she wascloser to the whiteboard yet further from the worksheet and the intermittent discussion between Allen andWalter (see Figure 2, image on the right).Figure 2. The image on the left depicts the physical blocking by both Walter and Paul. The image on the rightdepicts Heather’s new spatial position in the group.The microanalysis of body positioning during this video segment revealed that Heather was on the physicalperiphery of the activity with limited access to the interactional space. As the physical barriers created by hergroup members became more prominent and stable, she strained herself to better see the information on theworksheet as well as what was being written on the whiteboard and eventually she moved to a new spatiallocation in the group. Although this move positioned Heather closer in proximity to the whiteboard, it furtherdistanced her from the center of the group discussion (i.e. between Allen and Walter) and the shared worksheet.During this video segment, Allen was the only person to hold the worksheet and Paul was the onlymember of the group to write on the board. In the analysis of talk, five clusters of conversations were identified,primarily involving either Allen, Walter, and Paul or only Allen and Walter. Furthermore, three out of five ofthese conversations were characterized as ‘exclusive talk’, meaning that members of the conversation eitherexplicitly addressed one another in the conversation or physically positioned themselves towards another personthereby excluding other(s) (i.e., mainly Heather) from participation. Heather did not make a single utteranceduring this video segment (and said very little as they solved the subsequent two word problems).From the theoretical and analytical lens of the researcher, this microanalysis reveals the ways in whichHeather was negatively positioned by her group members. The question remains as to whether these physicalblocks and exclusive conversations between the male members of the group were a salient part of the experiencefor Heather. Let us now turn to the interview data to investigate whether and how Heather identified,interpreted, and explained these acts of positioning.Part II. Using Interview Data to Explore Heather’s ExperienceIdentifying Acts of PositioningThe video segment described in the previous section was played for Heather during the SRI and she was thenasked to respond to the footage and describe what she was thinking and feeling during that point in the activity.She began by explaining that she did not enjoy the word problem because the people in her group were “takingcharge”. She went on to describe how she was physically blocked and had difficulty seeing the worksheet andthe whiteboard:They didn’t- I couldn’t really see the question, so I didn’t really know what was happeningand then I was trying to look at the board and then [Paul] decides to like stand right there infront of me. So I'm like, “oh, ok!”A few moments later, she went on to say:Well also like, [Paul] is like blocking my view so I can’t really see what’s going on. Andthey’re just like...and those- [Allen] and [Walter] or- those people, they like-they like takingcharge and that’s what they’re doing! …And also like, I didn’t know what the question wascause I couldn’t see it cause they’re holding it [the worksheet] like that, so I didn’t- couldn’treally contribute anything.Heather’s narrative clearly illustrates the impact of physical marginalization. Here and throughout the SRI, sherepeated the fact that she was being physically blocked by Paul. In contrast to the microanalysis of the video thatrevealed the physical blocks of both Walter and Paul, in her narrative, Heather solely focused on the blockingactions of Paul. To further build on the findings of the video microanalysis, Heather attributed her inability toaccess the worksheet as a result of the way in which Allen was holding the paper and angling it towards himself:ICLS 2014 Proceedings406© ISLSHeather:Just like- I don’t really know what’s going on cause I haven’t heard the question.Researcher: Yeah. Cause you didn’t hear the question being read?Heather:Yeah and like, he’s [pointing to Allen] hoarding the question.As a result of this limited access to the shared learning resources, Heather indicated that she “couldn’t reallycontribute anything”. Heather went on to explain her movement to the new spatial location in the group as “anattempt to see the board” as a result of being blocked by Paul. Consistent with the microanalysis of the videosegment, Heather indicated that although the move allowed her to see the board better, “that was about it” and itdid not increase her participation in the group activity.In addition to discussing the physical aspect of the marginalization, Heather acknowledged the wayAllen and Walter dominated the discussion and essentially took charge of the group work. She also noted thatPaul did the writing for the group and served as the “scribe” for Allen and Walter. Taken together, Heather’snarrative points to the subtle ways in which marginalization occurred through verbal and nonverbal means andprovides further nuance into the experience of this marginalization.Interpreting and Explaining Acts of PositioningDrawing from the full episode of video recorded group work, the SRI, and the final interview, the focus of theanalysis is now broadened to consider some of Heather’s general interpretations and explanations. At the end ofthe SRI, Heather was asked to describe her general feelings about the group work activity:Well, I did not particularly enjoy it, but I think for people like [Allen] and [Walter]- likepeople who really dominate- that was helpful for them cause they could like bounce ideas offeach other. But personally, I did not really benefit from that cause I couldn’t see the questionsand then I didn’t really know what was going on and then…yeah.Based on Heather’s appraisal, the physical marginalization seemed to be a salient aspect of the overall groupwork experience. A microanalysis of video segments obtained across the entire group work footage revealedthat the physical blocks, ‘hoarding’ of the worksheet, and exclusive conversations were not isolated events.Heather also explained that she was often grouped with these same students within the mathematics class andthey characteristically tended to take charge of the group work. When asked how this group work experiencecould have been improved, Heather suggested having the group “work in a circle instead of a line” so that allmembers could see the worksheet and the whiteboard. Heather also advocated having students select their owngroup members: “I know like you’re not supposed to work with your friends, but I actually would preferworking with my friends cause then they would actually let me see the question and then we could actually findout what’s going on.” Taken together, the importance of the physical dimension of the collaborative activity wasemphasized throughout Heather’s narrative description of the experience.Although Heather identified various forms of marginalization and provided insight into how it madeher feel, she did not offer as many clear explanations to account for these actions. During the SRI, she did,however, use the dispositional characteristics of her group members to account for their actions. For example,with respect to Allen ‘hoarding’ the worksheet she stated that, “he loves his paper” and described him as being“controlling with math”. She also indicated that Allen and Walter were, “people who really dominate” and“enjoy taking charge” and so they tended to do so during the activity. During the final interview, when askedabout whether race or gender had an impact on the group work dynamic, she stated:I don’t think race comes into play. Especially not at [my school] cause [my school] is a verynice and diverse school. But maybe gender a little bit. Like I don’t even think it’s necessarilygender, it’s more like who you’re friends with. Cause the guys, they were all friends.This quote reveals Heather’s perception of the school culture as a “nice and diverse” place devoid of issues ofrace. It also suggests the underlying importance of friendship for Heather within group interactions. Althoughshe only alludes to the role of gender in the group work interactions, her reference to the boys in the group allbeing friends suggests that these friendships are gendered in nature.Discussion and ImplicationsThis case study provides a snapshot of how one student became a marginal member of a group through the waysshe was positioned by her group members. Whether or not Heather was proficient with the mathematical contentor had ideas to contribute to the group, the exclusive exchange of talk that took place between her groupmembers as well as the ways in which they oriented their bodies, prevented her from accessing the interactionalspace and conversational floor. Together, this limited her to peripheral participation in the activity. Reinforcingthe work of Dookie and Esmonde (2012), this study also demonstrates the significance of shared learningartifacts in collaborative learning contexts. Not being able to see the whiteboard or access the shared worksheetICLS 2014 Proceedings407© ISLSwere central concerns highlighted across the analyses and contributed to the ways in which Heather wasrestricted to participating in the margins of the activity.By considering both observed and experienced positioning, this case study makes a unique researchcontribution. It offers a nuanced understanding of how a student from a non-dominant social group experiencedcollaborative group work and provides further insight into the microdynamics of positioning. Although theyforegrounded different dimensions of marginalization, the analysis of both the video and the SRI yielded insightinto how Heather was marginalized through verbal and non-verbal means. For example, the findings of themicroanalysis highlighted Heather’s limited access to the shared worksheet while her narrative provided furtherdetail and described that it was the way in which Allen was holding the worksheet that made it difficult for herto access it. The video footage alone (and the constraints associated with using a single video camera) could notprovide this kind of detail and nuance. Similarly, while the findings of the video microanalysis emphasized theway Heather was physically blocked by multiple members of the group, Heather’s narrative focused specificallyon the physical blocks of one group member. These findings are similar to those of Leander (2004), who wassurprised to find that although his analysis of a video recorded interaction was centered around student-studentpositioning, a posthoc interview with a focal student, Latanya, instead revealed her focus on her relationship tothe classroom teachers (who were not captured in the video footage). Leander (2004, p. 207) states, “WhileLatanya and I watched the same videotape of the interaction, she appears to have attended primarily to [theclassroom teachers] who were, for the most part, off camera.” These findings point to the potential formisinterpretation when we rely too heavily on the sole perspective of researchers in these microanalyses ofsocial interaction and highlight the importance of considering the perspective of the participants involved.This study intentionally focused on the account of one focal student. It is important to acknowledgethat reflective perspectives of an event may often differ from the complex ways in which actions arecollaboratively organized in the moment. Positioning is an interactional dance that is co-constructed by theparticipants involved. This study focuses on the ways in which a student from a non-dominant gender group wasrestricted access to participation. Heather’s moves in this interactional dance were limited by the moves of hergroup members. By straining her body and moving to a new physical location in the group, however, Heathermade physical bids to be included. One could imagine a number of other ways in which Heather could havepushed back. Future studies should further examine the ways in which a person can be restricted fromdemanding access to central participation and whether and how this is tied to social identity.It is also important to note that an interview provides a subjective perspective of an event and, inaddition, is always a conversation between two people, rather than insight into all the participant’s privatethoughts. This is particularly important in reference to the interpretations and explanations provided by Heatherin her response to the video footage. From the theoretical and analytical lens of the researcher, Heather wasworking with three boys and their physical blocks and exclusive talk could be conceptualized asmicroaggressions. However, Heather did not vocally explain these acts of positioning as such and essentiallydismissed the notion of race and gender playing a role. Instead, her talk about gender was implicit in nature andcame about through her indirect reference to the gendered nature of friendships within the classroom. Withoutundermining Heather’s interpretation of the experience, this does not necessarily mean that gender and/or racewere irrelevant in this collaborative learning activity. In her work examining colormuteness, Pollock (2004)demonstrates that there is a general propensity for students to resist talking about race in school in certainsituations, despite its omnipresence. There are numerous reasons to account for why Heather may not havemade explicit mention of taboo topics. For example, like many, Heather may have been motivated to appear‘egalitarian’ which is particularly likely given the way she described the culture of the school as being “nice anddiverse”. One of the goals of this case study was to foreground the experience and voice of a student from anon-dominant social group and the intent here is not to discount her narrative but to instead draw attention to thesubtle ways in which students may resort to talk about taboo issues as a result of school culture and so forth.In her interview, Heather talked about gender implicitly by making an indirect reference to thegendered nature of friendships. In the endeavor to create more equitable learning contexts that provide studentswith opportunities to thrive and develop positive mathematics identities, it is important to understand the waysin which students experience and talk about their group work experiences. This includes the ways in which theytalk about race and gender. Furthermore, it is important to investigate and understand the microdynamics ofpositioning so that educators can work towards better organizing collaborative learning activities so that allstudents have equitable access to learning opportunities. The classroom teacher in this case study had equityfocused intentions for the collaborative group work activity and it is likely that the acts of positioning performedby Heather’s group members were unintentional and unconsciously delivered. However, students from nondominant social groups can become marginalized in very subtle and unintended ways during collaborativelearning activities. Over time and repeated experience, this can have a profound impact on their evolvingmathematics identities. Bringing discussions about the microdynamics of positioning and marginalization intomainstream teacher discourse and professional development may be one way to work towards ensuring that allstudents have the opportunity to become successful mathematics students.ICLS 2014 Proceedings408© ISLSReferencesAnderson, K. T. (2009). Applying positioning theory to the analysis of classroom interactions: Mediating microidentities, macro-kinds, and ideologies of knowing. Linguistics and Education, 20, 291-310.doi:10.1016/j.linged.2009.08.001Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of HarvardUniversity Press.Dookie, L. & Esmonde, I. (2012). Understanding influence in collaborative group work: The importance ofartifacts. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2012).Engle, R. A., Langer-Osuna, J.M. & McKinney de Royston, M. (2008). Toward a model of differentialinfluence in discussions: Negotiating quality, authority, and access within a heated student debate. InB.C. Love, K. McRae & V.M. Slousky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of theCognitive Science Society (pp. 2010-2015). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.Erickson, F. (2006). Definition and analysis of data from videotape: Some research procedures and theirrationales. In J. L. Green, G. Camilli, & P. B. Elmore (with A. Skukauskaité & E. Grace) (Eds.),Handbook of complementary methods in education research (pp. 177–191). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Esmonde, I., & Dookie, L. (2012). The Mechanics of Marginalization and Resistance: Positioning in aMathematics Classroom. Paper presented at the Research Pre-session of the Annual Meeting of theNational Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM 2012), Philadelphia, PA, USA.Esmonde, I. & Langer-Osuna, J.M. (2012). Power in numbers: Student participation in mathematical discussionsin heterogeneous spaces. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 44(1), 288-315.Gee, J.P. (2000). Identity as an analytic lens for research in education. Review of Research in Education, 25, 99125.Glaser, B.G. & Strauss, A.L., (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago, IL: Aldane.Gutiérrez, R. (2002). Beyond essentialism: The complexity of language in teaching mathematics to Latino/astudents. American Educational Research Journal, 39(4), 1047–1088.Holland, D., Lachiotte, W., Jr., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (2001). Identity and agency in cultural worlds.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Kurth, L. A., Anderson, C. W., & Palinscar, A. S. (2002). The case of Carla: Dilemmas of helping all studentsto understand science. Science Education, 86, 287–313. doi:10.1002/sce.10009Ladson-Billings, G., & Tate, W. F. (1995). Toward a critical race theory of education. Teachers College Record,97(1), 47–68.Langer-Osuna, J.M. (2011). How Brianna Became Bossy and Kofi Came Out Smart: Understanding theTrajectories of Identity and Engagement for Two Group Leaders in a Projects-Based MathematicsClassroom. Canadian Journal of Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education, 11(3), 207-225.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Leander, K. M. (2002). Silencing in classroom interaction: Producing and relating social spaces. DiscourseProcesses, 34, 193–235. doi:10.1207/S15326950DP3402_4Leander, K. (2004). They took out the wrong context: Uses of time-space in the practice of positioning. ETHOS,32, 188–213.Martin, D. B. (2006). Mathematics learning and participation as racialized forms of experience: AfricanAmerican parents speak on the struggle for mathematics literacy. Mathematical Thinking andLearning, 8(3), 197–229.Nasir, N.S. (2002). Identity, goals, and learning: Mathematics in cultural practice. Mathematical Thinking andLearning, 4(2-3), 213-247.Nasir, N., & Hand, V. (2008). From the court to the classroom: Opportunities for engagement, learning, andidentity in basketball and classroom mathematics. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(2), 143-179.doi: 10.1080/10508400801986082Pollock, M. (2004). Colormute: Race talk dilemmas in an American school. Princeton, New Jersey: PrincetonUniversity Press.Solórzano, D., Ceja, M., & Yosso, T. (2000). Critical race theory, racial microaggressions, and campus racialclimate: The experiences of African American college students. Journal of Negro Education, 69(1/2),60-73.Sue, D.W., Capodilupo, C.M., Torino, G.C., Bucceri, J.M., Holder, A.M.B., Nadal, K.L., & Esquilin, M. (2007).Racial microaggressions in everyday life. American Psychologist, 62(4), 271-286. doi:10.1037/0003066X.62.4.271Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language (A. Kozulin, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Wortham, S.E.F. (2006). Learning identity: The joint emergence of social identification and academic learning.New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings409© ISLS