“So, I think I'm a Programmer Now”: Developing ConnectedLearning for Adults in a University Craft Technologies CourseDeborah A. Fields and Whitney L. KingUtah State University, 2830 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT 84321deborah.fields@usu.edu, whitney.king@aggiemail.usu.eduAbstract: In the past decade many conversations about learning have turned from primarilydiscipline-based or space-based settings to concerns about helping students make connectionsbetween settings, what some have popularly termed “connected learning” (Ito et al., 2013).Nowhere is connected learning more needed than in areas of programming and engineeringwith new digital technologies, specifically craft technologies, which holds new potential toreshape the ways that we think about these disciplines. Often, discussions of connectedlearning focus on children and youth with an emphasis on informal, out-of-school settings. Weargue college students and adults may benefit just as much from connected learning, andformal settings of learning should not be neglected in conversations of connected learning.We describe and analyze a new university course called Craft Technologies, developed toengage non-engineering, non-computer science major students by creating projects that wouldchange the way they thought of and used computers and electronics.IntroductionIn the past decade many conversations about learning have turned from primarily discipline-based or spacebased settings to concerns about helping students make connections between settings, what some have popularlytermed “connected learning” (Ito et al., 2013). Many studies note the ways that conflicts between values,discourses, roles, and knowledge between home and school, or home and workplaces result in students’disengagement from academic learning (e.g. Holland et al, 1998; Nasir & Hand, 2008). In answer, connectedlearning purposefully seeks to help people develop positive relations between home, school, family, friends,hobbies, and institutional settings like school, work, and civic institutions. Thus connected learning is “sociallyembedded, interest-driven, and oriented toward educational, economic, or political” opportunities that have highstakes for equitable participation in our society (Ito et al., 2013, p. 4).Nowhere is connected learning more needed than in areas of programming and engineering with newdigital technologies. For several years, the disproportionate lack of women in engineering and technologysectors have been noticed by practitioners and researchers not only in these fields, but also in education andlearning sciences (Margolis & Fisher 2002; Hill, Corbett & St. Rose, 2010). Cited reasons for this disparatepursuit of programming and engineering include the lack of supportive social connections that can help studentsbetter identify with those fields (Brickhouse & Potter, 2001), implicit bias about abstract and top-down modelsas the “best” programming or engineering (Turkle & Papert, 1991), and limited views of what computer scienceis and what roles are available in it (Margolis & Fisher, 2002). The perspective of connected learning provides apotential answer for these challenges, for instance with the goal of enabling better social connections inprogramming and engineering, providing multiple legitimate ways to engage in them, and developing broaderviews of what they are and who can do them. Yet how can we achieve these goals in meaningful ways?The hobbyist-driven Maker and digital fabrication movement holds new potential to reshape the waysthat we think about programming and engineering. The movement is largely interest-driven and focuses ontangible (versus abstract, screen-based) artifacts in ways that often integrate well with everyday life andpersonal interests (Blikstein, 2013). In particular, we argue that aspects of ‘making’ that draw on knowledge andskills that people build at home, in community and religious groups, and with friends may hold particularpromise for creating spaces of connected learning related to programming and engineering. Craft technologiesare a subset of the digital fabrication movement that bring together traditional hand crafts like sewing, knitting,and woodworking with electronics and programming with microcomputers. They are inclusive of but broaderthan electronic textiles (e-textiles) which focus largely on soft fabrics and sewing, but like e-textiles they candisrupt people’s notions of what can be made with computers and who can make it (Searle, Fields & Kafai,2013) through the integration of hand crafts with wiring and computing.In this paper we describe and analyze participation in a new university course called CraftTechnologies, developed with the aim to engage non-engineering, non-computer science major students in aseries of projects that would change the way they thought of and used computers and electronics. Over thesemester, students created a series of five semi-structured projects targeted to teach them techniques for usingand understanding conductive materials (thread, fabric, yarn, wire, etc.), basic programming, human-computerinteraction, and electrical properties (e.g. resistance, short circuits, polarity, etc.). The course culminated in asixth and final creative project of each student’s choice with an accompanying Instructables.com entry toICLS 2014 Proceedings927© ISLSprovide detailed instructions and pictures about their final project to a broader audience online. Each project wasintended to support connected learning by encouraging self-expression and customization within constraintsdesigned to teach specific techniques and concepts. Thus our primary questions in this paper regard if and howconnected learning happened for individual students, and whether and how it mattered to them.BackgroundWithin a framework of connected learning we recognize that learners live in multiple, intersecting spaces thatmay reflect different values, repertoires of practices, and even languages (e.g., Fields, 2010; Gutiérrez &Rogoff, 2003). Thus connected learning should reach across multiple spheres of learners’ lives, includingfamily, school, hobbies, and other communities to which people belong (Ito et al, 2013). Building on theConnected Learning report (Ibid), we suggest that in the context of creating with computational media, such ascraft technologies, connected learning can reach learners in four distinct ways. First, design tasks shouldencourage self-expression, allowing learners to draw on their interests and longstanding preferences (Azevedo,2011). Second, there should be low barriers to access new knowledge; it should be approachable with multiplepoints of entry (Margolis & Fisher, 2002). Third, learners should be able to draw on new and existing socialsupports for learning. This builds on pre-existing relationships from multiple environments as well as newrelationships in local communities and through broader networks afforded by digital media (Grimes & Fields,2012). Last, connected learning environments should encourage learners to make meaningful connections totheir cultural backgrounds and their prior expertise whether that expertise was developed at home, with friends,or in school (Moll, Tapia & Whitmore, 1993).In general, discussions of connected learning focus primarily on children and youth with an emphasison informal, out-of-school settings. In this paper we argue that college students and adults may benefit just asmuch from connected learning, especially with computational media, as children and youth, and that formalsettings of learning should not be neglected in conversations of connected learning. Indeed, the very studies thathelped to generate theories of learning as situated in specific contexts and that recognize that people participatein multiple social worlds were based on studies of adults in workplaces, local communities, and self-help groups(e.g., Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998). Indeed, college-age students and adults may have an even greaterneed for engaging connectively in designing with computational technologies than children and youth. Manyadults generally have strong skill sets in their areas of expertise, whether at work or at home, providing richpotential to build on existing practices, knowledge, relationships and simple common sense (Rose, 2012). Foradults who are not already experts with technology or engineering, creating with digital technology can seemintimidating. They may already be committed to non-science or tech focused majors or careers with less time toengage in new pursuits. Many see children’s and youths’ facility with tech gadgets as a sign that the youngergeneration are fluent “natives” with digital technologies (Prensky, 2001), implying that older generations are theoutsiders. Yet in a time when workers change jobs frequently (U.S. Department of Labor, 2003) and we haveneed of effective citizens who have the knowledge and skills to live and act in a complex, diverse world wheredigital technology permeates businesses, homes, hobbies, and civic activism, adults may have just as much needof learning to design with digital technologies as children and youth.Why do we so rarely consider college students and adults in relation to connected learning and creationwith computational media? One reason may be that classic psychological theory holds identity as anachievement of adolescence (Erikson, 1968). However, if we take a situated view of identity (Holland et al,1998), we are inherently compelled to admit that identities and learning emerge and change over time at allages. Unfortunately, only a small set of researchers have attempted to study the existing practices of “workingpeople” in their attempts to make sense of, manage, and learn about technological changes (Sawchuk, 2003, p.3). Research that we do have demonstrates that adult workers learn about computers across a range of socialsettings (Sawchuk, 2003) and often do so through exchanges of hands-on skills (Golding, 2011), making themespecially relevant audiences for connected learning with craft technologies based on hands-on skills. In thefollowing sections we discuss ways that students in the Craft Technologies course engaged in connectedlearning through designing with novel computational media. We feature three students whose trajectories ofparticipation reflected broader trends in the class in developing new views of themselves as programmers anddesigners with computational media. In doing so they drew on pre-existing skills and knowledge developedprimarily with families, hobbies, and community groups, built new and strengthened existing relationships, andintegrated their new learning with longstanding preferences.Context and MethodsCraft Technologies” was a brand new university-level semester-long course taught by the first author (Lee &Fields, 2013). The course was opened to both graduate and undergraduate students from any department in theassociated university. Students from Art, Communications, Music and Education fields enrolled. The initial andfinal enrollment for the course was 20 (12 undergraduate students, 8 graduate students; 16 women, 4 men), atleast half of whom were in their mid-twenties to mid-forties in age.ICLS 2014 Proceedings928© ISLSThe course focused on hand crafts as a particularly promising entry point for novices into computingand hardware. To this end two of the projects utilized the LilyPad Arduino (Buechley & Eisenberg, 2008), asewable computer with inputs and outputs and an accompanying set of sensors (e.g. light sensors,accelerometers) and actuators (LEDs, sound buzzers, vibrator boards), and one project used the new MakeyMakey. While many students focused on sewing as a primary crafting technique, many others successfullyintegrated prior expertise with wood working, origami, or sculpting Students also researched the properties ofnovel conductive craft materials like different conductive yarns, threads, fabrics, tapes, and paints, as well aseveryday materials like cooking sheets and aluminum foil, They utilized these in conjunction with traditional(generally non-conductive) craft materials in order to create sensors that could sense pressure, stretching,touching, etc. Thus the course introduced students to basic computing and circuit design as well as materialproperties. At the end of the semester students shared their projects in a Student Showcase, where members ofthe University and community were invited to attend.Data come from the experiences and designs of 18 of the 20 undergraduate and graduate studentsenrolled in the course, focusing on eight women students who agreed to participate in pre/post interviews(approximately 20-40 minutes). The pre interviews focused on students’ prior histories with crafting,programming, and circuitry, as well as overall feelings about personal efficacy in each of these areas. Postinterviews focused on experiences with the course, students’ projects, and identity-based questions such as“what/who is a programmer?” The interviews were recorded and transcribed. Students also completed apre/post survey about interests and expertise in several key areas related to e-textiles, as well as weeklyreflective blog posts about the processes of making their projects. We conducted a two-step open-codinganalysis (Charmaz, 2000) of interviews; emergent coding focused on self-perceptions, interests, abilities, andrelationships as exhibited in their projects.ResultsIn this section we concentrate on the experiences and shifting identities of three participants that illustrateconnected learning through designing with computational media. Although each student’s case is unique, thenarrative cases are illustrative of broader trends revealed across students in the course, especially in the waysstudents built on old and new relationships, pursued longstanding personal interests in and beyond the course,integrated new with older knowledge, and considered new possibilities in the future.Connected Cultural Learning: NaomiOne goal of connected learning is to provide new educational opportunities by supporting interest-drivenlearning and self-expression. An outcome of this goal is to facilitate learners’ creation of new identities andvision of expanded possibilities for what they can do, a goal that we believe is equally important for adults aswell as children. Our first case study, Naomi, illustrates ways that she was able to engage in self-expressive,connective activities through her new learning to design with craft technologies in the course. In particular,Naomi used projects in the course to connect to her mother’s knowledge, her children’s interests, and her localchurch community’s do-it-yourself priorities. As a result, she was able to develop a new identity as aburgeoning programmer who had confidence in her abilities to program and saw applications for that in her jobas well as at with her family and community.Naomi, a graduate student and single mother of three, initially expressed being intimidated byprogramming and more “technical” skills at the beginning of class. In her pre-interview, Naomi indicated sheboth enjoyed and felt comfortable with crafting, and mentioned how her mother had “always been hands-onwith crafts” and passed those skills on to her children. Her mom, a seamstress, helped with her 4-H classes whenNaomi was a child. Naomi fondly mentioned having regular girls’ nights where the women of the family craftedand a traditional “big craft day” the day after Thanksgiving. From the onset of the class, Naomi’s pastexperience in crafting gave her confidence in her ability to construct projects, even though she had noprogramming background. She slowly built her knowledge of programming, circuitry, and conductive materials,linking those new domains of knowledge with her prior knowledge of crafts. For her final project, Naomidecided to make an interactive wall hanging for her youngest daughter as a part of an ongoing process to re-doher children’s rooms. She quilted the wall hanging backdrop from scratch, adding flowers which lit up upontouch, stars that played “Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star,” a fairy whose wings twinkled, and butterflies that lit upwhen someone triggered the sound sensor. Naomi fluidly integrated her new knowledge with prior skills, andalso learned new knowledge beyond the course content, teaching herself how to use and program certainelements like a sound sensor that were not covered in class. She saw her newly developed hybrid knowledge asconnecting to her mother, her local church, and her master’s degree work, and planned to continue this heritageby teaching her children both traditional and new skills she had gathered together.ICLS 2014 Proceedings929© ISLS	  	  	  Figure 1. Various stages of Naomi’s interactive quilt. She arranges the squares (left) to determine the layout. Aclose up of the fairy (middle) with twinkling wings. The final quilt (right) which plays music, and has sound andlight sensors.In a follow-up interview, after the Craft Technologies course had ended, Naomi expressed a new identity in thatshe now considered herself to be a programmer, because she had gained skills that she was able to transfer toanother programming course she took. Naomi stated, “Remember, how I said I didn’t consider myself aprogrammer? Well, maybe I do now…I was so much more confident…and I was the only one of the studentswho got a perfect grade on my final” She also indicated ways she would use her new-found skills for futurecrafting and programming projects, particularly as craft technologies opened “a whole new dimension” she canintegrate when crafting with her daughters. Naomi also recognizes possibilities for crafting outside of herfamily. In a follow-up interview, she discussed how she would like to teach the light-up bracelet, the firstactivity in the course, to a group of 8-11 year old girls she mentors at her church. Additionally, Naomi’s abilityto program will be helpful in her career as a technology coordinator at her job, where coding often occurs.Naomi’s transference of skills gained to other courses and to other practices outside of school was demonstratedin all interviewed students, and again, is indicative of how positive connected learning experiences can be foradults.Connected Teaching: FionaCollaborative, peer support is another integral part of connected learning. This can occur as learners share andprovide feedback to another, as well as when they provide guidance and expertise needed to accomplish sharedand individual goals. An environment with strong peer support provides opportunities for learners to contributein a variety of meaningful ways. In the space of the Craft Technologies course, students actively supported andshared expertise with each other. This occurred when a student skilled at sewing helped students with their stitchwork, when students critiqued, discussed, and brainstormed about project designs, and as exhibited by thissecond case study, when an experienced community college teacher taught her classmates how to program.Fiona, similar to Naomi, was a graduate student and mother of three. She had a background withcomputer programming, both as an undergrad and as a teacher at another college. She also enjoyed craftingactivities such as sewing and cross-stitch, and drew from a family heritage of crafting, notably her mother andsisters who were skilled crafters. During the pre-interview, Fiona indicated she was not worried about either thecrafting or the programming parts of the course, and hoped her prior experience in those areas would allow herto focus more on the electrical components, a subject was interested in.In our pre-interview, and several times throughout the course, Fiona positioned herself away from a“programmer” or expert identity. She insisted she was not a programmer, despite her extensive experience withprogramming, both technically and in teaching. However, only a few weeks into the course, Fiona realized herprogramming and teaching background could be helpful for her classmates. She announced to her peers she waswilling to help with any of their programming questions, and wrote her email on a class whiteboard with thenote “Help with programming,” Several students in the class did utilize her help and many acknowledged her intheir blog posts and post interviews. During our post-interview, Fiona stated out of everything she experiencedin the course, even over learning basic electrical engineering, she was most of proud of the classmates shetaught to code. She stated she loved when she could see her classmates understand a programming principle andit gave her a “rush” to teach others how to program. She further went on to state how Craft Technologies hadchanged her view of how computer science can and should be taught. She stated,So maybe I'm thinking you could take a CS 101 class and have the students build the circuitand tell it what to do. Instead of writing, "Hello World" in Python. I think in some ways, itgives a better understanding of what's behind in programming, and why you have to be sospecific in programming.ICLS 2014 Proceedings930© ISLSThis contrasted with her earlier view that teaching programming by building circuits was the “wrong way” to doit. Based on her experiences in the course, she acknowledged that craft technologies was a viable way tointroduce programming, “… I've seen people who don't see themselves as a programmer, and don't seeminterested in pursuing programming, and they've built and programmed circuits, and maybe you really can do itthis way, and it works. It's been cool.” This shift in belief of how programming should be taught was one of thebiggest takeaways Fiona took from the course. Because she was able to connect her identity as a teacher withher experience as a student in this course, she showed a marked changed which could influence how sheapproaches teaching programming in the future. She indicated in future programming courses she taught, shewould include a unit on building programmable circuits because she felt it was so valuable for noviceprogramming students. Yet this striking change wasn’t the only one Fiona had as a result of the course. 	  As mentioned earlier, several times through the semester Fiona denied she was a programmer, becauseshe wasn’t “paid” to write code for anyone. She thought that to be a programmer, one had to have corporate orinstitutional validation, removing any notion of programming as a hobby or for the love it. However, by the timeof our post-interview she had altered her definition of who and what a programmer is. She expressed that herlove of programming, even if it was done only in a hobbyist setting, made her a programmer. This is radicalshift in her identity exemplifies how identity for adults isn’t fixed, but can be fluid and dynamic. Fiona was botha beneficiary and an agent of connected learning. She helped manifest a collaborative, supportive environmentfor her peers, and in return, received a positive identity crystallization.Connecting Art and Technology: CamilleConnected learning also attends to creativity and “creative work,” specifically as it relates to digital media. Idealconnected learning environments allow for learners to engage in interest-driven, creative, academically orientedendeavors which could eventually parlay into economic opportunities. For this reason, we argue adults,especially those in college, have great need for this type of learning experience. Our third case study centers onCamille, an undergraduate art student who was able to connect several, seemingly disparate, facets of her lifeinto her course projects. As a result, she was able to learn new skills she could transition into making uniquesculpture art both for school-based and outside artistic pursuits.Camille identified strongly as an artist and a “maker,” and acknowledged her profound skills in theseareas. An adult college student in her late twenties, she began college after several years in the Marine Corpsand other jobs, and was pursuing an art major at the time of the course. Her interests focused on sculpture withceramics, metal, and glass and she had a broad set of skills related to glass blowing and kiln making in additionto sewing, knitting, woodworking and crafting in general. On the side she enjoyed making creative projects athome with her husband, an electrical engineering student. Camille brought to the course a limited computingbackground that she associated both with her father, who was a computer programmer, and from her time in theMarine Corp, where she worked with small systems computers. Throughout the course Camille created projectswhich linked to each of these aspects of her life. She learned circuitry and programming skills which allowedher to forge connections with her husband’s experience as an electrical engineer and to enhance the “making”they did together. Furthermore her experience in Craft Technologies gave her an opportunity to blendelectronics and technology with her art making interests and skills.	  	  Figure 2. Two of Camille’s projects. The art doll monster (left) uses conductive patches on the arms to turn onlights sewn into the hearts on its chest. The blooming flower (right) made using nitonel, which opens and closes.In her pre-interview, she specifically mentioned her passion for creating “fun, goofy” art as a contrastto the typical fine art that is often produced by artists. This love of creating interesting, whimsical artifacts wasactualized with the creation of many of her projects. For example, her project for the human sensor projectenabled her to learn programming and circuitry techniques, and integrate those with sculpting and sewing skillsto create an artifact that played to her interests in sculpture, art, and making (see Figure X). Her goal was tocreate a fine “art doll” monster, inspired by makers whose work she been studying on the Internet. She carefullyselected the fuzzy fabric for the monster skin, hand-sewed every piece (including the striped horns) and sculptedICLS 2014 Proceedings931© ISLSthe claws. Camille took the project further than most students, studying persistence of vision in programmingthe LEDs to save battery power over time and adding a carefully curled resistor to improve the function of theproject.Camille’s final project is a prime example of how she brought together past expertise and interests withnew knowledge learned in the course to create new methods for artistic expression. Camille had long beeninterested in interactive art or moving sculpture, but had been unable to learn how to make it in her art courses.However, the connected learning environment of the Craft Technologies course allowed her to explore ways tobring her ideas to life. For her final project, she wanted to create a kinetic flower sculpture that bloomed. Inorder to do this, she taught herself to use nitinol, a dynamic material similar to glass, which can be programmedto change shape. In the post-interview, Camille indicated she would further explore this juxtaposition betweenart and technology, showing while craft technologies was a relatively new endeavor, it was also built upon alongstanding preference for pushing the boundaries with art and making (Azevedo, 2011). .Additionally, Camille received validation for her creations widely outside of the Craft Technologiescourse. She posted a tutorial for making the flower sculpture on Instructables, a do-it-yourself social networkingforum where users share detailed tutorials of projects of all kinds from woodworking, robotics, and of course,craft technologies. Within days of posting her tutorial, Camille had several thousand views. Currently, thetutorial has over 40,000 hits. At a recent Maker Faire, Camille was recognized by the Instructables communityfor her tutorial’s contribution to the website. This is a particularly striking example, as prior to the CraftTechnologies course, Camille had often looked at tutorials on Instructables, but had never posted her own. Shehas since posted a second Instructables entry and has become a more visible and contributing member of boththe Maker and Instructables communities. She will also be a TA for second offering of the Craft Technologiescourse in Spring 2014, giving her a chance to parlay her expertise into teaching and supporting new students.Further, Camille included her art doll monster in a portfolio for a scholarship, which she was awarded.Undoubtedly a connected learning environment gave Camille relevant, educational opportunities to learn andapply new skills by integrating them with existing practices.DiscussionIn this paper we have shown how college age and adult women changed they way they viewed themselves aswell as how they took up new practices that integrated computational media with existing interests throughconnected learning in the Craft Technologies course. All interviewed students acknowledged that theyconsidered themselves —if only as beginning or hobbyist—programmers by the end of the course. Further, overhalf of the interviewed students indicated they had future plans to continue programming, either by taking morecourses, making or teaching. As none of these students, with the exception of Fiona, came from a computerscience background, the course presented a unique chance for them to navigate unfamiliar academic terrain, andto “learn new crafting and programming practices of through creative and self-expressive designs. In otherwords, the college-age and adult students “crafted” new versions of themselves along with all the projects theymade in class.Amidst the many influences of parents, children, hobbies, and prior education on students’ connectedlearning in the context of this course, local, cultural knowledge played a particular role in legitimizing students’prior expertise in the Craft Technologies course. In Utah and neighboring states, the setting of the course, thereis a strong emphasis on do-it-yourself practices, largely influenced by the dominance of the Church of JesusChrist of Latter-day Saints (LDS church). This emphasis on DIY crafting and related practices is not unique tothe LDS church nor its members, but it has certainly become codified as a practice and spilled over into themilieu of making in Utah. For women, this spirit of do-it-yourself is predominantly exhibited as crafting withsoft materials (paper, textiles), and takes place either at auxiliary church meetings or as a part of family practice.All of the participants interviewed were influenced by this making culture, whether overtly from being raised inthe LDS church (the majority of students) or tacitly as members of the broader community. Several participantsspecifically mentioned learning to sew or craft because of church activities. Others discussed how they wouldparticipate in “crafting weekends” with their moms and sisters. The unique fusion of the “soft and tactile” withprogramming and circuitry concepts allowed students to build on their past crafting experience, while learningnew knowledge. In a broader sense, the Craft Technologies course also validated students’ crafting and DIYactivities which are often pursued outside of formal learning environments.Earlier we described the importance for engaging not just children but adults in connective learningand becoming through design practices with computational media. As many students in the class expressed,opportunities for self-expression and creativity can be very limited in the lives of busy working adults—kids are‘allowed’ this kind of play (in many circles at least) but adults are often excluded from this throughcommitments to work and family. The course opened up a space for older students to pursue personal interestsand learn new techniques. These opened up new identities as well as new skills that were relevant inworkplaces, hobbies, and with families. Beyond this there may be other benefits to engaging older students andadults in learning with computational media. As hinted in the narratives about Naomi and Fiona, parents,ICLS 2014 Proceedings932© ISLSteachers, and community leaders have strong influences on the opportunities given to children and youth, be itas counselors, teachers, mentors or as parents. Their ideas about children have significant effects on howchildren view themselves in areas like science and math, with implications for their decisions about what careersand experiences to pursue (Yee & Eccles, 1988). Our research opens up possibilities of engaging adults inlearning to design with new technologies in ways that may reshape not only their own identities and practicesbut also their views of younger students’ capabilities and even their willingness to engage in new forms ofteaching and mentoring.ReferencesAzevedo, F. (2011). Lines of Practice: A Practice-Centered Theory of Intereset Relationships. Cognition andIntruction, 29, 147-184.Banks, J.A., Au, K.A., Ball, A.F., Bell, P., Gordon, E.W., Gutiérrez, K.,. . . . & Zhou, M. (2007). Learning inand out of school in diverse environments. Seattle, WA: The LIFE Center, University of Washington.Blikstein, P. (2013). Digital Fabrication and ’Making’ in Education: The Democratization of Invention. In J.Walter-Herrmann & C. Bü ching (Eds.), FabLabs: Of Machines, Makers and Inventors. Bielefeld:Transcript Publishers.Brickhouse, N. W., & Potter, J. T. (2001). Young women's scientific identity formation in an urban context.Journal of research in science teaching, 38(8), 965-980.Buechley, L., and Eisenberg, M. (2008). The LilyPad Arduino: Toward wearable engineering for everyone.Wearable Computing Column in IEEE Pervasive, 7(2), 12-15.Buechley, L. (2013, October). Thinking about making. Keynote address at the annual FabLearn 2013 DigitalFabrication at School conference. Palo Alto, CACharmaz, K. (2000). Grounded theory: Objectivist and constructivist methods. In N.K. Denzin & Y.S. Lincoln(Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp. 509–535). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.Erikson, E. H. (1968) Identity: Youth and crisis. Norton: New York.Fields, D. A. (2010). Trajectories of identification across social spaces: Intersections between home, school,and everyday settings. Unpublished dissertation. University of California, Los Angeles.Fisher, A., & Margolis, J. (2002). Unlocking the clubhouse: the Carnegie Mellon experience. ACM SIGCSEBulletin, 34(2), 79-83.Golding, B. G. (2011). Social, local, and situated: recent findings about the effectiveness of older men’sinformal learning in community contexts. Adult Education Quarterly, 61(2), 103-120.Grimes, S., & Fields, D.A. (2012). Kids online: A new research agenda for understanding social networkingforums. The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice.Educational researcher, 32(5), 19-25.Hill, C., Corbett, A., & St. Rose, A. (2010). Why So Few? Women in Science, Technology, Engineering, andMathematics. Washington, DC: AAUW.Holland, D. Lachiotte,W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and Agency in Cultural Worlds. HarvardUniversity Press, Cambridge, MA.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., . . . & Watkins, S.C. (2013).Connected Learning: An Agenda for Research and Design. Irvine, CA: Digital Media and LearningResearch Hub.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge UniversityPress.Lee, V. R., & Fields, D. A. (2013). A clinical interview for assessing student learning in a university-level crafttechnology course. Paper presented at the III Digital Fabrication in Education Conference (FabLearn2013), Stanford, CA.Moll, L. C., Tapia, J., & Whitmore, K. F. (1993). Living knowledge: The social distribution of culturalresources for thinking. Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations, 139-163.Nasir, N. I. S., & Hand, V. (2008). From the court to the classroom: Opportunities for engagement, learning, andidentity in basketball and classroom mathematics. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(2), 143179.Prensky, M. (2001). Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants. On the Horizon. NCB University Press, 9(5),Sawchuk, P. (2003). Adult learning and technology in working-class life. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.Turkle, S., & Papert, S. (1991). Epistemological pluralism and the revaluation of the concrete.Constructionism, 161-192.Searle, K. A., Kafai, Y. B. & Fields, D. A. (2013, April). Building new clubhouses: Opening doors to computingfor girls and boys with electronic textiles. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the AmericanEducational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.ICLS 2014 Proceedings933© ISLSU.S. Department of Labor. (2003, September). FY 2003-2008 strategic plan. Retrieved February 13, 2007, fromhttp://www.dol.gov/_sec/stratplan/strat_plan_ 2003-2008.pdf.Yee, D. K. & Eccles, J. S. (1988). Parent perceptions and attributions for children’s math achievement. SexRoles, 19(5/6), 317-333.ICLS 2014 Proceedings934© ISLSReport and Reflection Papers