When Experts Disagree: Sourcing Practices While ReadingConflicting Online Information SourcesSarit Barzilai, University of Haifa, 199 Abba Hushi Blvd., Haifa, IsraelEynav Tzadok and Yoram Eshet-Alkalai, The Open University of Israel, 108 Ravutsky St., Ra’anana, IsraelEmail: sarit.barzilai@edu.haifa.ac.il, eynav150@hotmail.com, yorames@openu.ac.ilAbstract: Laypeople who use the Internet to learn about issues of personal or social relevanceoften encounter online information sources that present conflicting expert accounts. The aim ofthe current study was to provide a close observation of spontaneous sourcing practices whilereading conflicting online information sources, to examine the relation between sourcing whilereading and subsequent argument construction, and to assess the role of epistemic perspectives,topic interest, and topic knowledge in sourcing. 61 university students thought aloud whilereading four blog-posts that provided conflicting accounts of a socio-scientific controversy.The findings revealed a wide range of sourcing practices. High sourcing participants mademore sourcing activities, paid more attention to source characteristics, and made source-sourcecomparisons. Higher levels of sourcing were found to be related to subsequent argumentcomplexity. Epistemic perspectives and gender played a significant role in sourcing practicesand highlighted their socio-cultural nature.IntroductionThe ubiquity of Internet and Web 2.0 technologies has created a contemporary learning challenge: On the onehand, information technologies have dramatically increased the abundance and variety of information sourcesthat are available to laypeople who wish to learn about current issues. On the other hand, the diverse andconflicting nature of Internet sources often makes it difficult to make sense of their claims and to reach informeddecisions. Effectively dealing with online information necessitates, therefore, acquiring digital literacystrategies, such as the ability to critically evaluate and integrate multiple information sources (Eshet-Alkalai,2004; Goldman & Scardamalia, 2013). A crucial aspect of evaluation and integration strategies is the ability toform connections between sources and their contents: Knowledge construction from multiple informationsources entails attributing information to specific sources and paying attention to the ways in which sourcecharacteristics, such as identity, expertise, perspectives, motivation, and credibility, impact the informationpresented (Rouet, 2006; Wineburg, 1991). However, multiple studies indicate that learners often ignore ordownplay source characteristics and tend to focus on medium and content characteristics (Britt & Aglinskas,2002; Gasser, Cortesi, Malik, & Lee, 2012).Sourcing involves attending to and evaluating source information and using source information tointerpret the content (Bråten, Britt, Strømsø, & Rouet, 2011; Britt & Aglinskas, 2002). Wineburg (1991) notedthat sourcing provides anticipatory frameworks for the subsequent encoding of text. Although sourcing has beenoften studied in the context of reading historical documents, recent studies have focused on sourcing processeswith varied types of documents, including online information sources (e.g., Goldman, Braasch, Wiley, Graesser,& Brodowinska, 2012; Strømsø, Bråten, Britt, & Ferguson, 2013). Sourcing studies often present learners withinformation sources of varying levels of expertise and authority, thereby highlighting evaluation of authortrustworthiness. In the current study we were interested in examining what happens when learners encounterconflicting information sources written by authors of comparable expertise and authority. Such examinationmay help improve the understanding of how online readers process and evaluate source information as theylearn about socio-scientific controversies. Additionally, the study examined whether or not sourcing matters interms of argument construction and how sourcing might be related to learners’ views of knowledge andknowing, to their topic interest, and to their topic knowledge.Multiple Document ComprehensionThe challenge of comprehending multiple information sources stems from the fact that these informationsources often do not provide a single coherent account of the issue or situation at hand, but rather may providepartially or wholly inconsistent accounts (Rouet, 2006; Wineburg, 1991). For example, online searching aboutsocio-scientific controversies, such as cell phone use or global warming, can yield numerous search results inwhich experts provide conflicting accounts and explanations. Therefore, source expertise and authoritativenessare necessary but insufficient criteria for evaluating and integrating online information sources about suchcontroversies. Deeper understandings of author backgrounds and perspectives and of the supports they offer fortheir claims are needed. The Documents Model (Bråten et al., 2011; Britt & Rouet, 2012; Rouet, 2006) describesthe structures and mechanisms of multiple document comprehension. In brief, the Documents Model proposesthat readers construct an Integrated Mental Model, which integrates information across documents, as well as anICLS 2014 Proceedings721© ISLSIntertext Model, which represents the documents and their relations. Constructing the Intertext Model involvesforming a representation of each document (i.e. author and document characteristics, rhetorical goals, and keyclaims or position), creating source-content links (i.e. connecting source information to content and using thatinformation to interpret the content), and creating source-source links between documents (i.e. comparingdocuments and noting similarities and differences). Although the Documents Model has been used as aframework in multiple studies, there have not been, to the best of our knowledge, many attempts to examine themodel in situ using think-aloud techniques (cf. Strømsø et al., 2013). In this study we focused on examininghow learners construct Intertext Models by analyzing spontaneous references to source representations, sourcecontent links, and source-source links while reading.Contributors to Multiple Document ComprehensionSeveral contextual and individual factors may contribute to multiple document comprehension. Source andcontent characteristics have been found to impact attention to and memory for sources. Specifically, conflictsbetween information sources have been found to increase source salience, source comprehension, and memoryfor sources (Braasch, Rouet, Vibert, & Britt, 2012). Interest in the topic may lead people to pay closer attentionto messages, to evaluate their arguments and sources more carefully and critically, and thus improve documentcomprehension and memory for sources (Strømsø, Bråten, & Britt, 2010). Disciplinary expertise and topicknowledge may also affect learners’ capacity to evaluate sources critically (Wineburg, 1991). Finally, learners’personal epistemology, that is, their thinking about knowledge and about how people know, has also been foundto have an impact on source evaluation and multiple document integration (Barzilai & Zohar, 2012; Bråten etal., 2011).In the current study, personal epistemology was conceptualized using a model proposed by Kuhn andher colleagues (Kuhn & Weinstock, 2002). In brief, this model distinguishes between three main epistemicperspectives: (1) absolutism— knowledge is perceived as objective, absolute, and certain; (2) multiplism —knowledge is perceived as subjective, relative, and uncertain; and (3) evaluativism— knowledge is perceived ascombining subjective and objective aspects, and although it is uncertain can be evaluated and improved.Learners’ epistemic thinking develops with age and schooling and is shaped by disciplinary standards as well asby socio-cultural values (Tabak & Weinstock, 2008). Learner’s epistemic thinking includes both metacognitiveknowledge, skills, and experiences regarding the nature of knowledge and knowing, as well as cognitivestrategies and processes for reasoning about the epistemic characteristics of specific information, knowledgeclaims, and their sources (Barzilai & Zohar, 2014). Thus, reasoning about the reliability of specific informationsources and about the justification and coherence of their claims are cognitive-level epistemic processes(epistemic cognition). Whereas learners’ views regarding the certainty, sources, structure, and justification ofknowledge and knowing are a meta-level epistemic knowledge (epistemic metacognition). Learners’ epistemicmetacognitive knowledge is proposed to interact with their cognitive-level epistemic processes (Barzilai &Zohar, 2012, 2014).The Present StudyThe goal of the present study was to observe and analyze learners’ spontaneous sourcing practices as they readonline information sources that present conflicting expert accounts regarding a socio-scientific controversy. Inaddition, the study examined some of the predictors and products of sourcing.The study questions were:1. To what extent do learners spontaneously attend to source information and process that informationwhile reading conflicting online information sources? Specifically, do learners spontaneously formsource representations, source-content links, and source-source links, while reading?2. What are the characteristics of learners’ sourcing practices?3. Is sourcing while reading related to subsequent argument construction?4. Is sourcing while reading related to learners’ epistemic perspectives, topic interest, and topicknowledge?MethodParticipantsParticipants were 61 Hebrew-speaking students from a distance learning university (64% female; 84% BAstudents; 16% MA students; mean age = 30.50 years, SD = 8.44).MaterialsThe topic chosen for the study was the socio-scientific controversy regarding whether or not Israel shoulddevelop an extensive seawater desalination system to supply growing water demands. We designed several shortblog-posts that were all based on authentic online sources. The blog-posts were of similar length, writing style,ICLS 2014 Proceedings722© ISLSand author expertise. All authors were presented as owning a doctoral degree and working as consultants togovernment departments and agencies. However, the authors presented conflicting arguments for and againstdesalination from different disciplinary perspectives (economic and environmental). Thus, in contrast to manyprevious sourcing studies, the sources were of similar expertise and authority, thereby focusing the attention ondifferences between source perspectives and positions.MeasuresScenario-Based Epistemic Thinking Assessment: Learners’ epistemic perspectives were measured using ascenario-based assessment that related to the desalination context (Barzilai & Weinstock, 2014). The assessmentis a topic-specific measure of learners’ epistemic metacognitive knowledge. Participants were asked to rate theiragreement with typical absolutist, multiplist, and evaluativist views, on a scale from one to ten (e.g., anabsolutist statement was “eventually there will be one right answer”). Internal consistency reliabilities of thescales were: absolutism, 10 items, α = .87; multiplism, 8 items, α = .85; and evaluativism, 10 items; α = .83. Ascore for each position was calculated based on the item mean. Mean scores were: absolutism, M = 7.49, SD =1.54; multiplism, M = 3.39, SD = 1.66; and evaluativism, M = 6.76, SD = 1.62.Topic Interest: Topic interest was assessed using a 10-item questionnaire by Mason, Gava, and Boldrin(2008) that was translated to Hebrew and adapted to the task topic. Items were scored on a six-point scale.Internal consistency reliability was α = .92. The topic interest score was based on the item mean, M = 3.76, SD =1.03.Topic Knowledge: We developed a multiple-choice test composed of 12 items, which related to theclaims made in the blog-posts. Internal consistency reliability was α = .45 which is lower than desirable and mayhave resulted from the fact that the assessment tapped multiple areas of knowledge regarding desalination andIsrael’s water sources. The topic knowledge score was based on the sum of the correct responses, M = 4.75, SD= 2.09.Argument task: Following reading, the participants were asked to write arguments presenting theirposition regarding the desalination controversy. The writing instructions were: “Please write an argument thataddresses the question: Should the State of Israel continue to encourage the construction of seawaterdesalination plants? Present your position on this issue and justify it”. The arguments were coded for complexityand the number of sources that the argument was based on.o Argument complexity - Coding was based on criteria employed by Schwarz et al. (2003): No sound argument (0 points) - A claim is not provided or no justifications are provided for a claim. One-sided argument (1 point) - A single claim is supported by a reason or a series of reasons. Two-sided argument with partial justification (2 points) – A claim and a counter-claim or a twosided claim is presented but reasons are provided for only one of the sides. Two-sided argument with full justification (3 points) - A claim and a counter-claim or a two-sidedclaim is presented and reasons are provided for both sides. The first two authors independentlycoded 40 arguments. Interrater reliability was Cohen’s kappa = .92.o Sources in argument - The number of blog-posts referenced in the participants’ arguments was counted.Interrater reliability was Cohen’s kappa = .74.ProcedureAll questionnaires, blog-posts and tasks were displayed on a computer screen via an Internet browser. Datacollection was conducted individually. We used the think-aloud method (Ericsson & Simon, 1993) to taplearners’ sourcing activity. Participants were instructed and trained to say everything they think or do as theyread. If participants were silent for more than 15 seconds they were reminded to think-aloud, using prompts suchas “please tell me what you are thinking”. No other instructions or feedback were provided.Coding SchemeThe unit of analysis was defined as a comment or a set of comments that relate to specific source information(Strømsø et al., 2013). The coding scheme was developed by adapting and expanding a coding scheme byStrømsø et al. (2013). Two main additions were made to the Strømsø et al. scheme: (1) Because readers madereferences to themselves as a source of knowledge, the reader was added as one of the possible sources; (2)Source-source link activities were added to the coding scheme. Interrater reliability ranged from Cohen’s kappa.87 to 1.00. The coding scheme is provided in Table 1.ICLS 2014 Proceedings723© ISLSTable 1: Sourcing coding schemeSourcingCategorySubprocesscategorySourceType ofPresent blogrepresentsourceOther blogation (SR)Other sourceReader assourceType ofreferenceExplicitImplicitSourcecharacteristicsExpertisePositionDisciplinaryperspectiveMotivationCurrencySourcingactivitySourcecontent(SC) linksSourcingactivityOtherAttentionEvaluatingsourcereliabilityPredictingConnectingSourcesource(SS) linksSourcingactivityInterpretingEvaluatingcontentreliabilityComparingsourceclaimsComparingsourceperspectivesor positionsComparingsourcecharacteristicsComparingsourcereliabilityICLS 2014 ProceedingsDescriptionReference to the source of the current blog.Reference to the source of one of the three other blogs.Reference to a source that is not part of the document set (e.g., anewspaper article previously read).Explicit and reflective reference to the reader as a source ofknowledge (e.g., “I remember that after the last winter, the waterlevel in the Sea of Galilee actually rose”).Clear and precise expression of source characteristics such assource name, profession, or affiliation (e.g., “Dr. Rabinovich,hydrologist”).Statements that indicate sourcing without precise verbalization ofsource characteristics (e.g., “She says that…”).Explicit reference to source expertise, qualifications,professionalism, prior experience, and knowledge (e.g., “They areall doctors…”).Explicit reference to source’s stance regarding the desalinationcontroversy (e.g., “It seems as if she is for desalination”).Explicit reference to the disciplinary perspective or point of viewof the source (e.g., “She has an ecological approach and not justan economic one”).Explicit reference to financial, professional, or social motivationsand interests (e.g., “He may have financial interests …”).Explicit reference to the time in which the blog was written (e.g.,“I wonder if these blogs are up-to-date”).Any other source characteristic (e.g., writing style or familiarity).Mention of the above source information without any furtherconsideration of source reliability.Explicit evaluation of the trustworthiness of the source (e.g., “Iam thinking if he is right or not”).Use of source information to anticipate information to appear inthe blog (e.g., “This is going to be different because he is aconsultant…”).Relating source information to a specific knowledge claim madein the blog (e.g., “She writes that the population is expected togrow”).Using source information to interpret a specific knowledge claim.Using source information to evaluate the reliability of the blog’scontent (e.g., “I am not familiar with the data but I assume that heis familiar”).Comparing and contrasting specific knowledge claims made bythe sources (e.g., “In the previous blog they said that the waterwells were becoming salty but here they say that there are otherwater wells”).Comparing and contrasting source point of views, opinions, orpositions (e.g., “She says that desalination shouldn’t be done andthe previous one said that it should”).Comparing and contrasting source characteristics such asexpertise, affiliation, or currency, not including source positionsor perspectives (e.g., “Before there was someone who wasemployed in the Water Authority and he is an economist”).Comparing and contrasting the trustworthiness of the sources(e.g., “It seems as if everyone is exaggerating a bit”).724© ISLSResultsSourcing ProfilesThe participants made a total of 219 sourcing comments that related to at least one document (i.e., present blog,other blog, or other source) while reading (3.6 comments per participant on average). However, examination ofsourcing activities revealed substantially different patterns of sourcing. Using the Documents Model, fourdistinct sourcing profiles were identified:Profile A - No sourcing – 12 participants (19.7%) made no sourcing comments at all.Profile B - Minimal sourcing: Source representations only – 2 participants (3.3%) mentioned SR onlywithout making SC or SS links. This profile was quite rare because SR were usually connected to blog content.Profile C - Low sourcing: Source representations and source-content links – 20 participants (32.8%)mentioned SR and made SC links only. Participants in this group referred to the authors of the blogs, to theirclaims, and sometimes to their characteristics, but did not engage in explicit comparisons. For example:It is not clear to me if when she speaks of alternative sources she is speaking aboutdesalination or something else… OK, so this is actually pro desalination… [Goes on to readanother blog] I agree with what is written here… I’m not sure this is sufficient, such asolution…. OK… What he says is interesting… [P40; emphasizes by the authors]Profile D - High sourcing: Source representations, source-content links, and source-source links –Lastly, 27 participants (44.2%) mentioned SR and made both SC and SS links. For example:It seems as if she has an interest in this because she is a consultant to the Water Authority…Compared to the previous one, they didn’t mention the [pollution of the] water wells… It isclear that she supports desalination… [Goes on to read another blog] … This doesn’t makesense, in the first blog they mentioned different data and the numbers don’t work out… Herethey don’t talk about desalination and they do talk about other solutions… [P7; emphasizes bythe authors]Participants in the high sourcing profile also made considerably more sourcing activities. See Figure 1.Figure 1. Sourcing profiles: Mean number of sourcing activities by sourcing processSource RepresentationsFigure 2. References to source characteristic by sourcing profileThe sourcing comments were overwhelmingly implicit (79.5% of the comments). However, high sourcingparticipants were more likely to make explicit source references compared to low sourcing participants, χ 2 (1, NICLS 2014 Proceedings725© ISLS= 47) = 15.09, p < .001. High sourcing participants were also significantly more likely to mention other blogs intheir sourcing comments than low sourcing participants, χ 2 (1, N = 47) = 35.66, p < .001. Lastly, high sourcingparticipants referred to a wider range of source characteristics. See Figure 2.Sourcing ActivitiesAmong SR activities, attention to the source (84.9% of the comments) was much more frequent than explicitevaluation of source reliability (15.1% of the comments). Figure 3 provides the percentage of participants whoengaged in each sourcing activity. Low sourcing and high sourcing participants were equally likely to engage insimple attention activities. However, high sourcing participants were marginally more likely to reflect on sourcereliability, χ 2 (1, N = 47) = 3.64, p = .056. The predominant SC activity was creating connections betweensources and claims, i.e., noting who says what (75.8% of the comments). Use of source information to evaluatecontent reliability was a much less frequent activity (12.3% of the comments). With a single exception,participants did not predict or interpret the content using source information. High sourcing participants mademore SC activities than the low sourcing participants but there were no significant differences between groupsin the distribution of SC activities. The most frequent SS activity was comparing source claims (13.7% of thecomments), followed by comparing source perspectives or positions (6.8%), comparing source characteristics(2.7%), and comparing source reliability (0.5%).Figure 3. Sourcing activities by sourcing profileRelation between Sourcing and ArgumentationIn order to examine the relation between sourcing and argument construction we conducted ANOVAs withsourcing profile as a between-subjects variable (no sourcing, n = 12, low sourcing, n = 20, and high sourcing, n= 27) and argument complexity and argument sources as dependent variables. No effect of sourcing profile onthe numbers of sources mentioned in the arguments was found. However, the effect of sourcing profile onargument complexity was statistically significant, F(2,56) = 5.68, p = .006, ηp2 = .17. Post-hoc Tukey HSD testsindicated that high sourcing participants produced significantly more complex arguments, M = 1.89, SD = .80,than low sourcing participants, M = 1.20, SD = .89, p = .013, and no sourcing participants, M = 1.17, SD = .58, p= .030. No differences were found between no sourcing and low sourcing participants, p = .993. A possibleexplanation of the relation between sourcing and argumentation emerged from the participants’ comments.Several high sourcing participants described in their arguments how source-source comparisons introduceepistemic doubt and promote an awareness of the complexity of the situation:The articles presented contrary opinions that made me doubt the situation. ... I am afraid thatif financial aspects will dominate the ecological aspects we will destroy the ecological balanceand create irreversible damages and therefore I still have some reservations… [P15;emphasizes by the authors]My opinion is conflicted. On the one hand, desalination has a positive aspect, and on the otherhand, negative. My opinion is that we need to find the best solution, and when I say best Imean a solution that will cause minimal damage to nature while balancing the water sources. Ifound it hard to base my opinion on what was written [in the blogs] because many positionsand opinions were presented. [P28; emphasizes by the authors]ICLS 2014 Proceedings726© ISLSPredictors of SourcingA multinomial logistic regression indicated that epistemic perspectives, topic interest, and topic knowledge werenot significant predictors of sourcing profile (no sourcing, low sourcing, and high sourcing). We furtherexamined the correlations between epistemic perspectives, topic interest, and topic knowledge, and specificsourcing activities among all participants who made document-related sourcing comments. Multiplism wasfound to be negatively correlated to SR activities, rs = -.31, p = .031, and to SC link activities, rs = -.31, p = .028.Accordingly, multiplism was also related to low attention to source characteristics, rs = -.38, p = .007, andspecifically to low attention to the positions and perspectives of the authors, rs = -.31, p = .031, and toinformation source currency, rs = -.33, p = .020. In contrast, multiplism was positively related to reference to thereader as a source of knowledge, rs = .36, p = .012. Evaluativism was also positively correlated with referencesto the reader as source, rs = .29, p = .040. However, evaluativism, in contrast to multiplism, was not significantlyassociated with document-related sourcing activities. Absolutism, topic interest, and topic knowledge were notcorrelated with sourcing activities.Unexpectedly, gender was found to be related to sourcing profiles, χ 2 (2, N = 59) = 6.80, p = .033.Examination of sourcing profiles revealed that 29.7% of the women and only single man were included in the nosourcing profile, 35.1% of the women and 31.8% of the men were included in the low sourcing profile, and35.1% of the women and 63.6% of the men were included in the high sourcing profile.Conclusions and DiscussionA close examination of spontaneous sourcing while reading conflicting online information sources, revealed awide range of sourcing practices. Some learners did not explicitly engage in sourcing as they read, whereasothers actively engaged in the full span of Intertext Model building activities. High sourcing participants mademore sourcing activities, paid more attention to source characteristics, and made source-source comparisons.However, even though high sourcing participants were aware of source characteristics and relations, they did notoften employ source information in order to explicitly evaluate source and content reliability and to predict andinterpret the content of the blog-posts. That is, even when learners did create Intertext Models, these were oftenloosely connected to an understanding of the text at hand and were not always used in order to construct anintegrated understanding of the documents. Nonetheless, higher levels of sourcing while reading were found tobe related to argument complexity, suggesting that sourcing while reading is an important practice whenconstructing knowledge from diverse information sources. Source-source comparisons may highlightdifferences between source positions and perspectives and thus promote knowledge construction. Additionally,such comparisons may introduce epistemic doubt (Bendixen & Rule, 2004) which can lead learners to considerand weigh alternate accounts.A possible interpretation of our findings is that the authors’ expertise might have conferred highreliability on the information sources and therefore may have negatively impacted learners’ tendencies toevaluate source and content reliability. Further studies will be needed in order to examine how different types ofcontrasts between online information sources and different task conditions might affect sourcing practices.The finding that multiplism is negatively related to attention to sources of the documents and positivelyrelated to attention to the reader as source of knowledge is in line with previous findings that views ofknowledge as subjective and of justification as personal are related to lower attention to the sources ofknowledge (Bråten, Ferguson, Strømsø, & Anmarkrud, in press). Evaluativism was also related to attention tothe reader as a source of knowledge. However, evaluativist perspectives were not related to lower attention tothe sources of the documents, suggesting that, in this case, awareness of the reader as source was balanced byattentiveness to additional sources of knowledge. Topic interest and topic knowledge did not emerge assignificant precursors of sourcing, possibly because topic interest was sufficiently high in our sample andbecause the texts were self-explanatory and did not require extensive background knowledge.The study revealed that not all learners spontaneously engage in sourcing. In our study, women weremuch more likely than men to adopt a position of silence (Belenky, Clinchy, Goldberger, & Tarule, 1986) vis-àvis the authors/authority of the information sources they were reading. The finding that gender may have a rolein sourcing was unexpected and requires further examination. However, this finding suggests that sourcing is asocio-cultural practice that is deeply related to how learners’ view themselves as knowers in relation to expertauthorities and to how they perceive their role in the knowledge society.Design ImplicationsOur findings suggest that all learners might benefit from instruction aimed at fostering sourcing while learningwith information sources. Promoting closer attention to source characteristics, consideration of theirimplications, and creation of source-source links appear to be particularly important aims for sourcinginstruction. We propose that the design of such instruction needs to take into account not only the nature ofonline information sources but also learners’ existing sourcing practices. These practices develop in the contextof everyday use of the Internet for information seeking and reflect learners’ views regarding what it means toICLS 2014 Proceedings727© ISLSknow and regarding their roles and goals as knowers in the knowledge society. Therefore, learning sourcing isnot just acquiring a set of skills; it is also learning how to become a knower and a producer of knowledge inincreasingly networked and information-rich communities. This reflection leads us to conjecture that sourcinginstruction that addresses learners’ epistemic perspectives regarding the nature of knowledge and knowing andregarding their roles as knowers in society might promote more active and critical sourcing.ReferencesBarzilai, S., & Weinstock, M. (2014). Development and validation of a scenario-based assessment of epistemicthinking. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association(AERA), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.Barzilai, S., & Zohar, A. (2012). Epistemic thinking in action: Evaluating and integrating online sources.Cognition and Instruction, 30(1), 39-85.Barzilai, S., & Zohar, A. (2014). Reconsidering personal epistemology as metacognition: A multifacetedapproach to the analysis of epistemic thinking. Educational Psychologist, 49(1), 13-35.Belenky, M. F., Clinchy, B. M., Goldberger, N. R., & Tarule, J. M. (1986). Women's ways of knowing: Thedevelopment of self, voice and mind. New York, NY: Basic Books.Bendixen, L. D., & Rule, D. C. (2004). An integrative approach to personal epistemology: A guiding model.Educational Psychologist, 39(1), 69-80.Braasch, J. L. G., Rouet, J.-F., Vibert, N., & Britt, M. A. (2012). Readers’ use of source information in textcomprehension. Memory & Cognition, 40(3), 450-465.Bråten, I., Britt, M. A., Strømsø, H. I., & Rouet, J.-F. (2011). The role of epistemic beliefs in the comprehensionof multiple expository texts: Toward an integrated model. Educational Psychologist, 46(1), 48-70.Bråten, I., Ferguson, L. E., Strømsø, H. I., & Anmarkrud, Ø. (in press). Students working with multipleconflicting documents on a scientific issue: Relations between epistemic cognition while reading andsourcing and argumentation in essays. British Journal of Educational Psychology.Britt, M. A., & Aglinskas, C. (2002). Improving students' ability to identify and use source information.Cognition and Instruction, 20(4), 485-522.Britt, M. A., & Rouet, J.-F. (2012). Learning with multiple documents: Component skills and their acquisition.In J. R. Kirby & M. J. Lawson (Eds.), Enhancing the quality of learning: Dispositions, instruction, andlearning processes (pp. 276-314). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Ericsson, A. K., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data (rev. Ed.). Cambridge, MA:MIT Press.Eshet-Alkalai, Y. (2004). Digital literacy: A conceptual framework for survival skills in the digital era. Journalof Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 13(1), 93-106.Gasser, U., Cortesi, S., Malik, M., & Lee, A. (2012). Youth and digital media: From credibility to informationquality: Berkman Center for Internet & Society.Goldman, S. R., Braasch, J. L. G., Wiley, J., Graesser, A. C., & Brodowinska, K. (2012). Comprehending andlearning from internet sources: Processing patterns of better and poorer learners. Reading ResearchQuarterly, 47(4), 356-381.Goldman, S. R., & Scardamalia, M. (2013). Managing, understanding, applying, and creating knowledge in theinformation age: Next-generation challenges and opportunities. Cognition and Instruction, 31(2), 255269.Kuhn, D., & Weinstock, M. (2002). What is epistemological thinking and why does it matter? In B. K. Hofer &P. R. Pintrich (Eds.), Personal epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing.(pp. 121-144). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Mason, L., Gava, M., & Boldrin, A. (2008). On warm conceptual change: The interplay of text, epistemologicalbeliefs, and topic interest. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100(2), 291-309.Rouet, J.-F. (2006). The skills of document use: From text comprehension to web-based learning. Mahwah, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Schwarz, B. B., Neuman, Y., Gil, J., & Ilya, M. (2003). Construction of collective and individual knowledge inargumentative activity. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 219-256.Strømsø, H. I., Bråten, I., & Britt, M. A. (2010). Reading multiple texts about climate change: The relationshipbetween memory for sources and text comprehension. Learning and Instruction, 20(3), 192-204.Strømsø, H. I., Bråten, I., Britt, M. A., & Ferguson, L. E. (2013). Spontaneous sourcing among students readingmultiple documents. Cognition and Instruction, 31(2), 176-203.Tabak, I., & Weinstock, M. (2008). A sociocultural exploration of epistemological beliefs. In M. S. Khine (Ed.),Knowing, knowledge and beliefs: Epistemological studies across diverse cultures (pp. 177-195). NewYork, NY: Springer.Wineburg, S. S. (1991). Historical problem solving: A study of the cognitive processes used in the evaluation ofdocumentary and pictorial evidence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83(1), 73-87.ICLS 2014 Proceedings728© ISLS