Taking a New Perspective on Spatial Representations in STEMDane DeSutter, University of Illinois-Chicago, ddesut2@uic.eduMike Stieff, University of Illinois-Chicago, mstieff@uic.eduAbstract: Representational competence is a vital capacity in STEM disciplines and studentsmust form strong representational expertise. When translating between highly spatialrepresentations, students can successfully rely on external resources to simplify the process;however, this may come at the expense of producing durable mental representations. Here weintroduce a software interface to help chemistry students perform spatially demandingdiagram translations. We implicate embodied perspectives for addressing the production ofsuch mental representations.IntroductionScientists rely on the ability to make fluid translations between external representations within their domain(Kozma, Chin, Russell, & Marx, 2000; Kozma & Russell, 1997). Representational translations are particularlyimportant in the domain of chemistry where students must learn to coordinate molecular diagrams, spectra,formulae, and concrete models to each other as well as to the phenomena they represent. In this discipline, thevast scale that separates the observable world from the represented world uniquely complicates translatingamong representations and presents a barrier to successful problem solving and conceptual change. As such,improving the ability to move fluently between representations, or representational competence (Kozma &Russell), is a central target for instruction and the design of new learning environments in chemistry.Developing representational competence becomes increasingly important as students progress throughthe chemistry curriculum. In particular, college level instruction in chemistry emphasizes a highly spatial subsetskill of representational competence: performing representation translation between standard moleculardiagrams. Representation translation between molecular diagrams (hereafter RT) like the Fischer, Dash-Wedge,and Newman projections (see Figure 1) is a difficult task, as students must identify and transform a molecule’s3D spatial relationships through both holistic and internal degrees of freedom. Recently, empirical work hasshown that RT can be supported through the use of concrete molecular models (Padalkar & Hegarty, 2012;Stull, Hegarty, Dixon, & Stieff, 2012). However, the utility of concrete models is tempered by reports thatstudents find these models confusing and are unable to use them to solve RT tasks without significant guidance(Stull et al., 2012).Figure 1. Equivalent representations of (2S,3S)-2-chloro-3-butanol: Fisher projection, Dash-Wedge projection,Newman projection, and concrete model (from left to right).Stull, Barrett, and Hegarty (2012) have reported that externalizing RT tasks onto virtual molecularmodels provides students the same benefits found in studies of concrete models for offloading spatialrelationships from working memory. Interestingly, Stull and colleagues have also found that students usingvirtual molecular models were more efficient in answering diagram translation questions and required little to noprior knowledge of chemistry. There is evidence, though, that when students are assessed in absence of suchtools, performance on RT suffers (Stieff, Lira, Scopelitis, in preparation). This raises important questions abouthow students might most productively interact with highly spatial domain content and instructional scaffolds toproduce durable mental representations for STEM.We propose that such durable mental representations may be produced by enlisting the body toperceive structure through embodied perspectives. An embodied perspective is the physical alignment of thebody in a perspective taking (PT) position relative to a spatial diagram and/or scaffolding representation (e.g.,virtual molecular model). Evidence supporting this notion comes from multiple research traditions. Factoranalytic work in spatial cognition has found that spatial visualization (mental rotation) and spatial orientation(perspective taking) are correlated but distinct cognitive processes (Hegarty & Waller, 2004). Thus, learningenvironments enabling PT should still support students with strong mental rotation abilities, but would providestudents with weak aptitude for object-based transformations an alternative when working with highly spatialcontent.PT construed solely as a mental operation, though, is cognitively expensive and may induce strategyswitching (Kozhevnikov & Hegarty, 2001). However, if PT is repositioned as an embodied process, the act ofICLS 2014 Proceedings1599© ISLSusing the body to physically perceive molecular structure becomes a demonstrable process in teaching andlearning settings (Scopelitis & Stieff, under review) and may also lead students to produce body-based schema(Wilson, 2002) that encode correspondence between perspective, structure, and structural diagrams. Suchschema may then be recalled “off-line” (Wilson, p. 633) to catalyze thinking on similar and novel spatial tasks.A Software Solution and Further ImplicationsFrom known affordances of virtual molecular models and the proposed benefits of embodied perspectives, weintroduce a software application that employs head tracking to allow students to embody multiple perspectiveson chemical structures. A computer’s integrated webcam captures a student’s position relative to the screen andtransforms it into reciprocated rotations. The virtual molecular model is then exchanged with its diagrammaticequivalent when a student's position aligns with the view encoded in standard structural diagrams (see Figure 2).Additionally, students have immediate access to molecular structure through pre-selected examples and a searchfield that queries structure data from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) database. Students can enablestandard molecular representations (depicted in Figure 1) after centering the molecule along “eligible bonds.”Figure 2. Example of an embodied perspective with the molecule centered along an eligible bond. Students seehow a ball and stick representation is exchanged for the appropriate diagram at relevant viewing angles.We assert that the implications of this software reach beyond the chemistry classroom. The affordanceof software learning environments to fluidly exchange representations may be beneficial in building students’understanding of space-diagram correspondence. More significantly, embodied perspectives may serve as ageneral, instructable process for highly spatial content in any STEM discipline, producing stable mentalrepresentations for productive inferential reasoning and problem solving.ReferencesHegarty, M., & Waller, D. (2004). A dissociation between mental rotation and perspective-taking spatialabilities. Intelligence, 32(2), 175-191.Kozhevnikov, M., & Hegarty, M. (2001). A dissociation between object manipulation spatial ability and spatialorientation ability. Memory & Cognition, 29(5), 745-756.Kozma, R. B., & Russell, J. (1997). Multimedia and understanding: Expert and novice responses to differentrepresentations of chemical phenomena. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 34(9), 949-968.Kozma, R. B., Chin, E., Russell, J., & Marx, N. (2000). The role of representations and tools in the chemistrylaboratory and their implications for chemistry learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9, 105–144.Padalkar, S., & Hegarty, M. (2012). Improving representational competence in chemistry with model-basedfeedback. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th AnnualConference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2162-2167). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.Scopelitis, S., Stieff, M. (2013). Disciplining perception for spatial thinking: A performative approach.Manuscript submitted for publication.Stieff, M., Scopelitis, S., & Lira, M. Manuscript in preparation.Stull, A. T., Barrett, T. J., & Hegarty, M. (2012). Design of a virtual reality system for the study of diagram usein organic chemistry. In R. Cox, J. P. San Diego (Eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop on TechnologyEnhanced Diagrams Research (pp. 33-41). Canterbury, UK: CEUR.Stull, A. T., Hegarty, M., Dixon, B., & Stieff, M. (2012). Representational Translation With Concrete Models inOrganic Chemistry. Cognition and Instruction, 30(4), 404-434.Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 9(4), 625-636.AcknowledgmentsThe research reported here was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (REESE 1102349).The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent the views of these agencies.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1600© ISLS