How do Children Draw, Describe, and Gesture about Motion?Donna Kotsopoulos, Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, Canada, dkotsopo@wlu.caMichelle Cordy, Thames Valley District School Board, London, Canada, m.cordy@tvdsb.on.caMelanie Langemeyer, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, melanie.langemeyer@mail.utoronto.caLaaraib Khattak, Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, Canada, khat2600@mylaurier.caAbstract: Grade 3 and 4 children (n = 19) created “motion maps” (including both static anddynamic representations) that could be used to find a hidden object. Their drawing, oraldescription, and gestures used while describing, as well as the evaluation of the motion mapsby their teacher were analyzed. Results suggest differences between lower and higherachieving children in the production of all the coding categories and in theirconceptualizations of large-scale space.IntroductionMaps assist children in developing conceptual understandings of small- and large-scale spaces (Uttal, 2000).Children’s ability to use and to interpret maps in small- and large-scale spaces increases with age and this hasbeen proposed to be related to increased experience with maps, encoding experiences, broader environmentalexperiences, and conceptual changes related to abstraction of space (Clements, 2004, p. 280; Piaget, Inhelder, &Szeminska, 1960). Studies have predominantly focused on children’s ability to use maps (i.e., navigation) or tointerpret maps (Frick & Newcombe, 2012; Uttal, 2000). Less prevalent are studies that explore children’s abilityto depict and to explain symbol-to-referent relations in 2-D representations that involve motion. Such studiesmay contribute understanding into the challenges that children face when asked to interpret and use maps.In this research, we examined how children aged 8-9 years depict, describe, and gesture about symbolto-referent relations in drawings (i.e., on an iPad) that also involve motion in what we refer to and describeshortly as “motion maps.” For the purpose of this research, motion in children’s drawings is understood as staticrepresentations of geometry (e.g., translations, rotations, symmetries, dilations, etc.) that reflect changes in oneor more objects’ spatial and geometric identities (i.e., initial location and properties).The question guiding our research was: How do children depict, describe, and gesture about motion intheir drawing of motion maps? Our central premise guiding this research was that in order for children toeffectively interpret and use maps, they must be able to create maps and to conceptualize and engage in motoractions that align with topographical representations within the map. The inclusion of motion elements in mapsmay force a child’s conceptual model to include elements of dynamic geometry that may facilitate increasedability to discriminate between locations in space and scale by having to think and plan for the object’smovement across space.MethodsIn total, 19 children (girls n = 11, boys n = 8) who had a mean age of 8.97 years (SD = 0.71) participated in thisresearch. As part of a culminating summative task to a transformational geometry unit of study, children wereasked to create a drawing referred to as motion maps which are two-dimensional representations of space andcontain objects that may depict motion (e.g., arrows). The children had the option of creating the motion mapson chart-sized paper (84 cm by 63 cm) or using drawing software on their iPads (paper n = 13, iPad n = 6).Paper motion maps were captured to iPads by cameras on the iPads. The motion maps children created digitallywere “locked” so that children were not able to manipulate the objects in them after they were captured to theiriPads. Children were asked to verbally explain their motion maps. The verbal explanations, along with themotion maps, were captured by screencasting (i.e., image and audio narration) on iPads positioned on standabout 30 cm from the child so that the child’s hands were free. To capture the gestures, the children weresimultaneously videotaped by the second author using a digital video camera on a stationary tripod.Parameters of the task required that children construct motion maps that could guide a peer or an avatarof them to a hidden object (i.e., school mascot) somewhere in the school. The motion maps were to include oneor more objects represented as geometrical shapes which moved across at least two distances (e.g., Point A topoint B and then Point B to C) and to change shape either in scale or in orientation (e.g., dilate, rotate, reflect).The task was considered a large-scale spatial task because children could not see the whole space of interest atonce (Quaiser-Pohl, Lehmann, & Eid, 2004). Objects in the motion maps could not be moved but the avatarcould be moved.The motion maps were assessed by the teacher (second author) using levels one, two, three and four,with four being the highest and one being the lowest level. Two curriculum expectations were addressed in thetask considering both the drawing and the verbal explanation. A level of achievement was given for the drawingcomponent and the verbal component, and then an overall level was computed based on the mean of the otherICLS 2014 Proceedings1521© ISLStwo levels rounded up. Coding of the objects in the motion maps, the verbal descriptions, and the gestures werethen described in terms of whether they represented static or dynamic properties of the motion map (Uttal,2013). Göksun, Goldin-Meadow, Newcombe, and Shipley’s (2013) coding scheme related to the study ongesture in mental rotation tasks was also adapted for the coding of the gestures. There were two components tothe coding of the gestures: (1) actual gesture (pointing and iconic), and (2) static or dynamic aspects of themotion map. In total, 25% of the transcriptions, coding, and assessments were done twice with discrepanciesdiscussed and then resolved between coders. Descriptive statistics and non-parametric measures of differencesbetween groups were computed using the Mann-Whitney U test. We make the distinction in the reporting of ourresults between “high” and “low” achievers and “higher” and “lower” achievement. High achievers refer to thetotal group of children achieving overall levels three or four. Low achievers refer to the total group of childrenachieving overall levels of one or two. Higher achievement refers to those children assessed in either levelsthree or four, and lower achievement may refer to those children who were assessed as either level one or two.ResultsThere were more static objects (n = 583) than dynamic objects (n = 88) in the drawings. Approximately 47% ofthe children received a level three or four for their drawings on the drawing component of the rubric. Thosechildren that were the highest achieving, overall level four, produced less overall objects, static, and dynamicobjects than those in levels two and three. These students showed efficiency and also a higher degree ofeffectiveness in their depictions.There were more dynamic verbal descriptions (n = 186) than there were static verbal descriptions (n =84). Approximately 26% of the children received a level three or four for their verbal descriptions on the verbalcomponent of the rubric. Highest achieving children produced the least amount of verbalizations were able tocommunicate their ideas more efficiently using less verbal descriptions.Children produced few gestures when describing their motion maps. High achieving children producedmore overall gestures (n = 40), compared to low achieving children (n = 31). There were more static-typegestures (n = 51) than there were dynamic gestures (n = 20).Based on the overall assessment (mean of verbal and drawing component of the rubric) there were 11high achievers (58%) and eight low achievers (42%). Using the Mann-Whitney U test, statistically significantdifferences were found between high and low achievers in the production of dynamic objects (U = 142, ρ =.000), total verbalizations (U = 523, ρ = .048), dynamic verbal descriptions (U = 392, ρ = .001), iconic-staticgestures (U = 517, ρ = .005), iconic-dynamic gestures (U = 550, ρ = .032), and total production of dynamicgestures (U = 535, ρ = .040). High achievers produced more of each of these codes.ConclusionResults suggest that children were better at depicting motion in their motion maps than they were at describingmotion verbally. Low achievers, compared to high achievers, produced very few objects and motion wasparticularly challenging for them to depict and describe. At the extreme levels, those children achieving anoverall level four demonstrated what we refer to as efficiency of representational relations. They were able touse fewer verbal descriptions and fewer objects, but the most amounts of gestures, compared to those achievingan overall level of two or three, to convey their understanding. The results suggest that perhaps low achieversdid not perceive the task to be large-scale, but rather a series of connected-smaller scale. The children’s use ofinterconnected small-scale spaces to represent a larger-scale space could be used as a spring-board fordeveloping large-scale spatial ability.ReferencesClements, D. H. (2004). Geometric and spatial thinking in early childhood education. In D. H. Clements, J.Sarama & A.-M. Di Biase (Eds.), Engaging young children in mathematics: Standards for earlychildhood mathematics education (pp. 267-298). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Inc.Frick, A., & Newcombe, N. S. (2012). Getting the big picture: Development of spatial scaling abilities.Cognitive Development, 27(3), 270-282.Göksun, T., Goldin-Meadow, S., Newcombe, N., & Shipley, T. (2013). Individual differences in mentalrotation: What does gesture tell us? . Cognitive Processes, 14(2), 153-162.Piaget, J., Inhelder, B., & Szeminska, A. (1960). The child's conception of geometry. London: Routledge andKegan Paul.Quaiser-Pohl, C., Lehmann, W., & Eid, M. (2004). The relationship between spatial abilities and representationsof large-scale space in children--a structural equation modeling analysis. Personality and IndividualDifferences, 36(1), 95-107.Uttal, D. H. (2000). Seeing the big picture: Map use and the development of spatial cognition. DevelopmentalScience, 3(3), 747-286.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1522© ISLS