Creativity as Practice(d) in a Design StudioChristoph Richter, Julia Lembke, Elisa Ruhl and Heidrun Allert, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu KielInstitute of Educational Science, Olshausenstr. 75, 24098 Kiel, GermanyEmail: {richter, j.lembke, ruhl, allert}@paedagogik.uni-kiel.deAbstract: Although the social and cultural dimension of creativity has been emphasized forquite some time, there is neither a consensus on how creativity can be nurtured nor on what itis to become creative. Adopting a practice-oriented perspective, this paper reports on anethnographic study in a studio-based course on Interface Design. Drawing on observationsand students’ narrative accounts of their working processes, the local design studio isportrayed as a well-attuned system of structural elements, patterns of interaction and epistemicassumptions. The findings reveal basic similarities but also significant differences with otherstudies on educational design studios. It is suggested that these differences are due todifferences in the epistemic frames enacted.IntroductionCreativity has become a vital and highly valued aspect of science, technology, the arts, as well as the everydaylife (e.g. Craft, 2011). It has been argued that the increasing interest in creativity is due to a global shift towardsa knowledge-based society and innovation driven economy (Sawyer, 2008). As a consequence the question onhow to promote creativity is of interest for policy makers and curriculum developers alike (Sawyer, 2012).However, creativity is not just relevant to ensure economic growth but also to address urgent social andecological problems and to enable individuals to actively cope with the volatile, provisional, and precarious lifeworlds they find themselves in. Creativity in this sense is not just a skill to be used in predefined settings andaimed to increase performativity, but essentially “can challenge the status quo” (Craft, 2011, p. 28). Adoptingthe conference’s theme, it is hence important not only to ask how creativity can be nurtured but also what it is tobecome creative.This paper reports on an ethnographic study carried out in a one-semester course in the study programon Industrial Design at the Muthesius Academy of Fine Arts and Design in spring 2013. Adopting a practiceoriented perspective, in which creativity is “seen as a mode of human interaction with the world” (Beardon, Ehn& Malmborg, 2002), the goal of the study was to describe respective patterns of interaction enacted by thestudents and the teaching staff and to trace the underlying epistemic frame in a design studio setting. The settingwas chosen because design education in general and the design studio in particular is supposed to be gearedtowards the cultivation of creativity and should therefore promote respective practices. However, due to thesituated nature of practices (e.g. Schatzki, 2012), the intent of our analysis is not to unravel general principles ofcreativity but to shed light on the meshwork of practice enacted in a particular pedagogical setting. Drawing on(1) observations of the actual doings and sayings of the students and the teaching staff during the contact hours,(2) students’ narrative accounts of their working process and procedures, as well as (3) the materialarrangements and artifacts present and utilized, the analysis shows how students work on the horizon of their(and others) knowledge, bring in personal perspectives and make deliberate use of the opportunities they spot torespond to the design challenge given.The contributions of this study to the learning sciences are threefold. First, the study provides anaccount of the patterns of interaction occurring in a genuine pedagogical setting, hence adding to the overalleducational case base. Second, it backs up the assumption that professional practices draw on specific epistemicnorms (cf. Shaffer, 2004) and therefore challenges paradigmatic orientations in education. Third, it providesideas on how creative practice might be nurtured within design but also in other domains.A Practice-Oriented Perspective On CreativityThe concept of creativity has been an object of concern for quite some time across various disciplines (e.g.Hennessey & Amabile, 2010). While the social and cultural dimension of creativity has been emphasized sincethe 1980th current conceptualizations of creativity often still build on a model of the social as “an externalenvironment, a set of stimulations that facilitate or constrain the creative act” (Glăveanu, 2010, p. 85) instead ofconceiving creativity as an inherently social process. Similarly, most of the current accounts also hardly accountfor the way creativity is mediated by material artifacts and environments (e.g. Vyas et al., 2009).The conceptual framework for the present study is therefore based on a practice-oriented perspectiveon creativity. From this perspective creativity is neither a property of a person, process, product, norenvironment, but a way of interacting with the world. More precisely, creative practices can be understood asthose modes of interaction in which individuals or collectives aim to cope productively with an otherwiseICLS 2014 Proceedings238© ISLSindeterminate situation, i.e. a situation that is inherently disturbed, confused, ambiguous, or unsettled (cf.Miettinen, 2006).Drawing on the work of Schatzki (2001, 2012) and Hörning (2001, 2004), we take practices as thecentral unit of analysis, which are understood as “embodied materially mediated arrays of human activitycentrally organized around shared practical understanding” (Schatzki, 2001, p. 2). A practice-orientedperspective holds that human action is not a sequence of self-contained intentional acts realizing preconceivedplans but an ongoing process in which the human actors actively frame, respond to, and transform the situationsthey find themselves in, making use of the artifacts and resources available. Competent action in this senseentails both an adaption of the individual to the environment s/he is acting in, giving rise to habits and routineways of doings things, but also procedures that allow the actor to cope with those situations in which establishedhabits do not work. Social practices, including creative ones, are neither an accumulation nor an abstraction ofindividual acts, but those patterns and styles of action that emerge from repeated interaction, allowing theparticipants to form shared expectations on how to act in a certain situation (cf. Hörning, 2001). Social practiceshence can be understood as the conventions and arrangements enacted by a certain group of people at a certainpoint in time. As practices cannot be separated from the concrete doings and sayings of the practitioners and thematerial assemblages in which these take place, particular practices are necessarily local and historical.Accordingly there is no such thing as a creative practice, but a multitude of creative practices enacted in varioussettings. Furthermore, as situations are usually open to different interpretations, they require an active framingof those engaged in them. Enacting a social practice therefore requires not only practical knowledge, but alsoknowledge about the overarching schemes that allow actors to interpret and define the situation they findthemselves in (cf. Hörning, 2004). The practical know-how as well as the interpretive schemes can beunderstood as repertoires the actors use to cope with the situations they are facing.Learning to become creative hence is about learning to engage in the continually evolving process of acreative practice. From a practice-oriented perspective on learning “the practitioner is an embodied subjectproduced through participation in practices that shape skills, knowledge, understanding and disposition toaction” (Hager, Lee & Reich, 2012, p. 7). Learning to be creative is a situated process entangled with thedevelopment of the learner’s identity. In this process learners not only develop an understanding of the domainand practical know-how but also interpretive schemes to draw on when facing a certain situation. An importantaspect of these schemes is what Shaffer (2006) has called the epistemic frame. Epistemic frames are “the waysof knowing, of deciding what is worth knowing, and of adding to the collective body of knowledge andunderstanding of a community of practice” (Shaffer, 2006, p. 223). Such frames might intersect and overlapwith traditional disciplines but are essentially bound to local practices and continually transformed by theirenactment. Learning therefore is not to be understood as a reproductive but as an inherently transactionalprocess in which the learner as well as the context are evolving.Against this background, the research agenda we pursue is not geared towards the identification ofgeneral principles of creativity but aimed to describe how creativity is practiced in a concrete educationalsetting. Trying to trace the underlying epistemic frame the present study aims to shed light on the utilization andcreation of knowledge in creative design efforts as well as its impact on the practitioners.Research on the Design StudioThe design studio has been variously identified as common denominator and essential constituent of designeducation across the disciplines (e.g. Brandt et al., 2008; Wang, 2010). The design studio is characterized by (a)open-ended projects the students work on over a prolonged period of time, (b) various types of structuredreview or feedback sessions focused on the evolving project work, and (c) a public presentation of the projectoutcomes (cf. Shaffer, 2003).Even though some authors have depicted the design studio as a distinct and consistent pedagogicalapproach (e.g. Kuhn, 2001; Brandt et al., 2008) it has been argued that there are apparently significantdifferences regarding both content and methods in studio teaching between schools and even within departments(e.g. Ledewitz, 1985). In fact various alternative models for design studio teaching have been proposed buildingon substantially different assumptions on the nature of design and the role of the designer (e.g. Dutton, 1987;Ledewitz, 1985; Wang, 2010). Ledewitz (1985) already suggested that the practices actualized within the designstudio depend on the stipulated model of design. In a more recent interview study Carvalho, Dong & Maton(2009) found that design disciplines not only differ with respect to the domain knowledge they deem relevantbut also with regard to the epistemic assumptions they build upon, a fact not least reflected in respectiveeducational efforts. Against this background it seems important to have a close look at the model of design andrespective epistemic assumptions enacted in a specific context, before looking for commonalities that holdacross settings in the first place.While there is number of studies on various aspects of design studios in different domains (e.g. Lahti,Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, Hakkarainen, 2004; Maldonado et al., 2007; Vyas et al., 2009), only few studiesexplicitly aimed to elicit the epistemic frames enacted in these settings. Three noteworthy exceptions are theICLS 2014 Proceedings239© ISLSethnographic studies on design studios reported by Schön (1987), Shaffer (2003), and Sawyer (2012). In hisanalysis of design studios in architecture Schön (1987) has focused on the interactions between the student andthe studio master and suggested these interactions to be essential to the development of a designerly way ofthoughtful action centered around processes of framing, naming, moving, and evaluating. Shaffer (2003)followed students in an architectural design course at the MIT trying to elicit the structures underpinning thestudents’ practices in the studio. To do so he depicted the way in which surface structures, pedagogy and theparticular epistemology of the design process form a coherent system of activity. The epistemology he tracesemphasizes the need for an individual interpretation of the design problem by the architect as well as theorganization of the design process “around the development and articulation of expressive ideas” (p. 25).Finally, Sawyer (2012) carried out an ethnographic study at two professional schools of art and design aiming toidentify general principles of the cultural model of the design studio. Synthesizing observation from interactionin the studio and interviews with instructors and students from a variety of domains, including among othersinterior design, illustration & architecture, he characterizes the teaching practices in the design studio as a formof “disciplined improvisation” (p. 34), in which the students are supposed to master a deliberate and effectivedesign process. All three studies focus on how design is actually practiced within the design studio. However,both Schön and Sawyer, either implicitly or explicitly, assume that there is a common model of design. OnlyShaffer’s (2003) analysis fully accounts for the situatedness of the enacted epistemology, and therefore providesthe most direct point of reference for the present study.Research DesignThe study was carried out in a design studio setting at the Muthesius Academy of Fine Arts and Design inspring 2013. The Muthesius Academy, founded in Kiel in 1907, is devoted to the systematic study of art anddesign. The school has about 500 students and offer bachelor and master programs in the fields of Fine Arts,Industrial Design, Communication Design, Spatial Strategies and Art Education. The course we followed waspart of the study program on Industrial Design with a specialization on Interface Design. It was run by aprofessor and a research assistant. Eleven bachelor students in the 5th semester and six master students took partin the course that lasted from April to July, spanning a period of 14 weeks. Under the overall theme“simulation/simulator” the students were asked to define and carry out individual design projects. All studentsenrolled in the course were included in the study.Our orientation towards practices led to a combined use of different research methods including (a)observations of the interactions between the students and the teaching staff during the contact hours, (b)students’ narrative accounts of their working process, either voiced in students’ interactions with the teachingstaff or in informal interviews carried out by the research team, and (c) the material arrangements and artifactspresent and utilized in the design studio. Data was recorded in the form of extensive field notes supplementedby photos and audio-recordings when feasible. All in all, a total of three observers conducted over 64 hours ofsite observations, taking part in over 90 individual feedback sessions as well as the students’ final presentations.In parallel, the observers wrote memos following the sessions they attended and conducted a workshop with thestudents and the professor aimed to elaborate on the utilization of design artifacts in the middle of the term.Each of the observers has at least two years of teaching experience in a design related domain. Informed consentto take part in this study was obtained from all participants including the teaching staff.To identify commonalities within the setting but also to trace variability, each of the students’ projectshas been treated as a distinct case in the analysis. Field and interview notes were organized into chronologicalcase logs. Using an abductive approach, case logs and memos were used to surface patterns of interactions,which were then iteratively tested against the other cases until a stable set of patterns was found. Afterwards, thepatterns and supporting data were used to trace the underlying epistemic frame.FindingsIn line with the analytic procedure, the presentation of findings starts with a general description of structuralelements of the design studio. Against this background an overview of the actualized patterns of interaction isgiven and the underlying epistemic frame is reconstructed.Structural Elements of the Design StudioAs pointed out by Shaffer (2003), the setup and organization of a design studio is strikingly different from alecture hall, seminar room or classroom. The students in the course were provided with a large open workspacethat they were only sharing with students of another course in the study program on Industrial Design. Withinthis workspace the students were free to setup permanent working areas, an option made use of by six of thestudents. The other students used the room as a temporal working and meeting space, especially during plenarymeetings as well as the feedback session with the teaching staff. In addition the students had access to a varietyof workshops on campus, an option used by the students working on hardware related projects.ICLS 2014 Proceedings240© ISLSWhile plenary meetings and feedback sessions with the professor took place during two fixed timeslotson Tuesdays and Fridays each week, the research assistant also dropped in the workspace in between. Apartfrom this, the students were free to decide when to work on their projects, each of them having access to theshared workspace 24 hours a day. With a calculated workload of 23 working hours per week the design projectswhere supposed to make up for most of the study time. In parallel, the students had to attend an introductorycourse on Human-Computer Interaction also given by the professor.The overall project assignment “simulation/simulator” was introduced to the students by the professorright in the beginning of the semester. Besides a general motivation the students were asked to address thetheme from a designerly perspective either by building on existing projects in other disciplines or taking a moreartistic stance towards the question of simulation and reality. In the first plenary meeting the professor invitedthe students to reflect on previous project experiences followed by a collective brainstorming and discussion ofpotentially relevant questions. In the two subsequent meetings the students were asked to present their personalworking plans for the course, detailing the envisaged stages of their projects and time management, elaborate onpotential design questions and give short presentations on a range of topics approaching the overall projecttheme from different perspectives. From then on the focus shifted towards the students’ individual projects onlyinterrupted by a plenary session in the beginning of May in which the students were asked to reflect on theirwork process, as well as a plenary presentation of interim results asked for by two students in the end of May.Apart from these plenary sessions most of the contact time, about 7-8 hours a week, were spent on individual,sometimes also small group, feedback sessions. In these sessions, which took place in the students’ workspace,the students presented their work in progress and discussed problems, design options and future directions withthe teaching staff. The feedback sessions were of varying length but usually lasted for about 20 to 40 minutes.The projects ended in a plenary presentation of the project results, attended by the participants of thecourse and the teaching staff, as well as a public exhibition on the campus of the Muthesius Academy.Additionally projects had to be documented on an online platform provided by the academy.Patterns of InteractionThe analysis of the case logs resulted in the formulation of twelve patterns of interaction, which synthesize theobservations throughout the 14 weeks of students’ project work. These patterns describe recurrent ways of howthe students and teaching staff coped with and transformed the situations they were facing throughout the designprocess. They are supposed to provide middle-level abstractions in that they capture situationally boundregularities in a form potentially verifiable and intelligible to other practitioners (cf. Dearden & Finlay, 2006).Even though not every pattern was observed in each case, the set of patterns is assumed to be characteristic forthis context in that each of the patterns was instantiated in at least 50% of the projects, often repeatedly.According to their spatio-temporal extension, the patterns have been grouped into three main clusters: (1)foundational patterns that provide a background and reference point for all other design activities but also locatestudents’ projects in broader realms of personal and professional development, (2) structuring patterns thatrender resources accessible and orchestrate project activities, and (3) patterns geared towards the advancementof project related ideas. The latter includes both prospecting patterns (3a) aimed at the exploration of ideas aswell as anchoring patterns (3b) focused on the safeguarding and integration of ideas. In the following we brieflysketch the patterns of interaction along these clusters.Foundational PatternsFoundational patterns of interaction include the explicit framing and re-framing of the design space, thepresentation of results to the outerworld as well as the working at the horizon of one’s own capabilities. Beingprovided only with the generic theme “simulation/simulator“ the students had not only to produce a product butalso to advance a frame of reference that motivates their design by circumscribing the design space they want tooperate in. While for example some of the students framed simulations as a means to learn certain conceptsothers conceptualized it as a tool to open up new perspectives or to provoke emotions and trigger thoughtfulreflection. Successful framing and eventual re-framing provided the students with concepts and criteria tocommunicate, focus, and orient their design project. In taking a certain perspective the students also had toposition themselves in relation to disciplinary questions as well as societal concerns. Similarly, by being askedto present their results to interested audiences, both during as well as at the end of the course, the expectedquality and relevance of students’ projects, which were expected not only to foster personal learning but also tobring forth worthwhile concepts and products, became salient. Furthermore, by defining projects at the horizonof the students’ capabilities, students were asked to move beyond the already known and learned, and exploreinto emerging opportunities.Structuring PatternsThis cluster of patterns includes agile project management, help seeking, and carving space. In the course oftheir projects the students had to plan and manage their activities taking into account given constraints as well asICLS 2014 Proceedings241© ISLSall kinds of uncertainties. While the participants apparently drew on a generic model of the design processincluding ideation, conception, design, prototyping, and presentation, the actual project management was highlyagile in that the students adapted and revised their plans in light of the obstacles but also possibilities thatopened up in the course of the semesters. The students did not only utilize given resources but actively sought torender new resources accessible. In particular, students were seeking help not only among fellow students andteaching staff but also among friends, relatives, external practitioners, and domain experts. In doing so thestudents not only resolved acute problems but also broadened their own scope of action and expanded orconsolidated their social networks. In addition, students carved both individual and collective spaces in supportof their projects rendering accessible both social as well as material resources.Prospecting PatternsThe prospecting patterns of interactions that are central to almost all projects include: imaginative walkthroughs,making ideas tangible, playing with ideas and reflective prototyping. What these patterns have in common isthat they explore into the design space aiming at new insights regarding potential constraints or potentialities.Even though the patterns address somewhat different situations, they all entail a momentum of uncertainty andlimited knowledge. In an imaginative walkthrough the actors simulated an anticipated usage scenario trying todevelop an empathic understanding of the foreseen target population and their experiences. These walkthroughshelped to identify requirements but also to elicit potential implications of a certain design decision. While thesewalkthroughs had a strong narrative moment, students created and made use of tangible objects when trying tocome to terms with experiential qualities and bodily experiences relevant to their projects. In playing with ideas,the participants typically started from a vague idea or incident, which was then explored in an open-ended,associative, and non-judgmental manner. In playing with ideas verbal comments were riddled with gestures andcomments but also augmented with finds, artifacts, as well as ad hoc sketches. Finally, the students alsodeveloped prototypes to explore the feasibility as well as potential (side-)effects of design options.Anchoring PatternsThe anchoring patterns of interaction that complement the prospecting patterns comprise of the focused lead-inand lead-out as well as the deliberate decision-making. The focused lead-in and lead-out brackets the stream ofevents marking the start and end of the feedback sessions as well as all types of presentations. While the focusedlead-in aimed to raise the dialogue partners’ interest, provided required background information and set theagenda, the focused lead-out synthesized the outcomes of the session, including the steps to follow. Deliberatedecision making, in contrast, was triggered whenever students realized that they were approaching a relevantbifurcation point. Rather than striving for a satisficing option only, students usually explored and elaborated ona set of design options before coming to a defensible decision.Reconstruction of the Epistemic FrameWhile each of the patterns of interaction denotes an important transformation in the course of the students’design projects, the patterns do not exist in isolation but form a complex meshwork. For example, a successfulimaginative walkthrough usually requires a focused lead-in and lead-out in which a certain framing isintroduced or challenged. The question hence arises whether there is a common interpretative scheme i.e. anepistemic frame against which this meshwork of practice is enacted and can be understood. Following Stumpfand McDonnell (2001) we reconstruct the underlying epistemic frame along the model of the design task, themodel of the design process, as well as the model of the designer implied in the meshwork of practice.Model of the Design TaskDespite the considerable differences in the ways students carried out their projects, ranging from highlyexperimental to concept driven approaches, a concern essential to all projects has been the development andconveyance of a sound and appropriate interactional experience. While the overall theme „simulation/simulator“is open to a variety of interpretations the students were expected to develop a perspective through which theywant to approach the design task. This was already made explicit in the initial meeting, when the professorexplained that: „design is anything but arbitrary“. Throughout the course the professor urged the students to takea stance and make deliberate decisions based on their interpretation of the design task. Irrespective of theparticular perspective the design space was however approached holistically. Functional, technical, experiential,aesthetical, and ethical issues were not treated separately but approached in a highly integrative fashion. Forexample, envisioned interaction metaphors for a mobile app were discussed not only in terms of their usabilityand visual appearance but also with regards to their meaning for a community of users. As a consequence,students and teaching staff were constantly cross checking for example how technical and aesthetical decisionswould affect the experiential or ethical qualities of the designs. From an epistemic point of view the studentswere hence supposed not only to develop a concept or prototype, but an understanding of the creation of aninteractive product and its qualities of use, based on a viable yet value-laden perspective.ICLS 2014 Proceedings242© ISLSDue to a strong focus on the envisaged qualities of use, in contrast to more technology-centeredapproaches, the elicitation and communication of the intended users experience were another major concernacross projects. A student put his emphasis on the qualities of use this way: „My aim is not that the prototypeworks in the first place, but that the feeling it gives is a good one.“ Being aware that many phenomena relevantto the quality of a product are only insufficiently captured in abstract representations the professor warned astudent: „But you cannot say, concept, concept, concept and then eventually comes the design ... this is exactlythe tricky point.” As a consequence prototypical realizations of the designs were often the only way to conveyexperiential qualities the students were interested in.Furthermore, with its emphasis on the qualities of use of a specific product, the focus was on theparticular rather than on the universal. Even though the professor repeatedly stated that design is not necessarilyabout innovation and the students are supposed to built on and integrate rather than invent technologies theywere however expected to develop original and also novel solutions. However, originality and novelty in thisconception are bound to the particular. Due to the specificities of their design concepts, existing know-how orexpertise repeatedly rendered pointless, forcing the students to carry out practical experiments in order todeepen the understanding of given design options. In this sense the students were expected not only to work onthe horizon of their own capabilities but also to add to the disciplinary knowledge base.Model of the Design ProcessAll in all the activities in the design studio at the Muthesius Academy were organized around the developmentof meaningful/fruitful options within reach. Even though the students did not have to develop a fully functioningproduct, they were expected to devise a design that at least in principle could be implemented with existingtechnologies and/or provide a working prototype conveying essential qualities of use. Towards this end thestudents continuously framed the design space, explored into and decided on design options they deemed mostpromising. While the initial framing of the design space marked an essential milestone for all projects, it wasconstantly reassessed and concretized in the course of the design process, sometimes resulting in a fundamentalredirection of the overall project. With the emphasis on the development of sound solutions, in line with thestudent’s interpretation of the design task, the students were neither asked to adopt a particular process modelnor were they given a fixed set of design principles or methods. Procedures and criteria were rather suggestedand agreed upon on a needs basis taking into account the particularities of the project at hand.Despite the purported linear organization of the design process, chaining up phases of ideation,conception, design, (prototypical) realization, and presentation, the underlying epistemic processes of framing,exploration and deliberate decision making were highly iterative and agile in the sense that participantscontinuously reflected on the implications of the design moves made. Rather than drawing on a fixed set ofrequirements and constraints for an envisaged product, the participants sought and created situations allowingthem to probe their ideas and provide new information and insights throughout all stages of the design process.Respective strategies such as imaginative walkthroughs, making ideas tangible, playing with ideas andreflective prototyping all typify forms of non-monotonic reasoning and hence expand the knowledge base, theparticipants can draw upon. Or as the professor put it with regard to prototyping: “It is particularly important,that there is something that you can figure out.” In the same way the design artifacts created by students wereused a catalysts for further elaborations rather than as mere explications of preexisting ideas.Model of the DesignerIn taking a certain perspective on the design task and devising a solution, that is publicly exhibited, the studentswere not only expected to demonstrate their competencies and skills but also to position themselves in relationto disciplinary questions as well as societal concerns. The students were also expected not to stay with thealready known and learned but to grow with their projects and produce meaningful results. The designer in thissetting was characterized as a capable creator and decision maker who is able to cope with uncertain, complexand value-laden situations. At the same time, the designer was also expected to be aware of the limits of his ownknowledge and skills. This dual demand was also apparent in the professor’s behavior. He, at various occasions,articulated the limits of his own know-how while also expressing personal preferences and convictions.Even though the outcomes of the design process were largely unpredictable, the designers weresupposed to actively seek and explore the opportunities that are opening up. In doing so, they recurrently had toshare preliminary and half-baked ideas as well as to put their models, mock-ups, and prototypes to test. Whileentailing the risk of failure, disappointment or misunderstanding this was seen as an important move, or as astudent put it: “The more feedback you get, the more impressions you get.” Additionally, a general curiosity andopenness towards novel things and ideas seems to be required. In an interview a student explained: “In the endit’s the job of the designer to deal with superficial knowledge. As a designer you might be provided with a shortbriefing and then you have to work with it […] therefore its good that we are introduced to so many differentsubject matters.” Furthermore, asking for assistance and help was not only seen as legitimate but activelypromoted by the teaching staff.ICLS 2014 Proceedings243© ISLSDiscussionOur findings fit quite well the overall characterization of the design studio as “a vital complex of materialrepresentation, social collaboration, creativity, emotionality and a tolerance for uncertainty if not outrightconfusion – balanced with a faith that meaningful designs eventually will emerge” Wang (2010, p. 176). On ageneral level the outcomes of our analysis also appear to be compatible with findings of Schön (1987), Shaffer(2003), and Sawyer (2012) in that (a) design is aimed at unique and open-ended problems, which have to beframed by the designer, (b) design is an iterative process in which a series of intermediate design products iscreated and reflected upon, (c) that this process is mediated by generative feedback and social scaffolds, and (d)that design is best taught in the process of designing itself.However, when having a closer look at our findings there also appear some noteworthy differences inthe way the design studio is enacted in the course we followed. First, in comparison to the other studies, thedesign assignment in the design studio at the Muthesius Academy was much more open, inviting students tobuild on existing projects in various disciplines or to take a more artistic stance towards the question ofsimulation and reality. Hence, the students had to start from their own themes and ideas and argue for theirrelevance. Second, the professor neither provided the students with a consecutive series of assignments, asreported by Shaffer (2003), nor did he advocate any particular process model, as suggested by (Sawyer, 2012).Even though the participants occasionally referred to a generic model of the design process, the actualapproaches differed significantly and were highly agile. The design approach enacted by the students,significantly differed from the analysis-synthesis model referred to by Sawyer (2012), in that the studentsactively sought and created situations to generate new information and insights. Third, while the creation oftangible products was also a major concern in the studios observed by Schön (1987), Shaffer (2003), andSawyer (2012), we found a strong emphasis on the experiential qualities than their formal or representationalproperties. To test and convey their ideas the students in our case had to create first hand experiences rather thanrepresentations of the intended products. In that sense they not only had to express their ideas but also to createan (experiential) proof of concept. Finally, the focus in the design studio we followed has not only been on themastery of disciplinary skills but also on the cultivation of personal design identities as well as the advancementof the disciplinary knowledge base. In fact, the disciplinary boundaries of the design studio were rather open,which also reflect the interdisciplinary roots of the field of Interface Design.The case study design does not allow for generalizations to other contexts and the reported deviationsmight at least partly be attributed to disciplinary differences or personal attitudes and preferences of the teachingstaff. Additionally, as epistemic frames are ephemeral in nature they are not open to direct observation but mustbe inferred. However, despite these limitations the results challenge the assumption that the design studio buildson a uniform pedagogy and entails a particular epistemology. The findings rather indicate that we should expectsubstantial differences in the way the design task, the design process, and the designer are understood by thoseinvolved in respective practices.SummaryThe study traced the creative practices enacted in a design studio in the field of Interface Design throughout asemester. In the analysis the design studio was portrayed as a well-attuned system of structural elements,patterns of interaction and epistemic assumptions. The comparison of our findings with other ethnographicstudies on educational design studios revealed some basic similarities, but also a range of significantdifferences. We argue that these differences are not incidental but back up the assumption that there aresignificant differences in the epistemic frames enacted by practicing designers as well as in design education.The respective assumptions about worthwhile forms of knowledge, forms of knowing, and the means to advancethe collective knowledge base, have direct implications for the understanding of creative practice as well aswhat it means to become a creative actor.The perspective taken in this study also raises to question the idea of a uniform design mode of thinkingconstitutive for all kinds of creative knowledge work as suggested for example by Bereiter (2010). Instead ofstriving for generic principles on how to foster creativity (e.g. Sawyer, 2012) we believe it to be more fruitful tocontinue the detailed analysis on how creativity is practiced in different domains and settings and shed light onthe mechanisms through which respective practices are nurtured and cultivated.ReferencesBeardon, C., Ehn, P., & Malmborg, L. (2002). Design of augmented creative environments. Proceedings ofCSCL 2002, Boulder, Colorado, January 7-11, 2002, Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp.503-504.Bereiter, C. (2010). Where the Learning and Pedagogical Sciences Need Philosophers. In Encyclopaedia ofPhilosophy of Education. Retrieved 1 November, 2013 from http://www.ffst.hr/ENCYCLOPAEDIA/.ICLS 2014 Proceedings244© ISLSBrandt, C., Cennamo, K., Douglas, S., McGrath, M., Reimer, Y., & Vernon, M. (2008). (de)Coding the StudioMethod to Teach the Design of Human-Computer Interaction. In Proceedings of the 24th NationalConference on the Beginning Design Student, Atlanta, Georgia, March 2008, pp. 0-11.Carvalho, L., Dong, A., & Maton, K. (2009). Legitimating design. A sociology of knowledge account of thefield. Design Studies, 30(5), 483-502.Craft, A. (2011). Creativity and Education Futures – Learning in a Digital Age. Stoke on Trent: TrenthamBooks.Dearden, A., & Finlay, J. (2006). Pattern languages in HCI: A critical review. Human-Computer Interaction, 21,49-102.Dutton, T.A. (1987). Design and studio pedagogy. Journal of Architectural Education, 41(1), 16–25.Glăveanu, V.P. (2010). Paradigms in the study of creativity: Introducing the perspective of cultural psychology.New Ideas in Psychology, 28, 79-93.Hager, P., Lee, A., Reich, A. (2012b). Problematizing Practice, Reconceptualising Learning and ImaginingChange. In: P. Hager, A. Lee, & A. Reich (Eds.). Practice, Learning and Change (pp. 1-14). Springer:Dordrecht.Hennessey, B.A., & Amabile, T.M. (2010). Creativity. Annual Review of Psychology, 61, 569-698.Hörning, K.H. (2004). Soziale Praxis zwischen Beharrung und Neuschöpfung. Ein Erkenntnis- undTheorieproblem. In: K.H. Hörning, & J. Reuter (Eds.). Doing Culture: Neue Positionen zum Verhältnisvon Kultur und sozialer Praxis (pp.19-39). Bielefeld: transcript Verlag.Hörning, K.H. (2001). Experten des Alltags. Weilerswist: Velbrück.Kuhn, S. (2001). Learning from the architecture studio: Implications for project-based pedagogy. InternationalJournal of Engineering Education, 17(4/5), 349-352.Lahti, H., Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., & Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Collaboration patterns in computer supportedcollaborative designing. Design Studies, 25(4), 351-371.Ledewitz, S. (1985). Models of design in studio teaching. Journal of Architectural Education, 38(2), 2–8.Maldonado, H., Lee, B., Klemmer, S.R., & Pea, R.D. (2007). Patterns of Collaboration in Design Courses:Team dynamics affect technology appropriation, artifact creation, and course performance.Proceedings of CSCL 2007, New Brunswick, NJ, July 16-21, 2007, International Society of theLearning Sciences, pp. 486-495.Miettinen, R. (2006). The Sources of Novelty: A Cultural and Systemic View of Distributed Creativity.Creativity and Innovation Management, 15(2), 173-181.Sawyer, R.K. (2008). Optimizing learning: Implications of learning sciences research. In: OECD (ed.).Innovating to learn, learning to innovate (pp. 45-65). Paris: OECD.Sawyer, R.K. (2012). Learning how to create: Toward a learning science of art an design. Proceedings of ICLS2012, Sydney, Australia, July 2-6, 2012, International Society of the Learning Sciences, pp. 33-39.Schatzki, T. R. (2001). ‘Introduction. Practice Theory’. In: T. R. Schatzki, K. Knorr-Cetina, & E. von Savigny(eds.). The Practice Turn in Contemporary Theory (pp. 1–14). London: Routledge.Schatzki, T.R. (2012). A Primer on Practices. In: J. Higgs et al. (eds). Practice-Based Education: Perspectivesand Strategies (pp. 13-26). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.Shaffer, D.W. (2003). Portrait of the Oxford design studio: An ethnography of design pedagogy (Working paperNp. 2003-11). Madison, WI: Wisconsin Center for Education Research.Shaffer, D.W. (2004). Pedagogical Praxis: The Professions as Models for Postindustrial Education. TeachersCollege Record, 106(7), 1401-1421.Shaffer, D.W. (2006). Epistemic frames for epistemic games. Computers & Education, 46, 223-234.Schön, D.A. (1987). Educating the Reflective Practitioner. San Francisco: Jossey Bass.Stumpf, S.C., & McDonnell, J.T. (2001). Talking about team framing: using argumentation to analyse andsupport experiential learning in early design episodes. Design Studies, 23(1), 5-23.Vyas, D., Heylen, D., Nijholt, A., & Van Der Veer, G. (2009). Collaborative practices that support creativity indesign. Proceedings of ECSCW’09, Vienna, Austria, September 7-11, 2009, Springer: London, pp. 151170.Wang, T. (2010). A New Paradigm for Design Studio Education. The International Journal of Art & DesignEducation, 29(2), 173-183.AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank the students and the teaching staff at the Muthesius Academy of Fine Arts and Design inKiel who made this study possible. The research leading to these results has received funding from theEuropean Union’s Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2011 under grant agreement n° 318552.ICLS 2014 Proceedings245© ISLS