A Design Inquiry: Bridging Assessment and CurriculumFrameworks to Engage Students in Science PracticesAngela Haydel DeBarger, SRI International, angela.haydel@sri.comErika Tate, bluknowledge, erika@bluknowledge.comYves Beauvineau, Culturally Responsive Science Pedagogies, beauvineau.yves@gmail.comMingyu Feng and Patricia Schank, SRI International, mingyu.feng@sri.com, patricia.schank@sri.comTamara Heck and Michelle Williams, Michigan State University, heckt@msu.edu, mwilliam@msu.eduAbstract: This reflective inquiry delves into the collaborative design process of a technologybased middle school genetics unit. With a lens on science practices, we describe how bridgingassessment and curriculum design frameworks can inform decisions in an iterative co-designprocess. The paper explores the role of these design frameworks in articulating learning goalsand outcomes, designing the learning experience to motivate student inquiry, and identifyingfeatures of technology tasks and tools to elicit artifacts and evidence. A pilot study with fourteachers and 435 students revealed how to enhance elements of the design approach tostrengthen the learning goals, improve learning experiences with visualizations, andstreamline the flow of the curriculum to emphasize productive patterns of inquiry.Implications of this integrated approach for informing the design of learning environments,the scalability of designs, and teacher practice are discussed.IntroductionExtensive research situates science education as a means for broadening participation in the practice and cultureof science. Researchers have designed learning environments that present science as an important part ofeveryday life using relevant science dilemmas, engage learners in authentic scientific practices such as modelingand evidence-based explanations, and incorporate technology that helps students visualize scientific phenomenaand monitor understanding (e.g., Bell, 2004; Lee, Linn, Varma & Liu, 2010; McNeil & Krajcik, 2011).Despite the preponderance of evidence that suggests students learn science best through these richexperiences, school science has been reported to decontextualize science and require less rigorous learningperformance. Limited resources, such as poor access to technology, too few professional developmentopportunities, and policies that endorse fragmented, low-level content standards, have challenged teachers’ability to offer coherent learning experiences for all students (Kali, Linn, & Roseman; 2008; Lee et al., 2010).Well-designed, coherent materials have the potential to address the aforementioned challenges. With alens on science practices, this paper describes how bridging assessment and curriculum design frameworks caninform key decisions in the iterative design process of a technology-based middle school genetics curriculum.We report emergent design knowledge aimed to help designers and researchers leverage resources in the(re)design, study, and scale of science learning environments that are accessible to schools and promote deepand meaningful science learning and teaching.Theoretical ApproachTwo frameworks guide our approach: Knowledge Integration and Evidence Centered-Design.Knowledge Integration (KI)Knowledge Integration (KI) offers a learning perspective and design framework to explain how studentsdevelop a deep understanding of science in everyday life and designed learning environments. KI recognizesthat students maintain a repertoire of ideas about scientific topics, practices, and disciplines (Bransford, Brown,& Cocking, 2000; Linn, Davis, & Bell, 2004). As students learn through a variety of experiences in and outsideschool, they revise their repertoire by adding new ideas or changing the relation among new and existing ideas.The KI design framework, comprised of principles, processes and patterns, guides the design ofcoherent science instruction, which provides students multiple opportunities to consider all their ideas, addscientifically sound new ideas, develop relations among these ideas, and promote an integrated understanding(Kali, Linn, & Roseman, 2008; Lee et al., 2010; Linn & Eylon, 2006). The principles (make science accessible,make thinking visible, help students learn from each other, and promote autonomous and lifelong learning)communicate the nature and quality of learning experiences that promote knowledge integration. The process(elicit ideas - add ideas - distinguish ideas - sort ideas) and patterns (e.g., predict, observe, create a model,explain) help designers coordinate learning activities that develop a deep understanding of science.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1022© ISLSEvidence-Centered Design (ECD)Evidence-centered design (ECD; Mislevy & Haertel, 2006) provides tools for creating valid assessments withinlearning environments. ECD involves an analysis of the substantive domain; the construction of an assessmentargument; specification of tasks, rubrics and psychometric models; and the implementation and delivery of taskswithin an operational assessment. A critical contribution of ECD is its provision of processes and structures todescribe epistemic practices within disciplines. ECD facilitates the articulation of (1) learning goals (knowledge,practices, abilities and the integration thereof), (2) evidence produced in the form of actions by and amongstudents, and (3) features of environments to elicit the desired evidence and learning goals. By making theunderlying evidentiary argument for an assessment explicit, ECD facilitates coherence in assessment design. Astechnologies (e.g., visualizations and simulations) become further integrated in learning environments, ECD iscritical for communicating decisions among the experts involved the design of these assessments.Coordinating and Integrating KI and ECDOur design approach aims to attend carefully to three dimensions: (1) learning goals that integrate core ideas,practices, and cross-cutting concepts within the discipline of science; (2) clear articulation of evidence, artifacts,and the ways students should engage to produce these; and (3) the features and flow of activity designs andparticipation structures. See Table 1. While KI prioritizes deepening students’ understanding in a disciplinethrough practice, ECD heightens awareness of assessment design within learning environments—how we knowlearning is taking place. Along these lines, KI and ECD function at different grain sizes in the design space.Table 1: Mapping of KI and ECD Theoretical Approaches to Design Dimensions for Learning Environments.Design DimensionsKnowledgeIntegration (KI)EvidenceCentered Design(ECD)Learning GoalsEvidence, Artifacts andEngagementFeatures and Flow ofActivity and Task DesignsFocus on connectionsbetween key ideas thatpromote lifelong learningLearning as engagementthrough eliciting, adding,distinguishing, sorting ideasApplication of designpatterns to promoteknowledge integrationwithin and across activitiesKnowledge, practices, andabilities and combinationsthereof that will be thetarget of assessmentsClear articulation of evidenceproduced by students toindicate progress toward andattainment of learning goalsSpecification of activity andtask design features to elicitdesired evidenceWe openly explored how KI and ECD approaches inform the design of a genetics unit, specificallyaddressing two questions: (1) What is the role of KI and ECD in articulating learning goals and outcomes? (2)How can KI and ECD help to define the learning experience and artifacts and elicit evidence of learning?Project ContextThe project context is the development and testing of a 5-week technology-based middle school genetics unit.Our goal is to develop students’ understanding of inheritance through science practices of constructing modelsand explanations (see NRC, 2012). “How can you use genetics to feed the world in 2052?” is the drivingquestion. The unit introduces a situation where the world will be running short of food and fossil fuels in 2052.Students inquire about how to selectively breed for more nutritious rice and higher endurance horses. Studentpairs complete 10 activities with frequent opportunities for whole class discussion facilitated by the teacherusing the open-source WISE 4.0 platform. Notable advantages of the WISE platform include tools such as IdeaManager, which supports sorting ideas and constructing explanations (McElhaney et al., 2012), and WISEDraw, a tool that students can use to draw models that illustrate a mechanism or process.Initial Design Approach and ImplementationOur co-design process involved experts in curriculum design, assessment design, science content, scienceteaching and software design. We engaged teachers as co-designers, and these teachers served as mentorteachers to their colleagues during implementation of the unit. A key structure in facilitating conversation aboutflow was the unit template, which documents for each activity (1) learning goals addressed, (2) anticipatedstudent problematic ideas, (3) learning experiences needed to address problematic ideas, (4) assessmentopportunities, and (4) the KI design pattern sequence to motivate student inquiry in the activity.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1023© ISLSArticulation of the Learning Goals and OutcomesThe design team referred to the Framework for K-12 Science Education (NRC, 2012) to identify disciplinarycore ideas that comprise a deep understanding of inheritance for seventh grade students. The Framework alsohelped to unpack two science practices targeted by the unit: Developing and Using Models and ConstructingExplanations. Here, we followed the ECD framework to specify abilities targeted for each practice asKnowledge Skills, and Abilities (KSAs; e.g., Ability to construct a causal explanation; Ability to construct amodel and use the model to explain a phenomenon). The KI perspective helped establish 12 measurable learninggoals that integrated content. The learning goals began with a broad statement about the core idea and sciencepractice (e.g., Students will be able to generate explanations that link the macro and microstructures/processes/functions relating to genetic expression) with additional details about the content to beaddressed (e.g., An organism's characteristics can be expressed in different versions or variations called traits).Defining the Learning Experience, Artifacts and EvidenceKI prompted us to think about how to scaffold students to write integrated explanations of heredity and developmodels. The design team identified WISE steps that engaged students in the knowledge integration process (i.e.,elicit, add, distinguish, and sort ideas). For example, the Explanation Builder step guides students to distinguishwhich ideas help explain the genetic expression process. Using ECD, evidence for each of the practices wasbroadly specified in terms of potential observations we might expect to see if students are engaged inconstructing models or explanations (e.g., application of science concepts to reason about the phenomenon).Task Features and FlowThe KI design principles (e.g., make science visible) and patterns (e.g., Predict-Observe-Explain [POE])informed an activity flow to scaffold coherent explanations of heredity. To make the practices of scientistsvisible, the activities require students to conduct selective breeding experiments using interactive visualizations.WISE Reflection Notes were then used to elicit students’ predictions and post-observation explanations to makestudents’ scientific ideas visible. ECD served to define specific design features of assessment opportunities ascharacteristic features or variable features. We considered which features needed to be present in tasks (e.g.,All items that prompt for a scientific explanation will include data or evidence in stimulus materials) anddocumented how tasks might vary (e.g., the complexity of data/evidence).Pilot StudyFour seventh grade science teachers implemented the unit in their classes for five weeks in Spring 2013; twoteachers were from a school in a Midwest suburban district, and two were from a Southern suburban district.The Midwest school district student body is approximately 60% Caucasian, 18% African American, 9% Asian,7% Hispanic, 5% Multi-racial and 1% American Indian and Pacific Islander. Twenty-five percent of thestudents are on free or reduced price lunch. The student body of the school district in the South is approximately64% African American, 28% Hispanic, and 8% Caucasian. Sixty-one percent of the students are on free orreduced price lunch. 435 students from 19 classes participated in the study and worked in pairs. Prior toimplementation, all teachers participated in a 2-day professional development workshop to discuss the unitlearning goals, the activities and web-based tools, and the teacher interface to manage student data. Studentwork was logged by WISE system. The team also conducted regular classroom observations, and mentorteachers facilitated conversations with their colleagues during the implementation of the unit.Sources of Data to Inform RevisionsStudent work on assessments provided evidence of their thinking and reasoning. Memos from classroomobservations and conversations with teachers provided insight into the student and teacher reactions to particularactivities and factors that hinder implementation.FindingsAn analysis of student work revealed that on average, groups submitted four to five ideas while viewingvisualizations and selected between three to seven ideas to support explanations. One fourth (24.7%) of theideas were problematic and non-normative. For example, students struggled to link ideas about macro-levelobserved traits and micro-level cellular-level processes. Observations revealed that teachers’ facilitation ofprediction, modeling, and explanation steps was uneven. Some teachers engaged students in productivediscourse around focal ideas in the unit (e.g., “Why do we want rice with high starch and horses with highendurance?”), but based on the observations, there was no evidence that these rich conversations occurredfrequently. These findings demonstrated the need for additional support for teachers and students to promoteknowledge integration. Revisions to the design approach are described below.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1024© ISLSRevised Design ApproachArticulation of Focused Knowledge-In-Use Learning Goals and EvidenceWe believed that students struggled to construct explanations and models that link ideas about macro-levelobservations and micro-level processes in part because our learning goals needed to be much more explicit inthis regard. Using ECD, we refined the original 12 learning goals into five learning performances that moreexplicitly consider targeted applications of the science practices within genetics: (1) Ability to use a model oftrait expression to explain the observed traits in an organism; (2) Ability to construct a model of processeswithin a cell and use the model to explain how traits are expressed; (3) Ability to evaluate different models oftrait expression; (4) Ability to construct a scientific explanation about how sexual reproduction can affectgenetic variation; and (5) Ability to explain how sexual reproduction and expression results in trait variation.For each learning performance, we crafted statements that clarify the evidence students would need to produceto demonstrate proficiency. See Table 2. The KI lens with ECD helped to outline the macro (e.g., identifyobserved trait) and micro (e.g., use the model to explain the mechanism of trait expression) elements.Table 2: Example of Refined Learning Goal and Anticipated Evidence from Student Artifacts.Learning GoalEvidence in Student ArtifactsAbility to use amodel of traitexpression toexplain theobserved traitsin an organismAppropriate use of visualization (model) of gene expression to explain why an organismhas a particular trait. Macro and micro elements are connected in the explanation.● Macro: Identification the observed characteristic and trait● Micro-structural: Identification of the location of the relevant component (s) of the cell● Micro-functional: Description of the function of relevant component (s) of the cell● Micro-mechanistic: Description of the mechanism of to explain trait expressionDesigning a More Consistent and Coherent Learning ExperienceThe rearticulated learning goals and evidence statements prompted the design team to bring practices to theforefront and further realize the design principle, make the practices of scientists more visible. We first made thealignment of activity steps to KI patterns more transparent. Activity steps now more explicitly map on to aspectsof science practices. For example, for the POE pattern, a Brainstorm step is used to elicit students’ predictions inconjunction with the Idea Manager Tools (Idea Basket and Explanation Builder) to support students indocumenting observations and constructing explanations. Applying ECD, we refined features of the Idea Basketsteps to promote more active and focused observations of visualizations, as shown in Figure 1. ExplanationBuilder question prompts elicit more directly explanations that require links between micro- and macro-levelideas (e.g., Explain what happens inside a rice plant that makes it high nutrition and how Farmer Wilder cancheck that the rice is very nutritious.) For some activities we also extended the basic POE pattern to incorporatemodeling (Predict-Observe-Model-Explain [POME] pattern). In the POME pattern, students create a dynamicvisual model using the WISE Draw tool.Figure 1. Screenshot of Expression Visualization with Idea Basket PromptsConclusions and ImplicationsFindings from this design study demonstrate that KI and ECD are complementary design perspectives. KI offersstrong grounding around patterns to guide the flow of curricular experiences as well as a lens that focuses ondesigns promoting connected conceptual understanding in models/explanations. ECD bolsters design practicesto support coherence in the rendering and application of tools to elicit intended knowledge and skills within acurriculum and facilitates the articulation of evidence to look for in student-generated artifacts.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1025© ISLSThe preliminary nature of our study limits our ability to generalize beyond the context of this unit. Yet,our early attention to emergent design knowledge positions us for a more rigorous investigation of studentengagement and learning outcomes during a larger scale implementation study in the 2013-2014 school year.This paper lends insights to practical approaches for designing knowledge-in-use learning environments thatengage students in important epistemological practices and incorporate valid assessments.This approach also supports scalability and reuse of design principles. Generating design solutions notonly involved conversations among the co-design team, but also clear documentation of decisions (e.g., new KIpatterns and the unit template). These types of design documents afford the potential reuse of designs andscalability of assessments and tasks for related purposes. By explicating these decisions using shared schemas,other learning environments (e.g., game-based) that incorporate these science practices can subsequently begenerated more easily by designers without having to retrace decision paths.While teacher practice is not the focus of this paper, we highlight some implications of our approachesfor teachers. We envision the curriculum and assessments as a starting point for discourse on constructingmodels and explanations. Thus, successful implementations of this unit and similar learning environmentsrequire supports for establishing norms to promote equitable participation (e.g., Hudicourt-Barnes, 2003),eliciting student reasoning and promoting discussion (e.g., Penuel, Beauvineau, DeBarger, Moorthy, & Allison,2012), and using assessments to provide feedback to students (e.g., Ruiz-Primo & Furtak, 2007).ReferencesBell, P. (2004). The educational opportunities of contemporary controversies in science. In M. Linn, E. Davis &P. Bell (Eds.), Internet environments for science education (pp. 233-260). Mahwah: Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates.Bransford, J., A. Brown, & R. Cocking. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school.Washington: National Academy Press.Hudicourt-Barnes, J. (2003). The use of argumentation in Haitian Creole science classrooms. HarvardEducational Review, 73(1), 73-93.Kali, Y., Linn, M., & Roseman, J. E. (2008). Designing coherent science education. New York: TeachersCollege Press.Lee, H. - S., Linn, M. C., Varma, K., & Liu, O. L. (2010). How do technology-enhanced inquiry science unitsimpact classroom learning? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 47(1), 71–90.Linn, M. C. & Eylon, B-S. (2006). Science education: Integrating views of learning and instruction. In P.A.Alexander and P. H. Winne (Eds.), Handbook of Educational Psychology (2nd Ed., pp. 511-544).Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.McElhaney, K., Matuk, C., Miller, D., & Linn, M. (2012). Using the idea manager to promote coherentunderstanding of inquiry investigations. In van Aalst, J., Thompson, K., Jacobson, M. J., & Reimann,P. (Eds.) (2012). The Future of Learning: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of theLearning Sciences (ICLS 2012) – Volume 1, Full papers. International Society of the LearningSciences: Sydney, NSW, AUSTRALIA.McNeill, K. L., & Krajcik, J. S. (2011). Supporting grade 5-8 students in constructing explanations in science:The claim, evidence, and reasoning framework for talk and writing. New Jersey: Pearson.Mislevy, R. J., & Haertel, G. D. (2006). Implications for evidence-centered design for educational testing.Educational Measurement: Issues and Practices, 25, 6-20.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Penuel, W. R., Beauvineau, Y., DeBarger, A. H., Moorthy, S., & Allison, K. (2012). Fostering teachers' use oftalk moves to promote productive participation in scientific practices. In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M.J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.), The future of learning: Proceedings of the 10th internationalconference of the learning sciences (ICLS 2012) – Volume 2, short papers, symposia, and abstracts.International Society of the Learning Sciences: Sydney, NSW, AUSTRALIA.Ruiz-Primo, M. A., & Furtak, E. M. (2007). Exploring teachers' informal formative assessment practices andstudents' understanding in the context of scientific inquiry. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,44(1), 57-84.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Number DRL1119055. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those ofthe authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1026© ISLS