“What in the world?” Animated Worlds in Multivariable Modelingwith Motion Chart Graph ArgumentsJennifer Kahn, Vanderbilt University Peabody College, jennifer.kahn@vanderbilt.eduAbstract: This poster presents part of a design study that engaged prospective secondarymathematics teachers in multivariable modeling practices to support learning about criticalmathematics and statistical literacies. Student pairs constructed graph arguments about globaldevelopment using an online, dynamic graphing tool (motion chart). Interaction analysis ofsequences of student trouble suggests that animating representing and represented worlds andlaminating historical narratives to the mathematical display encouraged success in the activity.Motion Charts, Modeling and Mathematical and Statistical LiteraciesThe motion chart (Al-Aziz, Christou, & Dinov, 2010; Rosling, Ronnlund, & Rosling, 2005) is a new,dynamic, digital, representational form for modeling multivariate data over time, freely available, along withlarge public datasets, on Gapminder’s website (gapminder.org). This study treats motion charts as comparable innature to complex, Big Data visualizations used to produce STEM arguments that increasingly appear in publicmedia spaces. A discussion of mathematics and statistics in the world thus framed the Gapminder activities. Wehoped that positioning secondary mathematics teachers as consumers and authors of arguments with motioncharts about global development would push them to build upon their reading of Gutstein’s (2003) contrast ofcritical and functional mathematical literacies and to consider “reading and writing the world” using models.Accordingly, how do prospective math teachers make sense of this modeling activity? Applying Ochs,Gonzales, and Jacoby’s (1996) framework for how laboratory physicists animate different worlds in talk toconstruct models to describe physics experiments, we contend that successful modeling practices with motioncharts (constructing and evaluating graph arguments that explain and compare nations’ development trend lines)depend on the animation and lamination of relations between represented (global health and wealth) andrepresenting worlds (the tool and datasets) (Gravemeijer, 1994; Hall, 2000). We seek to explore at themicroanalytic level of multimodal, sequential interaction an emerging practice of modeling that accounts forhow students used Gapminder to animate complex, multidisciplinary, multivariable data and bind a craftednarrative of historical change to a dynamic, mathematical display to compose a compelling graph argument.Theoretical and Methodological Approaches Pursued in the DIY ActivityThe modeling task was part of a larger design study (Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer, & Schauble, 2003) in arequired Mathematics Literacies course at an elite university in the Southern U.S., spanning three 3-hour classesover four weeks. We first asked students to find and dissect mathematical or statistical arguments in publicmedia. We then introduced students to Hans Rosling’s (Gapminder’s designer) Gapminder performances.Students then used Gapminder to imitate and remix Hans’ arguments and to make their own graph arguments ina DIY activity to perform in the next class. Data reported come from the DIY activity in the last 70 minutes ofthe second class. The course instructor identified two student pairs for selective case study comparison(Flyvbjerg, 2006): masters students Nathan and Nicole (N&N) and undergraduates Cara and Tara (C&T). Weconsidered all students as nonexperts in graph argument performance creation (as compared to Hans). Wecaptured a HD video record of each focal pair working at a table with two computers.Trouble with “Interestingness” in Animating and Storify-ing WorldsAnalysis focuses on the multimodal activity of modeling (talk, significant gesture, interaction with computer(s)and Gapminder display). Initial structural analysis segmented the 70 minutes of video data for both student pairsin order to compare their graph argument paths, following their transitions between models, each defined asselection of a unique pairing of X- and Y-axis indicators from the dataset and unambiguously mentioned in talk.We considered whether or not students played the graph so that the model displayed changing indicator valuesthrough time and how often student(s) examined a given model. We compared three model paths: one for N&Nwho worked on a single computer, one for C, and one for T, who worked side by side on separate computers.We then used interaction and conversation analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995; Schegloff, 1991) to explore thesequential organization of trouble and repair in these model assembly pathways as student pairs continuallygenerated models using Gapminder. We identified three categories of trouble: (a) when a country’s trail violatedexpectations (e.g., increase in life expectancy with an increase in alcohol consumption); (b) when toolunfamiliarity left stories untold (e.g., forgetting to select country trails to show change over time when playingthe graph), or (c) when there was confusion with quantities (e.g., CO2 per person vs. yearly CO2 emissions).Next, using patterns of students’ announcements of trouble, we delved into animation and lamination in studenttalk (at the level of predicate structures) and gesture. We looked at the ontologies of story fragments related toICLS 2014 Proceedings1649© ISLShealth and economic processes unfolding. As in Ochs et al.’s (1996) analysis of physicists, we conjectured thatGapminder modelers hybridize stories of country development with a visually, dynamic graph to collaborativelyand progressively build and refine (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004) what they feel are “interesting” modelsfor public performance. While the larger corpus of data has been reviewed with this analytic framework, adetailed microanalysis and transcription is complete for the first 10 minutes of each video record and for asecond 10 minutes when each pair approached a model close to the final graph argument presented in class. 	  Preliminary Findings and DiscussionThis study offers new insight into how prospective secondary math teachers variably understand a novel genreof modeling practices as a critical mathematical literacy. Though both pairs worked serially through indictorsfor X- and Y-axes, selected ‘interesting” variables that were personally relevant, socially taboo or trendy,determined model misfit (i.e., an “uninteresting” display was unfit for this task), and argued about alternativevariables and measurements, the comparative analysis of model paths showed little collaborative progressiverefinement (Collins et al., 2004) for C&T as compared to N&N (e.g., N&N often returned to models while C&Tnever revisited a model). N&N activated and aligned the represented and representing worlds of motion charts,as evidenced by the ways in which they communicated understandings of quantities and the graphing tool,engaged in historical inquiry to contrast and explicate relationships between health and wealth of nations, andexplicitly considered development over time by regularly playing models. Similar to Ochs et al.’s (1996)physicists, N&N used hybrid utterances to describe and narrate the graphical representation. Indeed, the motionof the motion chart afforded N&N possibilities for seeing and telling historical, social, economic narrativesbased on power relations. Their common modeling environment (one screen), which helped N&N focus theirmodel path, also likely supported their productivity. In contrast, C&T's division of labor across separatemodeling environments (two screens) led to diverging model paths, model abandonment and less consistent andfrequent engagement in the animation of worlds. As they moved from model to model, especially at the start ofthe DIY, C&T did not regularly play the world, which restricted their capacities for animating explanations, forconsidering change over time, and for embracing the tool’s “messiness”—its dynamic and multivariablequalities (e.g., they mostly treat the display as static scatter plot, like a conventional school statistical display).Such a stance, akin to a functional mathematical literacy perspective, created challenges for describing the graphanimations narratively to compare varying historical anecdotes of development for particular nations. Additionalanalysis will continue to describe the processes of animation and lamination of conceptual worlds to supportdeeper connections between this new domain of modeling practices and critical mathematical literacies.ReferencesAl-Aziz, J., Christou, N. and Dinov, I.D. (2010). SOCR motion charts: An efficient, open-source, interactiveand dynamic applet for visualizing longitudinal multivariate data. Journal of Statistics Education,18(3), 1–29.Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educationalresearch. Educational researcher, 32(1), 9–13.Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15–42.Flyvbjerg, B. (2006). Five misunderstandings about case-study research. Qualitative inquiry, 12(2), 219–245.Gravemeijer, K. E. P. (1994). Developing realist mathematics education. Utrecht, The Netherlands: CDBetaPress.Gutstein, E. (2003). Teaching and learning mathematics for social justice in an urban, Latino school. Journal forResearch in Mathematics Education, 34(1), 37–73.Hall, R. (2000). Work at the interface between representing and represented worlds in middle schoolmathematics design projects. In L. R. Gleitman & A. K. Joshi (Eds.), Proceedings of Twenty-SecondAnnual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 675–680). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Jordan, B. & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Ochs, E., Gonzales, P. & Jacoby, S. (1996). “When I come down I’m in the domain state”: Grammar andgraphic representation in the interpretive activity of physicists. In E. Ochs, E. Schegloff & S. Thomson(Eds.), Interaction and grammar. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Rosling, H., Ronnlund, A.R. & Rosling, O. (2005). New software brings statistics beyond the eye. In E.Giovannini (Ed.), Statistics, knowledge and policy: Key indicators to inform decision making (pp. 522–530). Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development.Schegloff, E. A. (1991) Conversation analysis and socially shared cognition. In L. Resnick, J. Levine, and S.Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on social shared cognition (pp. 150–171). Washington, DC: AmericanPsychological Association.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1650© ISLS