Connected Gaming: Towards Integrating Instructionist andConstructionist Approaches in K-12 Serious GamingYasmin B. Kafai, University of Pennsylvania, 3700 Walnut St, Philadelphia, PA 19106, kafai@upenn.eduQuinn Burke, College of Charleston, 86 Wentworth Street, Charleston SC, 29425 burkeqq@cofc.eduAbstract: In this conceptual paper, we argue that K-12 serious gaming should focus onconnected gaming, which is signaled by a move from a predominantly instructionist focus onhaving students play educational games for learning to an increasingly constructionistapproach that has students make their own games for learning. Constructionist activities havealways been part of the larger gaming ecology but have traditionally received far less attentionthan their instructionist counterparts. We argue that constructionist gaming approachespromote not only meaningful content and collaboration but also creative and critical skills inthe context of coding. We propose that future discussions of serious gaming ought to beinclusive of constructionist approaches to better realize the full potential of gaming as a meansto genuinely connect children to technology and to each other and how this potential for moremeaningful connectivity can address the persistent access and diversity issues long facinggaming cultures.IntroductionEvery educator must have felt some envy watching children playing video games: If only thatenergy could be mobilized in the service of learning something that the educator values. Butthe envy can take very different forms. Instructionists show their orientation by concretizingthe wish as a desire for games that will teach math or spelling or geography or whatever. TheConstructionist mind is revealed when the wish leads to imagining children making the gamesinstead of just playing them. Rather than wanting games to instruct children they yearn to seechildren construct games.Seymour Papert (p. ii, 1995)Papert’s assessment was remarkably prescient of developments that would follow just a decade later when theserious games movement started. Despite video games having become a multi-billion dollar businessequaling—if not surpassing—the movie industry, gaming is still regularly dismissed by some educators as awaste of time, or even worse, an instigator of stereotypes and violence. In response to such critics, sometheorists (Gentile & Gentile, 2008) have wondered that if video games are, in fact, such effective inculcators ofstereotypes and violence, why can’t their influence be harnessed for good and serve as powerful tools to supportchildren’s learning? This was the question that Gee (2003) answered when examining what video games couldteach us about learning and literacy, arguing that many good educational principles—36 in total—could befound in the design and play of video games.The launch of serious gaming realized the yearning for instructionist games, those games that aredesigned to teach academic content to students. Hundreds, if not thousands, of educational games andsimulations have been designed to support learning in various domains (Shaffer, 2007; Squire, 2011).Accompanying these efforts were the launch of several conferences and journals, the funding of numerousresearch initiatives, and even the placement of a senior policy advisor on games and gaming in the WhiteHouse. Following a report by the National Research Council (2011), a flurry of reviews have recently come outexamining the learning benefits of instructionist games. The verdict reached by these meta-analyses is decidedlymixed: while one meta-analysis found significant impact (Wouters, van Nimwegen, von Oostendorp & van derSpek, 2013), others were more hesitant in their assessment of impact (e.g., Girard, Ecalle, & Magant, 2012;Vogel, Vogel, Cannon-Bowers, Bowers, Muse & Wright, 2013), while still others were downright dismissive ofthe motivation and cognitive benefits claimed by serious gaming (e.g., Young, Slota, Cutter, Jalette, Mullin, Lai,Simenoni, Tran & Yukhymenko, 2012).There has however been one notable absence in all of these reviews: the inclusion of constructionistgaming approaches—namely those approaches in which games are designed by students rather thanprofessionals for their learning benefits (Kafai, 1995; 2006). And this absence is surprising given the successesof constructionist gaming for not only learning programming but also academic content and other skills (seeHayes & Games, 2008). It is worth reflecting for a moment on what might have caused this omission. The firstand most obvious reason stems back to what Papert aptly described as the instructionist desire of having afinished, downloadable, teaching product—namely, the game itself—as the party responsible (rather than theinstructor) for teaching the child. A second and less inimical reason may be that constructionist gaming has beenICLS 2014 Proceedings86© ISLSless popular simply because educators have viewed the endeavor as far too technical given its association withlearning programming. And last, a third reason may be that until recently, the gaming industry did not wantplayers to engage in any design or modification of the games they produced for the marketplace. However,whatever the reasons—educational, technical, or cultural—the situation is clearly changing.We are currently witnessing a paradigmatic shift toward constructionist gaming that is propelled byseveral developments, including the initiative to promote computational thinking (Grover & Pea, 2013), a needto broaden participation in computing (NRC, 2011), and the emergence of a DIY culture (Lankshear & Knobel,2010). But the central impetus for a shift comes from the industry itself. After all, some of the most populargames on the market today include level and character modding as a central feature (El Nasr & Smith, 2006)and encourage such modding as part of game play until the next version becomes available. This element ofconstructionism is not limited to gameplay itself. A closer examination of gaming cultures reveals that manyrich learning activities happen in the context of what Gee (2003) refers to as “metagaming” in which playextends beyond the game and includes participating in online discussion forums (Steinkuehler & Duncan, 2008)and even accessing cheat sites (Kafai & Fields, 2013) to help players more effectively navigate the game. In thecommunity of many instructional game designers, we also observe a recent shift to include game makingplatforms and activities (Klopfer & Haas, 2012). Perhaps though the clearest indicator that constructionistgaming has arrived is signaled by the remarkable popularity of Minecraft (Duncan, 2011), a virtual sandboxwhose tremendous popularity has garnered over 12 million paying designers and even served as the topic of arecent South Park episode.In this conceptual paper, we articulate a long overdue framework for constructionist gaming to outlineits learning benefits in terms of coding, creativity, collaboration, and criticality. Through this framework, wemake a case for connected gaming, an approach to serious gaming that includes both instructionist andconstructionist perspectives such that playing and making games are no longer treated as two separate activitiesbut overlapping, mutually informing processes for learning. Connected gaming, as we argue, sees learning toplay and make games as part of a larger gaming ecology in which the traditional roles of game player and gamemaker are no longer treated as distinct entities. In the following sections, we first conceptualize how the fourcomponents, or 4 C’s of constructionist gaming, manifest themselves in the game-making process, and thenoutline a sample scenario for connected gaming, before addressing some of the key challenges in making theprocess more accessible to non-programmers and traditionally underrepresented groups. Our goal is to focus onhow the learning sciences of serious gaming can be more inclusive and informative for children by giving youngplayers a greater hand in the design and production of video games.The “4C’s” of Constructionist GamingOur approach to constructionist gaming builds on prior efforts to understand how and what children learn in theprocess of designing and making digital media through computer programming (Kafai & Burke, 2014). Whilecurrent developments situate game making in several different fields such as new media literacies (Gee, 2010),system-based thinking (Salen, 2007) and critical engagement with media (Buckingham & Burn, 2007; Pelletier,2009), we draw on the broader notion of participatory culture informed by Jenkins and colleagues’ (2006) work.We identify four different dimensions of participatory competencies—coding, creative, collaborative, andcritical—that are all relevant to constructionist gaming (Kafai & Peppler, 2011) and underpin the nature ofconnected gaming.CodingCoding is the most distinctive skill to be learned, especially when compared to instructionist gaming whichinvolves the mastery of complex interfaces but rarely to reaches beyond the surface of the screen itself. By theirvery design, digital games provide compelling systems precisely because they are not only one of the firstsystems a child encounters at an early age, but they remain a regular presence in children’s lives, even as theygraduate into adulthood. Video games are no longer meant for children only and as players grow older, theyincreasingly can appreciate the nuances of and the differences between various games. The design of theinterface, the intuitiveness and responsiveness of game play, the way in which challenges are scaled to growmore complex and difficult—even where there are potential “cheats” within the game engine—all can bemanipulated by the player. All of these functions are present in even the most rudimentary of video games andare optimal fodder for exploring the nature of systems, particularly when a player is not simply reacting to thesystem but also designing it.Numerous studies over the last twenty years have shown what students can learn when coding games(e.g., Hayes & Games, 2008) using various programming tools such as Agentsheets, Alice, Flash, Logo, Scratchamong others (Burke & Kafai, 2014). In a quasi-experimental study, Kafai (1995) showed that a class of upperelementary students who learned Logo programming in the context of game design activities over a three monthtime period improved significantly in writing and debugging programs when compared to students who werelearning Logo programming solely in the context of smaller independent projects unrelated to gaming.ICLS 2014 Proceedings87© ISLSSupporting this initial research, several comparative pair programming studies (Denner & Werner, 2007)showed that pairs of Latina middle school girls outperformed students working on their own in learningprogramming concepts when designing games with Alice. Both designing and playing a video game alongsidepeer proved to be a crucial way that children understood the nature and function of code. The Globalorianetwork (Reynolds & Caperton, 2007), in which over thousands of students design video games as part ofcurricular activities in their schools, also demonstrated learning of key programming concepts using Flash. Evenoutside of school, a two-year study in a Computer Clubhouse found that use of programming conceptssignificantly increased from year 1 to year 2 (Maloney et al., 2008) as children increasingly developed andremixed video games for themselves and each other.Foremost though, coding has received by far the most attention because it can include various softwaredesign practices ranging from programming, debugging, and remixing code. Taken together, these practicescapture what has been described as “computational thinking” which Wing (2006) defined as designing systemsfor more effective problem solving. While computational thinking is not just coding, code represents one of thekey avenues to engage youth in an early understanding about how effective systems are designed andmaintained, a skill set that can be applied to fields as diverse as industrial mechanics, computational biology,and marketing analytics. Understanding game design is an optimal early incubator for grasping computationalthinking as would be designers not only have to create a series of novel user interfaces but also need to ensurethat these interfaces scale in complexity and even adjust to the player’s capacity to accomplished digitallydesigned tasks. Coding in the context of constructionist gaming is not just learned for the sake of understandingand generating code, it also demands designers to be aware of perspectives other than their own and thusprovides a rich context for collaboration, the next dimension.CollaborationThe collaborative dimensions of constructionist gaming is often perceived in terms of the exclusivecommunities of “gamers” who are the self-professed experts in all things video games, much to the frequentannoyance of others and even to the isolation of themselves. Yet this die-hard group of those who "geek out"(Ito et al., 2009) around making and playing video games tend to overshadow a growing number of DIYcommunities that use programming as a core tool for creative media production, including roboticscommunities, e-textile communities, and programming communities like those that have evolved aroundScratch, Arduino, and Processing languages. As large online communities have grown around more beginnerfriendly tools like Alice, Scratch and Processing, they are marked by openness rather than what has traditionallybeen perceived as gamer exclusivity, with members regularly sharing ideas and remixing one another’s work.These new tools further reshape contemporary literacy practices in DIY communities, helping youth to meet thegoals of becoming fluent with technologies, and extend computational thinking into computational participation(Kafai & Burke, 2014), in which solving problems and designing systems are not solely the function ofalgorithmic processes but more fundamentally representative of the practices and perspectives increasinglynecessary to contribute within wider social networks and understand the cultural and social nature of anetworked society.This push for more collaborative endeavors around making video games becomes readily apparent withthe plethora of new gaming challenges that have grown popular just over the past three years. Theaforementioned Scratch website issues regular “collaborative challenges” and “collab camps” (Kafai & Burke,2014) annually, as does Microsoft’s Kodu site with the “Kodu Cup” and Globaloria with its annual “GlobeyAwards” challenge. While each of these sites have their own rules and regulations for their respectivecompetitions, all of these competitions foster the collaborative spirit by encouraging their challengers to posttheir ongoing projects for feedback from their peers and utilize discussion boards and forums to search outfellow team members and solicit advice on the game-making process. In the spirit of competition, collaboration(more tacitly) ensues—not unlike what we witnessed with the tremendous growth of science fairs over thesecond half of the 20th century in the U.S. Even the federal government appears to be tapping into theexcitement of gameplay and competition, having sponsored the STEM National Video Game Challenge(http://www.stemchallenge.org) for the past three years. With the stated goal “to motivate interest in STEMlearning among America’s youth by tapping into students’ natural passion for playing and making videogames,” the Challenge is issued by none other than the President himself and can be utilized as a forum that K12 schools can adopt to more effectively integrate collaborative STEM learning through a hands-on, projectdriven approach.This constructionist context of making games for others adds a new collaborative dynamic to the moretraditional instructionist approach to gaming in which the power of collaboration manifested itself in playersplaying with each other to advance the game. For instance, Gee (2003) brings up examples of how players haveto coordinate in order to plan and successfully orchestrate many of the higher up challenges that no single playercould can complete on his or her own. Likewise, Luther and Bruckman (2011) illustrate how in online creativecommunities, such as the popular game-making site Newgrounds, when collaborations succeed, they produceICLS 2014 Proceedings88© ISLScontent that far supersedes what any single member could have made on his or her own. In these collaborativegame-making activities, different expertise, not just technical but also team management and various creativeartistic skills are needed, which leads to our next dimension.CreativeMany of the creative practices involved in making games are rooted in the arts and can involve observing anddeconstructing media, evaluating and reflecting gameplay, as well as referencing, reworking and altogetherremixing other games (Hetland et al., 2007). These referencing, reworking and remixing practices include notonly the creation of original works that make knowing reference to previous games, cartoons, music, and othersources of popular culture but also the modification of existing games, images or sounds, often to create entirelynew interactive pieces or “machinima” such as non-interactive movies. With the advent of the so-called “web2.0”, youths’ creative media production with digital media has increasingly entailed a great deal of reworking orremixing of popular media texts such as videogames and music (Kafai & Peppler, 2011).Peppler and Kafai’s (2007) case study of 15-year old Jorge well captures the potential for young gamedesigners to not only learn coding and effective collaboration but also the creativity behind seamless imitation.Using Scratch at a Computer Clubhouse specifically geared toward low-income youth from the surroundingneighborhood, Jorge was a regular visitor to the Clubhouse over the eight-months of the ethnographic study.The second project he created was a video game entitled “Metal Slug Hell Zone X”, a play off the popular “runand gun” video game series Metal Slug. Carefully coding each sprite within Scratch to respond promptly tokeystrokes, Jorge fully recreated the avatar fluidity characteristic of the original game, exploring and— to acertain degree—reformulating the genre conventions of shooter games. Yet with this functionality established,Jorge did not stop. Instead, he spent numerous additional hours, drawing every character and animation from theoriginal game using Scratch’s paint feature, which in turn were based upon his own penciled sketches of theoriginal video game. If, as Buckingham (2003) points out, “imitation is an indispensable aspect of learning” inmedia education, Jorge’s own video game exemplifies the educational potential of such creative imitation (p.134).In observing creative practices as they pertain to constructionist gaming, young designers learn aboutand appreciate artistic principles by making artistic choices within a single modality (e.g., visual, audio, orkinesthetic), as well as by connecting multimodal sign systems across two or more modalities (e.g., visual andsound, visual and movement or gesture, and sound and movement) to convey an artistic idea (Peppler, 2013). Inconstructionist gaming, the creative dimension not only adds personal but also multimodal expressions into theirdesigns. Some of these same elements of creative designs arise in instructionist gaming, such as when playershave the opportunity to name and customize their avatars at the start of a game. While this may seem to be onlya minor element, this ability to creatively customize a game has been one of the hallmarks of “good”instructionist games and points out that the creative dimension of serious gaming has always been inherentlyconstructionist in nature.CriticalThe fourth and final component of constructionist gaming—criticality—may very well be the hardest to pindown since media and arts education have historically emphasized the consumption and appreciation of existingdesigns as their main goals rather than making anew through the critical remixing and repurposing of suchdesigns (Peppler, 2013). Several approaches have examined game design as a way to involve youth in criticallyviewing media and using this understanding to create their own original work. As youth begin to take advantageof living in a digital world by capitalizing on the wealth of images, sounds, and videos accessible as “materials”to reuse in their own work, media educators grew particularly concerned about the ways in which youth areeither re-inscribing or questioning existing dominant norms (Buckingham, 2003; Buckingham & Burn, 2007).These critical practices of game production include youth being able to critically reflect on and evaluate mediatexts, understanding references made in popular texts, and deconstructing and interpreting the meaning behindsuch texts. By observing the critical practices of game designers in this way, we gain an understanding of theextent to which young designers understand and question the popular texts that they incorporate in their work,apart from what they learn about software programming and the arts.For instance, critical choices can take on the form of game designers intentionally removing allshooting features and enemies while keeping other features of a run-and-gun game genre intact (e.g., sidescrolling engine, smooth-action animation, core mechanics, etc.) to create a peaceful setting in a once violentvideogame (Peppler & Kafai, 2007a). Popular DIY practices, like remixing, bring up important issues of ethicsin new media literacies such as crediting ownership and providing inside information. Crediting ownershipconsists of referencing the intellectual origins of “text” used in media productions. And children can take thisreferencing quite seriously. In an after-school club, Scratch programmers ages 10-12 years were adamant thattheir fellow programmers credited the origins of programs that they had remixed and posted online. WhileScratch programmers initially were concerned about other taking their programs, they also came to understandICLS 2014 Proceedings89© ISLSthe remixes as a form of recognition that represented attention they received from others (Kafai, Fields, &Burke, 2010).In the context of constructionist gaming, the process through which youth transform from players tocreators of gaming also provides a critical lens, even in informal learning spaces (Burke & Kafai, 2014; Peppler& Kafai, 2007a). The extent to which these practices represent the larger community is unknown and is at thecore of our rationale for investigating vast data sources that were amassed by multiple members of thecommunity. As youth make a series of choices, this ultimately leads to more fuller forms of literacy as theybecome more practiced in these decision making processes. Some approaches in instructionist gaming havetaken on more critical lenses by choosing topics such “World without Oil”, which engages game players incritical examination of their own gas consumption by imagining over several weeks what life would be like withrestricted or even absent resources; likewise, DeVane and Squire’s (2007) study on how youth of different SESplay Grand Theft Auto and use this to examine home ownership and other economic situations holds thiselement of personal critical reflection within an instructionist gaming context. Whether within an instructionistor constructionist context though, this fourth C of criticality is a crucial element to keep in mind wheneverplaying or making video games as games and gaming do not simply represent an escape from everyday life butalso a reflection of our own lives and personal predilections.Connected GamingWe see the four C’s—coding, creative, collaborative, and critical practices–to be present in both constructionistand instructionist approaches to gaming, and while some of these elements are more widely documented tooccur in one approach over the other, these two approaches are nonetheless complimentary and serve as thebasis for connected gaming. The well-known game SimCity and the newly released Scratch 2.0 program eachoffer an apt example of instructionist and constructionist approaches merging together into this notion ofconnected gaming. From the instructionist gaming side, SimCity illustrates how playing a game can contributeto a better understanding of the constantly shifting dynamics of a simulated world (Salen, 2013). From theconstructionist gaming side, new features in Scratch 2.0 environment allow for writing programs that surveyinformation from participants at the site to better understand who is sharing online and what they are sharing(Dasgupta, 2013). These are two different approaches, but both have the same goal of “looking under the hood”for understanding what happens in the massive and interconnected community. While the tools in SimCity areprogrammed by experts, the tools in Scratch are programmed by players themselves. Going forward, there is noreason that SimCity couldn’t offer programmable tools that would allow end-users to customize theirinvestigations, while pre-programmed tools in Scratch can be offered for those wanting to experience an actualsimulation before designing their own. In fact, the latter approach already exists. Thus in bringing instructionistand constructionist approaches together, we open up new perspectives on using computation for understandingonline participation in gaming.To realize this potential of connected gaming, however, we face at least two critical challenges thathave long faced gaming culture in an instructionist context: access and participation. The first issue stems fromthe lack of access to learning coding skills. While children may have the devices themselves, they have little tono understanding how the devices actually work. The second issue follows the first and addresses the strongdisparities in participation as to who actually produces within both gaming and coding communities. These twoissues have been particularly dicey issues for girls with girls’ underrepresentation in both coding and gamingcommunities. Yet, in an unexpected development over the last decade, programming games has been used tobroaden participation in computing for girls (Kafai et al., 2008).From Tools To Communities in Connected GamingSo can we capitalize on these developments to broaden access and participation? Making games is obviously nota simple enterprise but requires much, including dedicated chips, significant technical knowledge, as wellexperience in storytelling, art, and design. Can novices become such game designers? One of the key challengesis to provide them with tools that lower the barriers, or the floors (Burke & Kafai, 2014), to make the oncelaborious process of computer programming. But by the same token, with the floor laid out, the next challengebecomes to what extent these various game-making tools have the capacity to retain their users. While “lowfloor” accessibility is the first step to ensure a steady number of novice users are accessing and using a gametool, designers also have to ensure that their game engine is robust enough to ensure more experienced users donot tire of the software and can find new ways to become more proficient at making video games..But most importantly, tools also need to consider the participation issue and with it, shift their attentionto the larger gaming community. Here “wide walls” signify the capacity of a tool to allow for a variety ofcreations—in this case, a wide variety of games. Effective game-making tools must allow their users to create avariety of game genres, be it platform games, first-person shooter games, RPGs (role-playing games), strategygames, and trivia games, to name a few. Likewise, “large windows” provide opportunities to connect withothers to join gaming communities that revolve around same interests. Many communities now are connected toICLS 2014 Proceedings90© ISLSgame design tools, including Kodu, Scratch, GameStar Mechanic, Spolder, and Game Salad. Some of these arespecific to video games while others are more open-ended and allow for multiple designs besides games. Thesecommunities of game designers is a key component, from the early classrooms where kids designed theirindividual games to the massive online communities where games are some of the most popular designs shared.Gaining access to a wide and appreciative community means that players have the opportunity to leverage thatcommunity as an extension of the tool itself, with meaningful feedback serving to help fledgling designers gaina foothold into what works in game design, while more experienced designers can grow in proficiency andcreate increasingly intricate games.From Old to New Clubhouses in Connected GamingIf tools can provide access to new communities and communities can function as effective extensions of suchtools, then we also need to address who is participating and who can participate in these communities. Gaming(Jenkins & Castell, 1998), but also coding communities (Margolis & Fisher, 2002), have a long history for notengaging girls and the reasons are multiple: on one hand, there is the lack of interest, lack of experience, andlack of skill from females, while on the other hand there is the persistent stereotyping of women in these samethree areas, which is then compounded by a lack of female player roles and the prevalence of violence in games.This larger issue of gender differences is not germane to gaming alone—it is one that has plagued programmingand STEM in the learning sciences at large. And yet, despite these persistent issues, constructionist gamingapproaches have been seen as a possible remedy for addressing the gender divide so present in the gamingculture at large. An early study of game making revealed no significant gender differences in learningprogramming and disbanded with conventional wisdom at the time believed to be true: girls could be interestedin programming and be interested in gaming, if they were just given the opportunity to make their own (Kafai,1995). The success of girls in constructionist gaming became the launch pad for a whole series of tooldevelopments (such as Storytelling Alice) and research initiatives to use game design to broaden girls’participation in computing.While there was much success with game making to bring girls into the so-called clubhouses ofcomputing and gaming, it also revealed a problematic aspect: why did girls have to design games in order tobecome gamers and more tech-savvy? This issue received little attention, even from the feminist side whomightily and justifiably lamented about the reification of stereotypes in girls making games (Jenson & deCastell2007). The challenge we are faced with is to no longer simply question how to open the doors of existingtechnology and gaming clubhouses but how to build new clubhouses that envision different applications andactivities in computing and gaming. The most prominent example here is the work by Leah Buechley who redesigned the Arduino board into the LilyPad Arduino for making electronic textiles. She found, indeed, newcommunities or clubhouses of coding could be created with such redesigns that are functionally equivalent intheir technical complexity but application-wise result in the construction of different artifacts (Hill andBuechley, 2011). A possible equivalent in building new clubhouses for gaming could be to focus on therelationship between stories and games and conceiving of the game making process as a matter of craftingpathways rather than simply responding to stimuli (Westecott, 2012).We of course have only touched upon the surface in imagining what connected gaming could look likeand how it can begin to address these issues of access and participation. When the field of serious gamingstarted, attention nearly inordinately focused on proving the effectiveness of instructionist gaming (Clark, 2007)and “researching learning in popular gaming cultures, designing learning environments based on thoseprinciples, and reconceptualizing educational practice for an interactive age” (p. 51, Squire, 2007).Constructionist gaming really was not part of either discussion in building the field of serious gaming. But if wewant to realize the larger potential of serious gaming, we need embrace a larger agenda that recognizes thatopening access and participation in serious games is not solely a matter of making better games for the end userbut allowing these end users themselves to make the games they would like to see and play. Ultimately,connected gaming’s goal is to promote environments good for learning, and it is here where constructionistapproaches join instructionist efforts. This is the case for “connected gaming”, an approach that doesn’t drawboundaries between players and designers as participants of digital media culture but rather sees them ascomplimentary to each other as already Papert envisioned: “if one does belong to a culture in which videogames are important, transforming oneself from a consumer to a producer of games may well be an even morepowerful way for some children to find importance in what they are doing” (p. iii, 1995).ReferencesBuechley, L. & Hill, M. (2012). LilyPad in the wild. How hardware’s long tail is supporting new engineeringand design communities. DIS ’10 Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing InteractiveSystems (p. 199-207) New York, NY: ACMBuckingham & Burn (2007). Game literacy in theory and practice. Journal of Educational Multimedia andHypermedia, 16(3), 323-349.ICLS 2014 Proceedings91© ISLSBurke, Q. & Kafai, Y.B. (2014). A decade of programming games for learning: From tools to communities. InH. Agius & M.C. Angelides (Eds.) The Handbook of Digital Games: Institute of Electrical andElectronics Engineers (IEEE). New York: John Wiley & Sons.Burke, Q. & Kafai, Y.B. (accepted). DIY zones for Scratch designs in class and club. The International Journalof Learning and Media. 3(4).Clark, R. E. (2007). Learning from serious games? Arguments, evidence, and research suggestions. EducationalTechnology, 47(3), 56-59.Cuban, L. (1986). Teachers and machines: The classroom use of computers since 1920. New York, NY:Teachers College Press.Dasgupta, S. (2013). From surveys to collaborative art. Proceedings of the 12th International Conference onInteraction Design and Children (pp. 28-35). New York, NY: ACM.Denner, J., Werner, L., Bean, S., & Campe, S. (2005). The girls creating games program: Strategies forengaging middle school girls in information technology. Frontiers: A Journal of Women’s Studies,26(1), 90-98.Denner, J. & Werner, L. (2007). Computer programming in middle school: How pairs respond to challenges.Journal of Education Computing Research, 37(2), 131-150.DeVane, B. & Squire, K. (2008). The meaning of race and violence in Grand Theft Auto San Andreas.10.1177/1555412008317308.Duncan, S. (2011). Minecraft, beyond construction and survival. Well Played, 1(1), 1-22. New York, NY: ACM.El Nasr, M. & Smith, S. (2006). Learning through game modding. Computers in Entertainment, 4(1)10.1145/1111293.1111301.Gee, J.P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: PalgraveMacmillan.Gentile, D. A., & Gentile, J. R. (2008). Violent video games as exemplary teachers: a conceptual analysis.Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 37(2), 128-141.Girard, C., Ecalle, J., & Magant, A. (2012). Serious games as new educational tools: how effective are they? Ameta-analysis of recent studies. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, (29)3. 1-13.Grover, S. & Pea, R. (2013). Computational Thinking in K–12: A Review of the State of the Field. EducationalResearcher, 42 (1), 38-43.Hayes, E.R. & Games, I.A. (2008). Making computer games and design thinking: A review of current softwareand strategies. Games and Culture, 3(4), 309-322.Casell, J. & Jenkins, H. (1998). From Barbie to Mortal Kombat. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Jenkins, H. Clinton, K., Purushotma, R., Robison, A., & Weigel, M. (2006). Confronting the challenges ofparticipatory culture: media education for the 21st century. White Paper. Chicago, IL: The John D. &Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.Jenson, J. & deCastell, S. (2007). Girls playing games: Rethinking stereotypes. Futureplay, 9-16.Kafai, Y. B. (1995). Minds in play: Computer game design as a context for children’s learning. Mahwah, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum.Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Playing and making games for learning: Instructionist and constructionist perspectives forgame studies. Games & Culture, 1(1), 36-40.Kafai, Y.B. & Burke, Q. (2014). Connected code: Children, programming and the power to make and connect.Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Kafai, Y. B. & Fields, D. A. (2013). Connected play: Tweens in a virtual world. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Kafai, Y.B., Fields, D.A., & Burke, W.Q. (2010). Entering the clubhouse: Case studies of young programmersjoining the online Scratch communities. Journal of Organizational and End User Computing, 22(2),21-35.Kafai, Y. B. & Peppler, K. A. (2011). Youth, technology, and DIY: Developing participatory competencies increative media production. Review of Research in Education, 35(1), 89-119.Kelleher, C. & Pausch, R. (2005). Lowering the barriers to programming: A taxonomy of programmingenvironments and languages for novice programmers. ACM Computing Surveys, 37(2), 88-137.Klopfer, E. & Haas, J. (2012) The more we know: NBC News, educational innovation, and learning fromfailure. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.Knobel, M. & Lankshear, C. (Eds.) (2010). DIY media: Creating, sharing, and learning with new technologies.New York: Peter Lang.McLaurin, M. (2009). Kodu: End-user programming and design for games. In Proceedings of FDG '09. NewYork, NY: ACM. DOI: 10.1145/1536513.1536516Mote, C., Kafai, Y.B., & Burke, Q. (2013). Can online competitions be collaborative? Utilizing virtual events topromote communication and learning in schools. Learning & Leading with Technology, 41(4), 16-21.National Research Council (2011). Learning Science through Simulations and Games. Washington DC: TheNational Academies Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings92© ISLSPapert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books. New York.Pelletier, C. (2008). Producing difference in studying and making computer games: How students constructgames as gendered in order to construct themselves as gendered. In Y. B. Kafai, C. Heeter, J. Denner,& J. Sun (Eds.), Beyond Barbie and Mortal Kombat (pp. 145-161). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.Peppler K. & Kafai, Y.B. (2007a). From SuperGoo to Scratch: Exploring creative digital media production ininformal learning. Learning, Media, and Technology, 32(2), 149-166.Peppler, K. Kafai, Y. B. (2007b). What video game-making can teach us about learning and literacy: Alternativepathways into participatory culture. In Akira Baba (Ed.), Situated Play: Proceedings of the ThirdInternational Conference of the Digital Games Research Association (DiGRA) (pp. 369-376). Tokyo,Japan: The University of Tokyo.Repenning, A. & Ioannidou, A. (2008) Broadening participation through scalable game design. SIGCSE ’08Proceedings of the 39th SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (pp. 305-309).New York, NY: ACM.Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy Hernandez, A. Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K. Millner, A., Rosenbaum,E., Silver, J., Silverman, B. & Kafai, Y.B. (2009). Scratch: Programming for all. Communication of theACM, 52(11), 60-67.Reynolds, R. & Harel Caperton, I. (2011). Contrasts in student engagement, meaning-making, dislikes, andchallenges in a discovery-based program of game design learning. Educational Technology Researchand Development, 59, 267-289.Salen, K. (2007). Gaming literacies: A game design study in action. Journal of Educational Multimedia andHypermedia, 16(3), 301-322.Salen, K. (2013, March). Agile development meets evidence-centered design: Glasslab and the design of gamebased assessments. Presentation at the Digital Media & Learning Conference, March 14-16. Chicago,IL.Shaffer, D. (2007). How computer games help children learn. New York, NY: Palgrave MacMillan.Steinkuehler, C. & Duncan, S (2008). Scientific habits of mind in virtual worlds. Journal of Science EducationTechnology, 17(6), 530-543.Squire, K. (2007). Games, learning, and society: Building a field. Educational Technology, 47(5), 51-55.Squire, K. (2011). Video games and learning: Teaching and participatory culture in the digital age. New York:Teachers College Press.Torres, R.J. (2009). Using Gamestar Mechanic within a nodal learning ecology to learn systems thinking: Aworked example. International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(2), 1-8.Vogel, J. J., Vogel, D. S., Cannon-Bowers, J., Bowers, C. A., Muse, K., & Wright, M. (2013). Computer gamingand interactive simulations for learning: a meta-analysis. Journal of Educational Computing Research,34(3), 229-243.Westecott, E. (2012). Independent game development as craft. Loading, 7(1), 78-91.Wouters, P., van Nimwegen, C., von Oostendorp, H., & van der Spek, E. D. (2013). A meta-analysis of thecognitive and motivational effects of serious games. Journal of Educational Psychology, 1-17.Young, M. F., Slota, S., Cutter, A. R., Jalette, G., Mullin, G., Lai, B., Simenoni, Z., Tran, M., & Yukhymenko,M. (2012). Our princess is another castle: A review of trends in serious gaming for education. Reviewof Educational Research, 82(1), 61-89.AcknowledgmentsThe writing of this paper was supported by a collaborative grant from the National Science Foundation (NSFCDI-1027736) to Yasmin Kafai, together with Mitchel Resnick and Yochai Benkler. The views expressed arethose of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Foundation, the University ofPennsylvania or the College of Charleston.ICLS 2014 Proceedings93© ISLS