Epistemic Networks for Epistemic CommitmentsSimon Knight, Open University, sjgknight@gmail.comGolnaz Arastoopour, University of Wisconsin-Madison, arastoop@gmail.comDavid Williamson Shaffer, University of Wisconsin-Madison, david.williamson.shaffer@gmail.comSimon Buckingham Shum, Open University, s.buckingham.shum@gmail.comKaren Littleton, Open University, karen.littleton@open.ac.ukAbstract: The ways in which people seek and process information are fundamentallyepistemic in nature. Existing epistemic cognition research has tended towards characterizingthis fundamental relationship as cognitive or belief-based in nature. This paper builds onrecent calls for a shift towards activity-oriented perspectives on epistemic cognition andproposes a new theory of ‘epistemic commitments’. An additional contribution of this papercomes from an analytic approach to this recast construct of epistemic commitments throughthe use of Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA) to explore connections between particularmodes of epistemic commitment. Illustrative examples are drawn from existing research dataon children’s epistemic talk when engaged in collaborative information seeking tasks. A briefdescription of earlier analysis of this data is given alongside a newly conducted ENA todemonstrate the potential for such an approach.IntroductionSeeking information in online environments is an increasingly important activity in a world in which studentsare no longer directed to pre-selected course books and materials. Yet, searching is a skill with which many –across age ranges – struggle. While support for technical aspects of searching may be of some assistance, weagree with Mason, Ariasi and Boldrin’s claim that complaints regarding students’ abilities at navigating the webare not technological, but rather epistemic issues around “the nature of knowledge and knowing, which mayfacilitate or constrain searching and evaluating sources of information on the internet” (Mason, Ariasi, &Boldrin, 2011, p. 139). This paper takes as its focus the seeking of information, claiming that this activity –particularly as mediated by and conducted through search engines – provides an epistemic lens through whichresearchers may explore the commitments learners make explicitly and implicitly about knowledge. Thesecommitments are implicated in the ways students select sources, use them, and make connections between themin any information-seeking task. Analysis to explore issues at this level, and understand how to support learnersto engage more effectively in their search practices is important. Both professional and academic learningcontexts require high levels of information literacy; as such, an activity-oriented perspective on developingskills to support such literacy is an important contribution. This paper builds on recent contributions (includingat ICLS 2012) calling for a shift from psychometric assessments for epistemic cognition, towards an explorationof the situated contexts in which epistemic practices are brought to bear. Specifically, we argue for a newapproach: epistemic commitments – action-oriented ways of working – rather than beliefs, and the analysis ofsuch commitments using Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA) to explore the connections between epistemicmodes of information seeking. We suggest a focus on trace indicators of behaviors, and the connectionsbetween particular types of behavior (as analyzed using ENA) offer a productive new approach to theinvestigation of epistemic practices.Seeking Information as an Epistemic LensIn describing the established epistemic cognition literature, Mason (2009, p. 69) highlights broad agreementacross models on the importance of two main facets – what knowledge is, and how one comes to know. Withinthe first area, two dimensions are noted: the certainty of knowledge (how stable or tentative knowledge is); andthe simplicity of knowledge (how holistic a perspective of interrelated concepts, or simplistic a perspective ofcompartmentalized facts is taken). Similarly, Mason identifies two dimensions of the second area: the source ofknowledge (from transmission to constructivism); and the justification for knowing (what warrants a knowledgeclaim – from authority to rules of inquiry). These models have informed analysis of the comprehension ofmultiple online sources – which may vary radically in the nature of their sourcing and justifications – in theunderstanding that students who regard knowledge as simple and finite may conduct brief and perfunctorysearches with little recourse to integration or multiple sourcing (Barzilai & Zohar, 2009; Bråten & Strømsø,2006). We thus agree that, “exploring students’ thought processes during online searching allows examinationof personal epistemology not as a decontextualized set of beliefs, but as an activated, situated aspect ofcognition that influences the knowledge construction process” (Hofer, 2004, p. 43).Research in this area indicates that students with more sophisticated inquiry stances are more likely toevaluate websites, and to do so meaningfully, while those with more sophisticated perspectives on themultiplicity of knowledge (or multiple perspectives) are more likely to integrate and critically evaluate multipleICLS 2014 Proceedings150© ISLSonline sources (Barzilai & Zohar, 2009; Bråten & Strømsø, 2006). While epistemic cognition is not a significantfactor in understanding converging perspectives in online sources, for conflicting sources, those withevaluativist beliefs (who critique claims) perform significantly better in their comprehension (Barzilai & EshetAlkalai, 2013). A growing body of work associates search and sourcing patterns with particular patterns ofepistemic metacognition (Mason et al., 2009), with think-aloud research indicating that students engaged inweb-based learning spontaneously engage in epistemic reflection, particularly around source selection andcredibility (Mason et al., 2011; Mason, Boldrin, & Ariasi, 2010), where students who verbalised about sourcecredibility and information veracity significantly outperformed those who evaluated only sources (Mason et al.,2011). It should be noted, however, that the use of think-aloud protocols may increase such practices (Schraw &Impara, 2000; Schraw, 2000). We return later to the possibility that the collaborative search context may havehigher external validity, as well as offering methodological advantages for gaining insight into a group’sepistemic practices.Situating Epistemic CommitmentsThe context of search is thus an interesting one for our investigations. Recent work has rejected an analysis ofbeliefs in favor of an action-oriented view:What we have called tacit epistemic beliefs might better be called epistemic commitments(Chinn & Brewer, 1993). Some theorists may be uncomfortable with the idea that one canhave a tacit ‘belief’ that cannot be expressed, and the term epistemic commitment avoidsreference to such beliefs. An epistemic commitment reflects a tendency to act in specifiedways, such as a proclivity to provide justifications based on personal experience (Chinn,Buckland, & Samarapungavan, 2011, p. 146).Furthermore, Sandoval (2012) has made related claims, calling for epistemic cognition researchers to takeseriously a ‘situated’ approach:One important way to understand the epistemic ideas that people bring to bear is to examinetheir participation in practices of knowledge evaluation and construction. Changes in the formof participation are indicators of changes in the meaning that individuals make of the activityin which they are engaged. […] Change in participation can indicate a shift in epistemicperspective, but it is the shift itself that suggests what particular epistemic ideas are brought tobear in the first place (Sandoval, 2012, p. 350)In a similar vein, Tsai (2004) suggests that information commitments involve “specific views about what countsas a successful explanation in the field (e.g. science) and […] general views about the character of validknowledge or information” (Tsai, 2004, p. 105). Tsai (2004, p. 109) thus proposes three dimensions:•••Standards for correctness: evaluative standards ranging from ‘authority’ to ‘multiple sources’Standards for usefulness: assessment of the usefulness of web-materials, ranging from ‘functional’(e.g. ease of retrieval), to ‘content’ (e.g. relevance of retrieved information)Searching strategy: information-search strategy ranging from ‘match’ (of simple claims to questions)to ‘elaboration and exploration’While this turn from epistemic beliefs to commitments is an interesting one for analytics/data miningresearchers who wish to analyze learners’ behavioral traces as proxies for epistemic beliefs, it is stillproblematic, not least because as Wu and Tsai (2005) highlight, students may utilize both of the informationcommitments (‘multiple sources’ and ‘authority’) at the same time when evaluating the accuracy of thematerials on the Web – a scenario which this framework does not have conceptual resource to explain. That is,while the orientations are proposed as dichotomous, or scalar, it is not clear that it is appropriate to think ofthem in such a way.In our view, the action-oriented shifts described above are best characterized by the connectionslearners make between aspects of their sourcing behavior and information use. Thus, the focus should be on theemergence of information needs, and the use of multiple implicit and explicit criteria to assess the suitability ofinformation for meeting those needs is dictated by a complex combination of searcher’s action, task context, andtechnical mediation. Importantly, “…information seeking is not carried out for its own sake but to achieve anobjective that lies beyond the practice of information seeking itself.” (Sundin & Johannisson, 2005, p. 107).Therefore credibility assessments do not stand alone, but are connected to the continued seeking of information,and the ways in which information is used. Thus individual activities should not be considered in isolation:selecting multiple sources; claims around source authority; connecting pieces of information in complex ways;and so on, are not in themselves complex or simple. Context sensitivity is fundamental for a sophisticatedepistemology; it is not very sophisticated to view the idea that the earth is round rather than flat as ‘tentative’whereas theories of dinosaur extinction do require a more tentative stance (Barzilai & Zohar, 2012, p. 42).ICLS 2014 Proceedings151© ISLSEpistemic FramesEpistemic Frame Theory (EFT) provides a means to conceptualize these connections between commitments.Epistemic Frames can be thought of in terms of the connections between elements usually described as: skills,knowledge, values, identities, and epistemological rules, from any particular domain. EFT is explicitly discourseoriented, and argues that an approach called Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA) may give insight into theframes of experts and novices working in a domain (Shaffer & Graesser, 2010; Shaffer et al., 2009). ENA thusoffers a way to model the relations among elements of epistemic frames – which are constituted in discourse:particular facets of the frame (e.g. keywords indicating particular ways of working) become nodes, whileconnections between those nodes represent the patterns of connections between frame facets (e.g. the cooccurrence of keywords).The search context is a particularly interesting one in which to deploy ENA. The theory takes as its unitof analysis any chunk of dialogue (a session) broken into meaningful chunks (stanzas). In the case provided inthis paper we chunk stanzas by task, but for other analyses it may be more appropriate to chunk by search query.ENA allows us to model various types of connections, and broadly examine whether or not particular ways ofmaking sense of information – in the confines of answering questions, or attempts at deeper understanding – cooccur with particular types of sourcing or connections between knowledge. Moreover, such analysis may offerinsight into the quality of frame elements (nodes) – for example, claims about the ‘authority’ of websites mightbe rather trivial (for example, “it looks good”) or more sophisticated (for example, “they used a scientificmethod”). Understanding how such justificatory elements of the frame are connected to sourcing elements maygive insight into the pedigree of those sourcing decisions which would be missed by looking only for ‘authority’claims. When we seek information we search for both in the sense that we search for information, and we searchfor a purpose; how users engage with those purposes is what matters, and how they connect those purposes totheir epistemic commitments. Their sourcing decisions and the way they conceptualize the complexity ofinformation is crucial. Thus, while search strategies matter, and an overreliance on individual (authoritative)websites or the consistent use of multiple websites (corroboration) might be of concern, their relationships toother epistemic assumptions are key.In the work reported in this paper we take a previously analyzed dataset, and apply ENA to theepistemic discourse around searching for information to address a number of pre-assigned questions. We discussthe dataset further below, note though, that the use of this pre-existing dataset allows us to compare insightsgained through close textual analysis, and those offered through ENA, thus supporting the development of a‘proof of concept’ model for ENA around epistemic commitments.The Collaborative LensA fundamental component of understanding the social context and role of language in learning is an analysis ofhow language mediates and represents learners’ views on their learning. This component of learning is alsofundamental to the theoretical and practical application of ENA, which takes as its data the discourse used in thecourse of students’ learning practices. As noted above, it also avoids the methodological risk of artificiallyactivating metacognitive strategies through the use of think-aloud techniques.High quality collaboration also entails particular – epistemic – ways of working. In the context ofepistemic commitments, take for example Hutchinson and Hammer’s (2010) case study from a scienceclassroom, in which framing by students which could be characterized as ‘sensemaking’ in nature (and, as wenote below, accountable or exploratory) is contrasted with a more absolutist perspective. For example, at onepoint a student (Bekah) offers and explains an equation to illustrate her understanding – this is taken up andreferred to collectively as “Bekah’s Law”, illustrating a cohesive tie (the repetition of terms through a text)demonstrating a type of common knowledge built up in that classroom (Hutchison & Hammer, 2010). This typeof talk bears striking resemblance to exploratory or accountable talk, research on which focuses on the ways inwhich language is used “as a social mode of thinking – a tool for teaching-and-learning, constructingknowledge, creating joint understanding and tackling problems collaboratively” (Mercer, 2004, p. 137). Inexploratory dialogue:Partners engage critically but constructively with each other’s ideas. Statements andsuggestions are offered for joint consideration. These may be challenged and counterchallenged, but challenges are justified and alternative hypotheses are offered. Partners allactively participate, and opinions are sought and considered before decisions are jointly made.Compared with the other two types, in exploratory talk knowledge is made more publiclyaccountable and reasoning is more visible in the talk. (Mercer & Littleton, 2007, p. 59)In such talk, explanatory terms and phrases are more common, for example: I think; because/’cos; if;for example; and also. Similar characterizations of effective dialogue have emerged from the work of otherresearchers across a range of ages (Michaels, O’Connor, Hall, & Resnick, 2002; Resnick, 2001). This talk isthus explicitly epistemic, in that it embodies consideration of “the other’s” perspective. The significance of thisICLS 2014 Proceedings152© ISLStype of dialogue for the study of epistemic commitments receives further support from Reznitskaya and Gregory(2013) who note that more sophisticated epistemic cognition of the ‘evaluativist’ variety, is closely associatedwith the kind of exploratory talk which is associated with educational gains. This claim – of an epistemicrelationship to exploratory talk – is further supported in Rosenberg, Hammer and Phelan’s work (2006). In thatstudy, a case study was presented of a 15 minute discussion of the ‘rock cycle’ by a group of 8th graders – again,making use of dialogue excerpts to exemplify. Rosenberg et al., note that in the initial stages students wereengaged in largely unproductive talk (there was some accretion of knowledge, with little explanation orevidence of understanding – it was largely cumulative in nature), suggesting this was because: "They [were]treating knowledge as comprised of isolated, simple pieces of information expressed with specific vocabularyand provided by authority" (Rosenberg et al., 2006, p. 270). After a brief intervention by the teacher, suggestingthe students might build on their own knowledge, this talk instead shifts to more productive dialogue, seekingcoherence and understanding in trying to create a theory and use terms they understand – the description, andexcerpts provided here suggest this talk might be characterized as more ‘exploratory’ in nature. Exploratorydialogue is thus closely associated with a component of our approach to epistemic commitments aroundopenness to ideas, and justification for them. This is particularly interesting given evidence that collaborativeinformation seeking is a common activity (see Shah, 2012 for a review), and may have benefits for informationseeking in classroom contexts (Lazonder, 2005) .A Proposal for Epistemic CommitmentsIn addition to exploratory dialogue, other components of epistemic cognition are highlighted in the literature.Earlier we noted Mason et al.’s (2009, p. 69) claim that across models of epistemic cognition, there was a focuson the certainty, simplicity, source and justification for knowledge. We then noted Tsai’s (2004, p. 109)framework for information commitments, comprised of: standards for correctness; standards for usefulness; andsearching strategy. We thus recast these two positions such that our focus is on:1.2.3.Which sources of information are selected – comprised of credibility decisions (from corroboration ofinformation across sources, to trust in the authoritativeness of sources)How information is used (in action – to justify claims, to make decisions) – comprised of justificationsand source use (from dialogic approaches using talk of an exploratory nature, to attempts to directlyapproach questions by matching information to answers)How links between information are created (or not) – comprised of claims, (explicitly in language andthrough structured environments, as well as implicitly through search patterns) made aroundconnectedness of concepts (from a holistic to a piecemeal perspective of knowledge)This recasting aligns well with the specific context being studied here – that of collaborativeinformation seeking. It also provides three conceptually distinct (although probably empirically associated)constructs for study. In the two other models highlighted – Tsai’s information commitments, and the generalmodel described in Mason’s analysis of the literature – it is not clear that each component can be conceptuallydistinguished. Specifically, ‘certainty’ in the general model seems likely to be a function of justification andsimplicity. The sophistication of one’s perspectives on ‘certainty’ depends on the purpose for which theinformation is being deployed, and the other information to which it is being associated – and indeed, whetherone holds a complex enough view of knowledge to recognize the instability of certain information. Indeed,‘certainty’ could be characterized as a connection between a facet of the information (publication date metadata,for example) and justification (recency, or information being well ‘established’ for example). Similarly, it is notclear that ‘searching strategy’ is a useful conceptualization of an information commitment given its strongrelation to the tools at hand, and the type of task set and justificatory framework required for that task. Theproposed model focuses on whom we believe, how we justify claims; and how holistic a conception we have.However, although ‘epistemic commitments’ recasts the constructs of other models, it still provides a lens forthem. For example, ‘certainty’ is recast in light of our standards for credibility, explanation, and relatingcomponents of information such as new and old, or geographically located information; ‘simplicity’ is mostclearly related to the third focus on connectivity; source to the first; and ‘justification’ to the second.Furthermore, the rhetorical shift both in the foci, and in the notion of ‘commitments’ over ‘cognition’ motivatesan operationalization centered on:1.2.Source selection, the corroboration of information across opened links, and the types of linksrepeatedly visited (e.g. use of authoritative sites such as ‘BBC’, repeated use of top links in searchengine results pages, use of source metadata in the justificatory framework below).The type of justificatory framework used, the assertion of information (perhaps closely related to a styleof search which emphasizes precision of information with little consideration to its wider impact)versus reasoning and understanding activities (closely related to exploratory dialogue)ICLS 2014 Proceedings153© ISLS3.The sorts of connections made by students between concepts in their dialogue and document creation,and in the ways that users build links between information in their search patterns (building on searchterms by rephrasing and appending new query terms, following internal links, and using terms fromopened sources to find new ones all imply some commitment to holistic perspectives on knowledge).This model thus describes both a conceptual and practical means to explore epistemic commitments ininformation seeking environments, and will be the model adopted in this work.A Pilot Validation for Epistemic CommitmentsThe data described in this paper were taken from research the first author conducted in an English Secondaryschool with a pair and two trios of female 11 year old pupils (Knight & Mercer, Forthcoming). The researcherrecorded an hour of discourse and (shared) display/browser use of the pupils while they were engaged in a set ofassigned information seeking tasks around the topic of “role models”. Some questions were closed (“How manywomen have won the Nobel Prize?”) while others were more open ended (“Why do some people think NelsonMandela is a good role model?”). In addition they were asked to justify their choices of information, and statetheir sources; these were questions explicitly designed to probe epistemic thinking. The data were analyzed forevidence of exploratory dialogue, and – making use of both the screencast and audio recordings – for epistemicbehavior in pupil interactions with each other, and the information they sought. One of the groups wasparticularly unsuccessful in their performance (completing relatively few questions) while the other twoperformed rather better, although demonstrated some different ways of working. The original data were not‘coded’ as such, rather a closer analysis using the methods of sociocultural discourse analysis (Mercer, 2004)was conducted. In the analysis here, this close focus on the properties of the text is used to motivate a shifttowards coding utterances (turns by a single speaker) within stanzas (topically related sets of utterances; in thiscase utterances responding to set task questions) at the level of particular epistemic commitments by using keyterms (see Error! Reference source not found.).Prior Analysis of the DataAs noted above, the data come from previous analysis with respect to epistemic cognition research, using abroadly sociocultural approach for a close hand-analysis of the transcript to explore the ways in which speakersmake meaning together in context. In this section, we briefly summarize the findings of that research (which thefirst author conducted) before describing outcomes of ENA. There were marked differences in the behavior ofthe three groups. Group 1 in particular focused on how detailed sources were, and the repetition of keywords orinformation as indicators of usefulness, and had a general reliance on one website for many of the questions –although they talked very little about source quality, they spent some time discussing why their sources andinformation answered the questions and were ‘useful’. In contrast, group 2 explicitly sought particular types ofauthority, noting the quality of BBC material, and potential problems with some sites (such as answers.com).Group 2 were very focused on extracting direct answers to questions from websites, and emphasized the noveltyof information (i.e. “I didn’t know that”) as reasons for its importance often without directly addressing the partof the question asking them to justify their selection of information, or attempting to corroborate or makeconnections between bits of information. Group 3 showed the starkest difference in their behavior – and indeed,the poorest performance in terms of task completion. They emphasized quantity of information over quality,making no distinction between the qualities of different sources even where corroboration was attempted (e.g.treating ‘answers.com’ sites as equal authorities to the official website for the Nobel Prize). Preliminary analysisof this data by the first author in light of the theory of commitments proposed, highlighted salience of keywordsfor dimensions as in Table 1 which were used to code utterances for the application of ENA.Table 1 – Dimensions of Epistemic Commitments for ENACodeDefinitionSource –Make reference to authorities when selectingAuthorityinformationSource –Make reference to repetition of informationCorroboration when selecting informationJustification – Little attempt to sensemake in question;Matchingtargeted matching of source information toquestions.Justification – Attempt to make sense of information, useUnderstanding more accountable/exploratory dialogue keyphrases (or epistemic superordinate codes)Simplicity –Make few connections between information,Simplelook for individual tokens of knowledgeICLS 2014 Proceedings154Example"use BBC, that's a good site",“just use the top site”, “it’s a reliable site”"we said x cuz it was on lots of sites", “welleveryone agreed”“it’s an answer”, “look, it says it there”,“what’s it asking?”“because”, “so”, “I think”“all the information”, “need more facts”,listing of claims without connections© ISLSCodeSimplicity –ComplexSearchGeneralSpecificDefinitionMake connections between tokens ofinformation, possibly across questions,contextualize information (e.g. account fortemporal aspect), and make judgmentsregarding relative utility of informationReferring to search or webpage specificaspects of the taskReferences to general knowledge required(around role models in this case)References to specific pieces of informationin each questionExample“important information”, making connectionsbetween claims (co-occurrence)“google that”, “click there”, “try searchingfor…”Keywords selected for general task relevance;e.g. “role models”Keywords selected for relevance to thespecific questions asked e.g. “43 women”Epistemic Network AnalysisCodes across epistemic commitments and search activities were applied at an utterance level (as examples inTable 1) with utterances grouped by question to form ‘stanzas’. Co-occurrence of codes in stanzas are thenidentified to create an adjacency matrix – a quantification of connections between nodes. In the search study allthree groups discussed at least the first four (of nine) questions (although one group did not complete it) thusonly these four stanzas are analyzed. In ENA, connections are weighted by their presence across stanzas. Assuch, it is possible to place a threshold on connections such that only the most prominent connections areselected (and graphed when using ENA visualizations). In this case, the threshold is set to the highest level atwhich all three groups show any connections between nodes, a level largely dictated by group 3 whoseutterances were characterized by simple phrases (many of which were off-task) and thus had very fewconnections between nodes. Furthermore, nodes which represent the greatest variation across groups arevisualized on opposing axes. Thus by looking at connections and distance on axes, differences between groupscan be explored.Figure 1. Epistemic Network Analysis for three groups’ Epistemic CommitmentsFigure 1 shows the ENA visualizations generated for Groups 1-3 (nodes have been combined to aidinterpretation). Two dimensions accounted for most of the between-group variance. The x axis (dimension 1)accounts for most (67%) of the variance, with groups with low values making stronger connections withSimplicity Complex, and groups with high x values making stronger connections with Simplicity Simple andSource Corroboration. The y axis (dimension 2), then, largely distinguishes between Justification Match, andSource Authority with the use of question specific terminology. Here we see group 1 with larger y valuesrepresenting stronger connections to matching, connecting to: understanding, making of Question General andSpecific claims, and Simplicity Complex. Group one’s talk might include things like: “we have to say why itmatters, so [fact] is important because…”. In contrast, we see group 2 with lower y values representing greateruse of Authority – making the same connections otherwise (the cluster in the middle). This group’s talk might becharacterized by phrases such as: “the answer’s [fact], because it’s a good site”.The x axis defined the main difference between groups 1 and 2, and group 3 who made far fewerconnections in general, and those that they did make were between: both Corroboration and Simplicity Simple,and making general claims, Justification Understanding and Justification Match. This might be interpreted asICLS 2014 Proceedings155© ISLSindicating a perspective that simple knowledge obtained through corroboration is used to match general aims(and justified as such) although not actually targeting question specific knowledge claims (as is evident in thetranscript and success rate with few targeted pieces of information associated with questions). Group 1 appearsto be more focused on answering the questions using the information at hand, and making relationships betweenboth the information found, and the questions. In contrast, group 2 appears to be focused on taking informationfrom sources of authority that appear relevant to them. They still spend some time trying to relate thisinformation and understand it, but they are not as focused on the requirements of the questions. It is interestingto note that there was little discussion of ‘search’ in any group, and that this is reflected in the lack ofconnections to this element of the frame. ENA thus offers a useful comparator for closer manual analysis.Through the analysis of connections in epistemic commitments, it gives many of the same insights as that closeranalysis, while offering a method to scale analysis and provide real-time feedback.DiscussionThis paper set out to motivate a conception of epistemic commitments in the context of collaborativeinformation seeking on the web, and to discuss the methodological and conceptual adequacy of ENA for theiranalysis. The example offered in this paper provides exemplifications of how such analysis might be conducted.Of course, ENA does not offer all the same insights as close manual analysis – for example, additional tracedata would be required to identify specific websites used as authorities across contexts (e.g. ‘BBC’ here);further work will be needed to identify reliable key-terms. Some insights into other factors (such as novelty: “Ididn’t know that”) are also lost, and some of these around unconnected commitments (as in the case of group3’s emphasis of quantity) should usefully be displayed in visualizations to indicate their presence asunconnected nodes. However, the brief descriptions offered from prior analysis of the data may be favorablycompared with ENA results. Given the recoding for such purposes, this is arguably unsurprising. However, wewould argue that we have avoided the risk of circularity; while more work is needed, this paper providespreliminary validation that ENA offers a representational tool for scalable interpretation of epistemiccommitments, and that the notion of connections in epistemic frames is a productive characterization ofepistemic commitments, offering more insight towards close qualitative [sociocultural] discourse analysis thansimpler coding methods. However, we do not wish to overstate the suitability of this analysis in this case –much more work will be needed to define the interpretative space through which ENA for epistemiccommitments is explored, including use of data designed for such use, validation and reliability assessment forinterpretations of ENA output, and more work on providing text-oriented processing capabilities rather than thepre-selected cases provided here. However, given continued calls for the development of more situated, activityoriented theories of epistemic cognition, and the specific aims of ENA for capturing the development ofprofessional practices through enacting those practices, it may be well suited for analysis of epistemic activitiessuch as information seeking. Comparison with ‘expert’ groups will also provide important comparison data;ostensibly while ‘matching’ is certainly an important connection insofar as it is core to actually addressingquestions, it should not be a feature which defines the best quality of group activity (and indeed, groups 1 and 2were very similar in many ways). Nonetheless, the conceptual scheme and preliminary analysis reported in thispaper provide a development in thinking about analysis of epistemic commitments as practice oriented elementsof working in the world. The next steps in this investigation which we are now planning are designed to assess anumber of hypotheses, including:1) In sourcing decisions, ‘understanding’ will give insight into the appropriateness of those decisions(corroboration v authority) that would not be gained through a simple analysis of either mode alone2) Connections between task specific knowledge claims, sourcing decisions, and information seeking(search) will support analysis better than any of these alone, with respect to specific information claims3) Connections between sourcing decisions and general knowledge claims (around broad taskrequirements) will give more insight than either alone4) Connections between modes of the same dimension (for example, corroboration and authority) may beproductively analyzed; positing decontextualized binary dimensions is problematic.ReferencesBarzilai, S., & Eshet-Alkalai, Y. (2013). The Role of Epistemic Thinking in Comprehension of Multiple OnlineSource Perspectives. In Y. Eshet-Alkalai, A. Caspi, S. Eden, N. Geri ,, Y. Kalman, & Y. Yair (Eds.),Proceedings of the Chais conference on instructional technologies research 2013: Learning in thetechnological era. Raanana: The Open University of Israel.Barzilai, S., & Zohar, A. (2009). The Role of Epistemic Thinking in Online Learning. Proceedings of the Chaisconference on instructional technologies research 2009: Learning in the technological era. Raanana:The Open University of Israel.ICLS 2014 Proceedings156© ISLSBarzilai, S., & Zohar, A. (2012). Epistemic Thinking in Action: Evaluating and Integrating Online Sources.Cognition and Instruction, 30(1), 39–85.Bråten, I., & Strømsø, H. I. (2006). Epistemological beliefs, interest, and gender as predictors of Internet-basedlearning activities. Computers in Human Behavior, 22(6), 1027–1042.Chinn, C., A., & Brewer, W. F. (1993). The Role of Anomalous Data in Knowledge Acquisition: A TheoreticalFramework and Implications for Science Instruction. Review of Educational Research, 63(1), 1–49.Chinn, C., A., Buckland, L., A., & Samarapungavan, A. (2011). Expanding the Dimensions of EpistemicCognition: Arguments From Philosophy and Psychology. Educational Psychologist, 46(3), 141–167.Hofer, B. K. (2004). Epistemological Understanding as a Metacognitive Process: Thinking Aloud DuringOnline Searching. Educational Psychologist, 39(1), 43–55.Hutchison, P., & Hammer, D. (2010). Attending to student epistemological framing in a science classroom.Science Education, 94(3), 506–524.Knight, S., & Mercer, N. (Forthcoming). The role of exploratory talk in classroom search engine tasks.Technology, Pedagogy and Education.Lazonder, A. W. (2005). Do two heads search better than one? Effects of student collaboration on web searchbehaviour and search outcomes. British Journal of Educational Technology, 36(3), 465–475.Mason, L., Ariasi, N., & Boldrin, A. (2011). Epistemic beliefs in action: Spontaneous reflections aboutknowledge and knowing during online information searching and their influence on learning. Learningand Instruction, 21(1), 137–151.Mason, L., Boldrin, A., & Ariasi, N. (2009). Epistemic metacognition in context: evaluating and learning onlineinformation. Metacognition and Learning, 5(1), 67–90.Mason, L., Boldrin, A., & Ariasi, N. (2010). Searching the Web to learn about a controversial topic: are studentsepistemically active? Instructional Science, 38(6), 607–633.Mercer, N. (2004). Sociocultural discourse analysis: analysing classroom talk as a social mode of thinking.Journal of Applied Linguistics, 1(2), 137–168.Mercer, N., & Littleton, K. (2007). Dialogue and the Development of Children’s Thinking: A SocioculturalApproach (New edition). Routledge.Reznitskaya, A., & Gregory, M. (2013). Student Thought and Classroom Language: Examining the Mechanismsof Change in Dialogic Teaching. Educational Psychologist, 48(2), 114–133.Rosenberg, S., Hammer, D., & Phelan, J. (2006). Multiple Epistemological Coherences in an Eighth-GradeDiscussion of the Rock Cycle. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(2), 261–292.Sandoval, W. (2012). Situating epistemological development. Presented at the International Conference of theLearning Sciences (ICLS), Sydney.Schraw, G. (2000). Assessing metacognition: implications of the Buros symposium. Issues in the measurementof metacognition, 297–321.Schraw, G., & Impara, J. C. (Eds.). (2000). Issues in the measurement of metacognition. Buros Institute ofMental Measurements and Department of Educational Psychology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln.Shaffer, D. W., & Graesser, A. (2010). Using a quantitative model of participation in a community of practice todirect automated mentoring in an ill-formed domain. Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop onIntelligent Tutoring Systems and Ill-Defined Domains held at the 10th International Conference onIntelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS ‘10) (pp. 61–68).Shaffer, D. W., Hatfield, D., Svarovsky, G. N., Nash, P., Nulty, A., Bagley, E., Frank, K., et al. (2009).Epistemic network analysis: A prototype for 21st-century assessment of learning.Shah, C. (2012). Information Retrieval: Collaborative Information Seeking: the Art and Science of Making theWhole Greater Than the Sum of All. Springer.Sundin, O., & Johannisson, J. (2005). The Instrumentality of Information Needs and Relevance. In F. Crestani& I. Ruthven (Eds.), Context: Nature, Impact, and Role (Vol. 3507, pp. 107–118). Berlin, Heidelberg:Springer Berlin Heidelberg.Tsai, C.-C. (2004). Information commitments in Web-based learning environments. Innovations in Educationand Teaching International, 41(1), 105–112.Wu, Y.-T., & Tsai, C.-C. (2005). Developing the Information Commitment Survey for assessing college andgraduate students’ evaluative standards for Web information and their searching strategies in Webbased learning environments. World Conference on E-Learning in Corporate, Government,Healthcare, and Higher Education (Vol. 2005, pp. 2500–2512).AcknowledgementsThe first author is grateful to the Epistemic Games group at UW-Madison and the Open University, who kindlysupported the academic visit from which this work arose, and the participants and academic advisors for theinitial work from which the data for this paper is drawn.ICLS 2014 Proceedings157© ISLS