Implementation Model for Developing Training Measures to FosterValues in an OrganizationSandra Niedermeier, Heinz Mandl, Ludwig-Maximilans-Universität MünchenEmail: Sandra.Niedermeier@psy.lmu.de, Heinz.Mandl@psy.lmu.deAbstract: This paper presents an implementation model for developing training measures tofoster values in cooperative banks. In this context the present work shows the requirementsanalysis, conception and realization. The empirical part of this project demonstrates thatvalues have to be concrete and related to practical work-oriented situations to support specifictraining needs. The developmental part demonstrates how work-oriented training measures onvalues can be tailored to training needs by drawing on authentic cases.Objective and PurposeValues are a major component of an organization's culture (Schein, 2010) and have increasingly gainedrecognition as important factors for organizational success in recent years. However, there are deficits in thevalue orientation of managers and employees. Therefore the goal of the present study is to implement workoriented training measures to foster values in organizations in the financial sector.Theoretical frameworkApproaches to foster values can be traced back as early as Kohlberg’s theory of moral development (Kohlberg& Turiel 1971). As cases, enriched with dilemma situations, represent an authentic part of reality, they allowtraining participants to reflect upon possible solutions in ethical dilemmas (Zumbach & Mandl, 2008). From aneducational point of view, we suggest that working with authentic cases including dilemma situations fromeveryday business are particularly potent for fostering values. To bring value-related training needs into thefurther education of managers and employees of an organization, an implementation process model based onWinkler & Mandl (2004) is developed. It is depending on the specific requirements of the organization.Modes of Inquiry. The goal of the present study is to implement work-oriented training measures to fostervalues in organizations in the financial sector: How can a work-oriented training on values in cooperative banksbe implemented?Research DesignThis paper presents an implementation model for developing training measures to foster values in cooperativebanks. In this context the present work shows the requirements analysis, the conception and the realization.Figure 1 provides an overview of the implementation process.Figure 1. Implementation processStep 1: The requirements analysisThe requirements analysis includes two empirical studies which aimed at value-related training needsassessment and the further specification of training needs. The two studies are now presented in this sequence.(1) Study 1: Value-related training needs assessmentQuestions:R1a: How important are the cooperative values for managers and employees from a practical perspective?R1b: What is the current contribution of existing training measures for promoting managers’ and employees’value orientation in regard to these cooperative valueICLS 2014 Proceedings1483© ISLSMethod: An online survey of a representative sample of 506 employees and 186 managers in 16 cooperativebanks was conducted. The questionnaire used a 5-point Likert-scales to measure respondents’ agreement withvalue-related statements.Results:R1a: Concerning the importance of values managers and employees rate all of the values.R1b: More than 20 % of the managers and more than 40 % of the employees could not or would not answer howcurrent training contributes to value-orientation. Interpretation: This indicated that while respondents were quickin agreeing with the relevance of values, it was difficult for them to relate them to training and practice.(2) Study 2 Specification of training needs: To further specify training needs in regard to values, an interviewstudy was conducted to gain more in-depth insight into the actual role of values for practice.Questions:R2a: Are managers and employees able to specify values in practical terms?R2b: Are managers and employees able to illustrate the values’ practical relevance by specifying work-orientedexamples from their own work experience?Method: Qualitative interviews with 7 employees and 9 managers from 16 cooperative banks were conductedand analyzed by qualitative content analysis.Results:R2a: Most managers and employees could hardly recall specific values in and specify in concrete terms how thevalues relate to their own work.R2b: Managers and employees were hardly able to give specific examples or cases of actual work situations.Step 2: The conceptionThe conception of work-oriented training on values includes a stakeholder workshop with executives from 4banks and 7 experts of the banks further education institute. The workshop was conducted to identify valuesparticularly relevant for training. Six values were selected that seemed particularly important for training. Foreach value, two authentic scenarios including dilemma situation were generated. Each scenario included threeelements: Scenarios, relating the value to a situation involving managers and/or employees and/or customers orother external stakeholder; the value-related behaviour in that situation and ways of supporting this behaviour inpractice.Step 3: The realizationThe realization of work-oriented training on values focusses on the development of these scenarios into caseswith trainers from the banks further education institute suited for training. Drawing on the scenarios authenticcases for work-oriented trainings are developed. To realize the cases a first case as example has been developed,representing the basic structure for the other cases. These cases each describe a dilemma situation from the dailyworkplace operations of managers and employees. Additionally, each case is enriched with tasks for reflectionand discussion. The cases are integrated by trainers from the cooperative further education institute intoseminars concerning the 4 areas Retail bank, Corporate bank, Operating range and middle management. 6 caseswere integrated in specific seminars, ideally matching the content of the respective seminar area. Finally, anonline survey is conducted to find out how the trainers from the cooperative further education institute realizethe cases after half a year in realization. The evaluation of the realization shows that the realization is successful.Research/Practical ImplicationsThe implementation model presented here can serve as an example for a comprehensive procedure to fostervalues. The empirical part of this project demonstrates that values have to be concrete and related to practicalwork-oriented situations to support specific training needs. The developmental part demonstrates how workoriented training measures on values can be tailored to training needs by drawing on authentic cases.ReferencesKohlberg, L. & Turiel, E. (1971). Moral development and moral education. In G. Lesser (Ed.), Psychology andeducational practice. Scott Foresman.Schein, E. H. (2010). Organizational culture and leadership. San Francisco: JB.Winkler, K. &. Mandl H. (2004). Mitarbeiterorientierte Implementation von Wissensmanagement inUnternehmen. In H. Mandl & G. Reinmann (Eds.), Psychologie des Wissensmanagements.Perspektiven, Theorien und Methoden (pp. 207–219). Göttingen: Hogrefe.Zumbach, J. & Mandl, H. (Hrsg.). (2008). Pädagogische Psychologie in Theorie und Praxis: Ein fallbasiertesLehrbuch. [Educational psychology in theory and practice: a case based educational book].Göttingen:Hogrefe.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1484© ISLS