Model-Based Reasoning: A Framework for CoordinatingAuthentic Scientific Practice with Science LearningJulia S. Gouvea, Arash Jamshidi, Cynthia Passmore,University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA, 95616, USAEmail: jmsvoboda@ucdavis.edu, ajamshidi@ucdavis.edu, cpassmore@ucdavis.eduAbstract: In this paper we explore data from a two-year professional development programintended to help teachers adopt and enact a model-based reasoning view of science instruction.We use a resources framework to explore the teacher learning in this setting. By examiningthe experience of one teacher, we investigate how the ideas about learning and scientificmodels this teacher brought to the PD environment were aligned and coordinated over time toresult in a change in her self-reported pedagogy by the end of the program. We exploreimplications of this view of teacher learning for PD in the current reform context.IntroductionThe assumption that science learning should be situated in authentic scientific practice underlies the vision ofthe recently released Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) in the United States. The important step takenby the new standards framework is that it calls for supporting students to engage with and learn science ideasthrough engagement in authentic scientific practices. In this way the framework puts forward a vision of sciencelearning that brings together constructivist theories of learning with an understanding of science as practice thathelps scientists generate and refine knowledge about the world. For many teachers this will mean a radical shiftin the character of their classroom instruction. In order to support teachers in enacting this new vision, teachereducators must consider what and how teachers learn (Wilson, 2013).Much of the scholarship on teacher learning in science has focused on what teachers need to know, andhow this knowledge can be brought into better alignment with education reform. In general, this literature tendsto treat teacher knowledge and beliefs as deeply held core conceptions that influence how teachers plan andenact their instruction. If these core beliefs do not align with the vision for reform, then they need to be alteredor changed through professional development experiences. In this paper we conceptualize teacher cognition interms of finer-grained knowledge elements, or resources (Hammer et al., 2005a), and model teacher learning interms of different patterns of activation and coordination of fine-grained knowledge elements. We present a caseanalysis of a teacher participant chosen because we observed evidence of substantial shifts in the ways in whichshe described her pedagogy over time in the context of a professional development program that emphasizedmodel-based reasoning as a framework to guide science teaching and learning.Theoretical FrameworkTeacher Knowledge Is Complex and Dynamically Related to Teaching PracticeIn the field of teacher learning there exist a number of complex constructs for describing teacher knowledge(attitudes, PCK, beliefs, orientations, core conceptions). What is common across these descriptions is theunderstanding that teachers bring together a range of different kinds of knowledge to their curricular andinstructional decision-making. Researchers have attempted to describe different components and constellationsof such knowledge in an effort to guide teacher learning and support professional development. A central aim ofthis body of work is to describe the kinds of knowledge held by exemplary teachers and how it differs fromnovice teachers (e.g. Shulman, 1986).However, the idea that teachers have stable knowledge structures or belief systems that hold in allcontexts has been challenged for both theoretical and methodological reasons (Friedrichsen et al., 2011).Mounting empirical evidence suggests that teachers have many different cognitive resources about teaching andlearning, and they do not necessarily leverage that knowledge in consistent ways across contexts, or even acrossmoments (Crawford, 2007; Kang and Wallace, 2005; Levin et al., 2009; Markauskaite & Goodyear, 2014). Thefield is moving towards a conception of teacher knowledge that is more dynamic and context dependent.This shifting conception of teacher knowledge mirrors the theoretical movement in student learning todescribe student knowledge as comprised of sets of interrelated “resources” – fine-grained cognitive elementsthat are differentially activated with context (diSessa, 2002; Hammer, 1996). Within a resources frameworklearning need not entail replacing or radically restructuring students’ knowledge frameworks. Instead,productive learning can often mean helping students build upon, connect or reorganize existing resources(Hammer, 1996; Hammer et al., 2005b) so that they access and leverage those resources in particular ways invarious contexts. When viewed through this lens, it becomes important to understand the ways in which studentsuse knowledge in different contexts, and insufficient to simply demonstrate that they have correct knowledge.ICLS 2014 Proceedings705© ISLSApplied to teacher learning and PD, a resources framework highlights the need to understand and helpteachers refine the knowledge they already have. That is, we want to understand when, how and why particularresources are coordinated in service of pedagogical purpose and action and how to shift these patterns over time.In our case analysis we focus on one teacher, Quinn, who describes her pedagogy as transformed by our PD andask, how can we make sense of this shift in terms of shifts in this teacher’s cognitive ecology? We argue thatQuinn developed coherence among knowledge resources and pedagogy as demonstrated in her descriptions ofher classroom practice and her reflections on her actions. We posit that it is this coordination that is importantfor lasting change rather than the acquisition of any single particular idea.Resources for Supporting Students’ Engagement in Authentic Scientific PracticeIn general, a “resource” can be defined as abstract basic knowledge unit that can be applied across arange of contexts. For example, Markauskaite & Goodyear (2014) propose a number of different knowledgecategories from which such resources could be drawn (e.g. resources about how people learn, disciplinarycontent, and student capabilities). In this paper we focus specifically on two types of resources that areparticularly relevant to the NGSS vision: resources related to (1) student learning (2) the nature and purpose ofscientific models. Separating these two dimensions is important for understanding how teachers makeinstructional and curricular decisions. Often researchers collapse teachers’ views of scientific practice andteaching and learning. For example, teachers’ orientations towards “inquiry” tend to combine conceptions of thescience as a practice of asking questions about the world and an orientation towards a student-centeredclassrooms in which students are the ones asking and answering questions. In this paper, we purposely teaseapart resources so that we can explore how interactions among these resources changed during her participationin a professional development program that focused on model-based reasoning,.MethodsStudy ContextThe Innovations in Science Instruction through Modeling (ISIM) program was designed to engage scienceteachers in the conceptual work of problematizing current approaches to science instruction and restructuringtheir curriculum and instruction to include model-based reasoning (MBR) in their classrooms. From 2007 to2011, two cohorts of 6-12th grade science teachers (N=57) participated in a two-year intensive professionaldevelopment (PD) program focused on MBR. Here we report on one teacher from the second cohort (N=28).MBR is an approach to science teaching that involves students in constructing and using models toexplain natural phenomena (see Passmore & Stewart, 2002; Stewart, Cartier & Passmore, 2005; Windschitl,Thompson & Braaten, 2008 for more thorough treatment of this approach). Each year of the two-year PDprogram consisted of a three-week summer institute in which teachers experienced MBR as adult learners todeepen their own content knowledge and analyze their own learning process when introduced to the MBRapproach. During the academic years of the program, teachers worked in content- and grade-alike teams todevelop and enact curriculum appropriate for their own classroom integrating the MBR approach. Teams metregularly throughout the year to report and reflect on their experiences implementing MBR during afterschoolmeetings and a day-long retreat in the spring of each year.Data Collection and AnalysisOver the course of the two-year program, we continually collected data in the form of artifacts from the PDprogram including approximately 100 written reflections per participant, field notes, video and audio of summerinstitutes and academic year events, and facilitator notes from lesson study team meetings. Each participant alsoparticipated in a small group and individual interviews during which participants discussed and reflected onprepared reflection prompts. All of the data were transcribed and entered into a FilemakerPro database. In thispaper we report results from two types of analyses conducting using written prompts and interviews. The first isa pre-post comparison of a single written prompt teachers responded to both upon admission to and exit fromthe PD The second uses the full set of prompts to track changes in teacher responses over time.The majority of prompts were generated in an ad hoc manner throughout the program in order toprovide opportunities for teachers to reflect on their participation in the PD as well as their evolving classroompractice. Because the nature of the prompts changed over time they cannot be used to measure absolute shifts inteachers’ responses. However, because all teachers had the opportunity to respond to the same set of prompts,we can use relative differences across teachers as an indicator of the ideas that were most salient to them atdifferent points throughout the program. We conducted a qualitative analysis of written prompts and interviewtranscripts in order to generate longitudinal descriptions of changing response patterns for the teachers in thesecond cohort. As a research team we iteratively developed a set of 14 categories to capture teacher statementsby first reading through the full datasets for 10 teachers. We then separated statements into these differentICLS 2014 Proceedings706© ISLScategories (double-binning was permitted), which made it easier to parse the large dataset for further coding andanalysis described in more detail below.Pre-Post Analysis of Teachers’ “Exemplary Lessons”One of the written prompts asked teachers to “Describe one of your exemplary science lessons and explain yourreasoning about the most important things that make it effective.” Teachers responded to this prompt on theirinitial applications to the program (pre-lesson) and again two years later on exiting the program (post-lesson).To analyze specific features of these lessons we created a rubric that we used to score the lesson along twodimensions: attention to student ideas as an overall measure of student-centeredness, and authenticity toscientific practice as an indicator of how science is portrayed in the classroom. Each lesson was given a scoreranging from 1 to 5 along each dimension. A score of 1 in the student-centered dimension described primarilylecture-based lessons, whereas a score of 5 signified lessons in which the teacher described giving students theopportunity to both share and reflect on their ideas with responsive feedback from the teacher. A score of 1 inthe science dimension indicated lesson descriptions not involving students engaging in scientific thinking orpractices, whereas a score of 5 represented lessons in which students combined science ideas and practices inorder to make sense of a phenomenon. During scoring, all identifying markers were removed and pre- and postlessons were randomized. Two researchers scored all lessons with initial reliability of 78%. Through discussionan inter-rater consensus of 100% was achieved.Longitudinal Analysis of Shifts in Teachers’ Instructional Choices and PedagogicalStrategiesOne of the 14 categories captured statements about teachers’ self-reported instructional choices andpedagogical strategies. We established qualitative codes for statements in this category by first reading throughthe binned dataset for each of the 28 teachers. As a research team we iteratively developed a set of codesdrawing on both a priori expectations and emergent patterns in the data. The final set of codes were assigned todescribe statements that fell into broad instructional strategies: (1) traditional approaches to science instructionincluding both lecture and activities focused on engagement (2) student-centered strategies such as grouplearning making student ideas visible (3) procedure-focused strategies including engaging students in laboratoryskills (4) sense-making strategies focused on explaining phenomena and (5) modeling strategies that explicitlyreferenced involving students in model development or use.Three researchers participated in the coding process by first coding a subset of the teachers andconducting extensive discussions to normalize code assignments. A single researcher conducted the remainderof the coding. Researchers were blinded to the identities of the teachers during the coding process.In order to visualize changing patterns in code distribution over time, we divided teachers’ responsesinto five time periods corresponding to the major time periods in the program (1st spring, 1st summer, 1stacademic year, 2nd summer, 2nd academic year). We then counted up the number of responses corresponding toeach code during each of the five time periods and plotted the percentage of statements made in each categoryfor each teacher (see Fig 1). This provides a visual representation of the relative frequency of specific codes.Qualitative Analysis of Quinn Focused on Alignment and Interactions Among ResourcesWe selected Quinn as a case for a more in depth analysis because of the dramatic change in the character of herexemplary lesson as well as the shifting patterns in her prompt responses related to her instructional practice.Because we were interested in the cognitive resources Quinn might be using to make and justify herinstructional choices, we conducted a more in depth analysis of two categories of statements we found in thedata: teachers’ conceptions of student learning and views of scientific models.We developed the Quinn case by reading through all statements in each category to first develop aqualitative narrative of how these statements changed over time. We then used the responses collected throughthe first summer institute to build inferences about the ideas that were most salient to Quinn during her earlyparticipation in the program and responses collected during the second summer and academic year to describethe ideas that were most salient to Quinn towards the end of the program. We then took a third pass through thedata looking for responses coded for both views of student learning and scientific models to build up an accountof how these different ideas were related for Quinn. Finally, we read through Quinn’s descriptions of andreflections on the MBR framework to better understand what it meant to her and in what ways it might beinfluencing the way she thinks about learning and teaching science.ICLS 2014 Proceedings707© ISLSResults: The Case of QuinnQuinn’s Shifting Descriptions of Her Teaching PracticeOne indicator of Quinn’s perception of her changing teaching practice is given by the comparative analysis ofher pre (before entering the PD) and post (upon exiting two years later) exemplary lessons (Table 1). Quinn’sfirst lesson received a score of 2 in both rubric dimensions. In terms of engaging with student ideas, Quinn’s prelesson relied mainly on direct instruction with some time given to allow students to rotate through lab stations,while the scientific aspect of the lesson is dominated by procedural laboratory skills.Quinn’s post lesson received a score of 5 in both dimensions. In it Quinn describes students working insmall groups while she played the role of questioning and facilitating whole class discussions. The sciencecomponent of the lesson involved an exploration into a number of phenomena leveraging ideas about particlemovement in response to temperature. Lessons that shifted from a score of less than 3 to a score of 4 or greaterin both dimensions were considered to be large shifts. Quinn was one of 11 teachers (42%) whose lessonsshifted in this way (N = 4, had smaller shifts, N=4 had high scoring lessons in both pre and post and N=7, hadlow scoring lessons in both pre and post).Table 1: Comparison of excerpted sections from Quinn’s description of an “exemplary lesson”Attending to Student IdeasAuthentic to Scientific PracticePreLessonScore: 2“After providing some direct instructionabout elements, the Periodic Table, andchemical bonding, the students partake in alab activity…”Score: 2“…the students partake in a lab activity where theyrotate through nine different stations. …the studentsperform a task of mixing the chemicals together,heating the chemicals, or some other action.”PostLessonScore: 5“I then had students respond to a challengestatement …Afterwards, students practicedgroup norms as they shared in small andlarge groups.” …. “I facilitated andquestioned student thinking.”Score: 5“We started with discussion about particles ofliquids, gases, and solids and how temperature andheat affect it or are affected…” “we examinedphenomena and attempted to explain them.Phenomena included: 1. Blue ice melting in warmtap water...”A second indication of a shift came from examining changes in how Quinn described her teaching overthe course of her participation in the PD program as captured by five different types of coded statements (Figure1). Overall, 110 written or transcribed statements from Quinn were categorized as instructional choices andpedagogical strategies. What drew our attention to Quinn was the relative increase in statements aboutattending to student thinking and engaging students in explaining phenomena coupled with a decrease instatements coded as traditional instruction and laboratory or procedure-based instruction. Compare for examplethe relative frequency of statements made in these categories upon entering the program (1st spring) and near theend of the program (2nd academic year) as depicted in Figure 1.The final strand of evidence we used to triangulate our account of Quinn is her own descriptions of herteaching. During the first summer institute Quinn described her current teaching practice as “a set of lecturenotes of facts that the students should know for the test, lab experiments that only serve to prove the factsalready presented, and reinforcement activities of the same rote facts” (135, 1st sum.). Quinn also describedattempting to engage her students with “hands-on” activities, but admitted that she often found herself “givingthe answer” (132, 1st sum.). Two years later, Quinn recounted the changes she made in her classroom as shediscussed her experience in the PD program with her peers in a group interview:Labs used to be very cookbook, and, “here, do this, do that, don’t do this, don’t do that.” And now I'vegiven them materials, I say here's some driving questions you might want to think about, what do youthink is happening or how do you think it’s working or could you design an experiment to test yourideas? (240, 2nd acad. yr.)Quinn also described her shifting role as an instructor in the classroom saying she “eliminated a lot of the directinstruction and lecturing” and was instead “question[ing] student thinking” (234, 2nd acad. yr.). For example,Quinn described beginning each class by asking students to think about “a phenomenon they may haveexperienced in their everyday lives.” (240, 2nd acad. yr). Quinn also drew attention to a in the way she organizedher classroom wall space. The information she has displayed on her walls was “no longer posters of this fact orICLS 2014 Proceedings708© ISLSthat fact and the periodic table. It’s more of what the students’ ideas are and how they’ve changed over thecourse of the term” (240, 2nd acad. yr.). Her approach to assessment also shifted: Quinn described focusing onwhether the “reasoning makes sense with the model” when assigning points to her students’ work (240, 2ndacad. yr).Overall, the comparison of Quinn’s descriptions of exemplary lessons and the quantitative andqualitative analysis of Quinn’s descriptions of her instructional approach suggest a shift in emphasis fromtraditional lecture-based instruction and hands-on laboratory activities to classroom discussions in whichstudents are encouraged to develop their own explanations for phenomena.                        "#$%& $' ###$   #)#&$"#(%)##"Figure 1. Quinn’s self-described instructional choices and pedagogical strategies over time. Size of bubbles andnumber labels indicate percentage of statements assigned to each of the five codes within each time period.Quinn’s Conceptions of Student Learning and Science TeachingEarly in the PD, Quinn’s statements about the learning process involve a number of different references tostudents’ prior knowledge. She describes students as having “many misconceptions about science, specificallyabout chemistry” and that students must be given opportunities to “question what they think that they alreadyknow.” For example, Quinn described how many students “assume there is only a chemical reaction if the resultis an explosion” so she provided them with the chance to observe other kinds of chemical reactions in a series of“hands on” lab stations (180, 1st spr.).She also described the importance of making connections between her instruction and students’ priorknowledge. In general, she stated, “throughout lecture/direct instruction, I try to ask questions of students toaccess their own personal experiences and prior learning” (155, 1st sum.). Specifically, Quinn described how“teaching for understanding” in her classroom might happen when “I present the information using analogies toconcepts that the students have in their prior knowledge or life experience (like when I compare the molecularmovement and energy of solids, liquids, and gases to students in class (solid), at lunch (liquid), and after 3pm(gas)) (132, 1st spr.). However, Quinn also expressed dissatisfaction in the way her current practice aligns withher ideas about learning. “My teaching has evolved into something that does not reflect what I do know aboutprior knowledge and preconceptions,” she wrote, stressing the mismatch between her current teaching and herideas about learning. “Rarely do I find the time to examine students’ prior knowledge,” (135, 1st sum.).Towards the end of the program, Quinn still expressed a concern over misconceptions. Her goal was tohelp students “eliminate all the previous theories,” but described this process in a way that emphasized givingstudents time to think and talk to one another. For example, Quinn indicated that markers of learning for hernow included being able to say that during a lesson, “at least they [students] were thinking, at least they werechallenging what was being said by their peers, or what they thought themselves…. The kids learn more asopposed to just filling their heads with the facts and not actually committing it into their long-term memory.”(238, 2nd acad. yr.).ICLS 2014 Proceedings709© ISLSQuinn’s Conceptions of Scientific Models and the Role of Models in Science TeachingEarly in the program Quinn’s responses reflect a number of different conceptions of the nature and utility ofscientific models. Like many teachers Quinn described a model as “a plastic form representing an importantstructure of process in science i.e. a model of the water cycle or a cell model” (122, 1st spr.). She suggested thatthe role they play in teaching is as, “visual representations of structures that are not readily accessible tostudents-whether it be due to the lack of equipment necessary (like you can't see a cell without a microscope) orthe lack of tangible attributes of a topic (for example, students who live in the suburbs may have difficultyunderstanding the rock cycle).” (123, 1st spr.) At the same time, Quinn stated that, “Models, like theories, arepossible explanations for phenomena.” (125, 1st spr.). In this role she described how models could be used in theclassroom to, “Engage students and explore curiosity through understanding the cause-effect of phenomena” aswell as to allow, “them to really try to formulate hypotheses and test them!” (129, 1st. spr.).In a science classroom, we use models everyday to teach students. After all, the models arewhat make up the ideas that we try to get our students to understand. However, the studentsand the teachers that often present the curriculum look at the models in the form of facts thatare memorized and regurgitated through assessments and projects. This does not demonstratea thorough UNDERSTANDING of the model, but instead, a memorization of the facts anddefinitions at hand. (emphasis original, 133, 1st spr.)Later Quinn consistently referred to models as things that “allow us to develop explanations for naturalphenomena (196, 1st acad, yr). A model, she says, is not “just a description,” but rather something that is usedfor “explaining/knowing mechanisms” (221, 2nd sum.). What makes models useful in science classrooms is thatthey allow students “to create their own driving questions make observations, collect data, and develop themodel,” and, “more importantly, I would like them to reason with their model” (197, 1st acad. yr.).Quinn’s “MBR” framework: Coordinating student thinking and explanatory modelsEarly in the PD, Quinn described MBR as a process that “has participants come to their own conclusions toexplain a phenomenon” (129, 1st sum), combining a constructivist ideas about learning with a focus on makingsense of phenomena. We see this integration echoed throughout Quinn’s responses. For example, at the end ofthe two-year PD, the teachers were asked to reflect on what they had learned from their participation. Quinn’sresponse once again brings together ideas about learning and the role of models in science.I don't need to be the source of information. I learned that I don't have to direct them to a source ofinformation, that a lot of things that students gain through this process are in looking at or experiencingphenomena and reasoning out for themselves that they are the source of knowledge, and that they don'thave to go somewhere else to find it, and that they can work together to come to the same answers theywould have found in a textbook, and in the process eliminate all the previous theories that used to bepresented in coming up with those scientific ideas. (238, 2nd acad. yr.)We posit that it was the refinement and coordination of these ideas that constitute the learningunderlying Quinn’s described pedagogical shift. We see evidence of this in the way Quinn linked MBR tospecific instructional strategies. In describing what it looks like to enact MBR in a science classroom, Quinndescribed “assessing constantly, to see oh, there’s a new misconception, oh, this group is totally on the rightpath, and then you have another group that’s totally on the wrong path, and it’s okay, because eventually they'llget there.” Quinn described how in her experience as a learner she often had moments of profound confusion,but that she saw these as an integral part of learning within this framework. Quinn stated that in her ownclassroom, “with my students I almost feel a sense of accomplishment when I leave their group and they seemjust as confused as I did.” Quinn also described how MBR means focusing her lessons around the followingquestion: what do I want my students to be able to do and explain? (223, 2nd sum.)In summarizing what she saw as the “essential elements” of the MBR approach, Quinn names threeinstructional heuristics: “1. Don’t steal ‘ah-hahs’ 2. Make thinking visible and making thinking happen, 3.importance of a driving question” (249, 2nd acad. yr.). The first refers to the teaching strategy of providing spaceand time for students to come to their own understanding rather than telling. The second refers to a set ofstrategies, including asking students to draw and reflect, while prompting them with challenging questions andthe third refers to organizing lessons around a central driving question about some phenomenon. Taken togetherthese essential elements combine strategies meant to support student thinking as well as keep that thinkingrooted to a scientific question.Finally, we see evidence of Quinn reflectively applying the MBR framework to her past instruction. Atthe end of the program Quinn critiques her original lesson (Table 1) noting that while it did “address apreconception,” it did not challenge students to “reason, take risks, or thinking deeper” and for this reason sheICLS 2014 Proceedings710© ISLSno longer believed it would be effective in changing student thinking. She also noted that the lesson, “asked foranswers without explanation” (253, 2nd acad. yr.). In contrast, she described her new lesson as exemplarybecause it incorporated strategies such as using pictures and words to make students thinking visible andengaging students in explaining a phenomenon. She further described her role in the lesson as “facilitating,” not“giving answers” (252, 2nd acad. yr.).DiscussionUsing a Resources Framework to Make Sense of Quinn’s ShiftThis case study relies solely on self-report data as evidence of a shift in how a teacher thinks about herpedagogy. While research has documented that descriptions of practice do not always reflect classroomenactment, we argue that the quality and consistency of the shift we see in Quinn’s responses represents anoutcome worth exploring. We acknowledge however that more work is needed to see how these self-reportsplay out in the classroom.Continuing from the assumption that we have captured a consequential change in how Quinnapproaches her teaching, how can we make sense of Quinn’s shift over time in the program? One interpretationcould have been to evaluate whether she attained the target knowledge about MBR and then attribute shifts tothat knowledge acquisition. However, when we actually look at the data they tell a much more complicatedstory. If we model stable beliefs as mediating instructional practice, then two trajectories are possible: EitherQuinn entered the PD with a set of sophisticated beliefs that allowed her to take up the messages of the PDprogram and change her practice, or the PD program was able to change Quinn’s core knowledge and beliefsabout science teaching and learning. Our analysis of Quinn’s statements about student learning and scientificmodels do not support the interpretation that she had a stable set of core beliefs coming into the program.A resources framework provides an alternative way to think about teacher learning in terms of buildingcoherence around sets of productive resources. Looking across our analyses we can begin to make sense of theshift we saw in Quinn’s descriptions of her teaching. Quinn’s evolving understanding of MBR seems to haveprovided her with a way to coordinate, refine and enact ideas that she brought with her to the program. Quinn’sinitial inclination to connect to students’ prior knowledge was refined into a strategy that allowed her students tomake their thinking visible by generating public representations of their ideas. Rather than demonstrating ortelling them the correct ideas, as she described doing early in the PD, Quinn described how to her, MBR meansgiving students more time to think, and allowing for, even valuing, frustration as part of the learning process.Crucially, MBR also gave her a way to structure this thinking around an authentic scientific aim – touse models to explain natural phenomena. That is, it gave her students something to think about. Rather thandemonstrating or directly teaching the scientific models to her students, the model ideas became the reasoningtools that her students would use to think about and explain phenomena. For Quinn, ideas about what it means tolearn deeply and what it means to engage in authentic scientific reasoning appear to have come together underthe MBR framework. That is, she came in with the inclination to attend to student ideas and an intention toengage students in science, but she admitted that she didn’t actually do much of that in her day-to-day practice.By the end of the program Quinn demonstrated that she was using MBR as a coherent framework and as a lensthrough which to view her pedagogy. In reflecting on her past lessons she was critical of both the quality of thescience and the nature of her attention to student ideas. In describing her current aspirations, she described theimportance of both choosing a phenomenon to investigate and ensuring that her students were the ones doing thethinking, while she played the role of facilitator. In her own analysis of her pedagogy, Quinn seemed toproductively bring together and coordinate a number of ideas around student learning and scientific practice.Implications for Professional DevelopmentThis PD program was not explicitly designed with a theoretical commitment to a resources view. Given thesuccess of Quinn, what can we say about PD more broadly? The ISIM PD included many design features ofgood PD including: engaging teachers as learners in the MBR process, long duration, community building andcoordination of theory with professional experimentation (Wilson, 2013). This work does not challenge thesedesign decisions, but rather provides us with a way to reframe the way with think about teacher learning. Forexample, one of the objectives of the PD was to help teachers take up the MBR framework. We now have abetter understanding of the mechanisms that may have led one teacher to take up many of our intendedmessages and a more robust understanding of what uptake even means. For Quinn it was not about merelyacquiring or replacing existing conceptions of teaching and learning. What seems to have mattered to her wasthat the PD generally and the MBR framework specifically allowed her to coordinate and refine some of herexisting ideas about teaching and learning. This work echoes the understanding that PD is situated in a muchlonger trajectory of teacher’s experiences. The PD aim should not be to completely overturn and replaceteachers’ systems of beliefs. Rather than labeling teachers’ knowledge as correct, unproductive or transitional,ICLS 2014 Proceedings711© ISLSwe can focus more specifically on the kinds of resources teachers have that can be built upon, coordinated andactivated in particular contexts while helping them to reflect on their pedagogy and refine their practice.As we go further into our data analysis and consider the implications for PD more broadly, we willneed to also attend to the varied reasons why teachers may not have taken up these ideas. Increasingly, researchon teacher learning suggests that merely targeting particular beliefs may not result in changes in classroompractice (Blanchard et al. 2009). Instead, what Franke et al. (1998) call “self-sustaining, generative change”seems to depend on the degree to which teachers have a coherent framework that can be used flexibly andthoughtfully to guide action. It is a more thorough understanding of the cognition of teachers in context that willbe useful moving forward. More work is needed to understand how to systematically support teachers as theyapply wide-ranging sets of cognitive and epistemological resources to the array of contexts in which they findthemselves. In particular, the implementation of the Next Generation Science Standards in the U.S. creates thepotential for a major perturbation of the status quo in science classrooms. Understanding how teachers develop,activate and cohere their new and existing cognitive resources around learning, teaching and scientific practicein service of aligning classroom practice to the new reform context will be critically important.ReferencesBlanchard, M. R., Southerland, S. A., & Granger, E. M. (2009). No silver bullet for inquiry: Making sense ofteacher change following an inquiry-based research experience for teachers. Science Education, 93(2),322–360.Crawford, B. A. (2007). Learning to teach science as inquiry in the rough and tumble of practice. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 44(4), 613–642.diSessa, A. A. (2002). Why “conceptual ecology” is a good idea. In M. Limon & L. Mason (Eds.),Reconsidering conceptual change: issues in theory and practice (pp. 29–60). Boston: KluwerAcademic Publishers.Franke, M., Carpenter, T., Fennema, E., Ansell, E., & Behrend, J. (1998). Understanding teachers’ selfsustaining, generative change in the context of professional development. Teaching and TeacherEducation, 14(1), 67–80.Friedrichsen, P., Van Driel, J., & Abell, S. K. (2011). Taking a Closer Look at Science Teaching Orientations.Science Education, 95, 358–376.Hammer, D. (1996). Misconceptions or P-Prims: How May Alternative Perspectives of Cognitive StructureInfluence Instructional Perceptions and Intentions. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(2), 97–127.Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005a). Resources, framing , and transfer. In J. P. Mestre(Ed.), Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective (pp. 89–120). Information AgePub Inc.Hammer, D., Russ, R., Mikeska, J., & Scherr, R. (2005b). Identifying inquiry and conceptualizing students’abilities. In R. Duschl & R. Grandy (Eds.), Teaching scientific inquiry (pp. 138–156). Rotterdam, TheNetherlands: SensePublishers.Kang, N.-H., & Wallace, C. S. (2005). Secondary science teachers’ use of laboratory activities: Linkingepistemological beliefs, goals, and practices. Science Education, 89(1), 140–165.Markauskaite, L., & Goodyear, P. (2014). Tapping into the mental resources of teachers’ working knowledge:Insights into the generative power of intuitive pedagogy. Learning, Culture and Social Interaction.Passmore, C., & Stewart, J. (2002). A modeling approach to teaching evolutionary biology in high schools.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(3), 185–204.Passmore, C., & Svoboda, J. (2011). Exploring Opportunities for Argumentation in Modelling Classrooms.International Journal of Science Education, (October), 1-20. doi:10.1080/09500693.2011.577842Shulman, L.S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2),4–14.Stewart, J., Cartier, J., & Passmore, C. (2005). Developing Understanding Through Model-based Inquiry. In M.S. Donovan & J. Bransford (Eds.), How Students Learn: History, Mathematics, and Science in theClassroom (pp. 515–565). Washington D.C.: National Research Council.Wilson, S. (2013). Professional Development for Science Teachers. Science, 340, 310-313.Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., & Braaten, M. (2008). Beyond the Scientific Method : Model-Based Inquiry asa New Paradigm of Preference for School Science Investigations. Science Education, 1–27.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by NSF award #0554652. Opinions and findings are our own and not necessarily thoseof the NSF. We are grateful to the teachers in our program for opening their practice and thinking to us over thecourse of the two-year program. We also thank Arthur Beauchamp, Rich Hedman, Connie Hvidsten, Lin Xiangand Wendell Potter for their assistance in data analysis and for contributing to the conceptualization of this workmore broadly.ICLS 2014 Proceedings712© ISLS