Leveling Transparency viaSituated Intermediary Learning Objectives (SILOs)Dor Abrahamson, Kiera Chase, UC Berkeley, 4649 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720-1670dor@berkeley.edu, kiera.chase@berkeley.eduVishesh Kumar, Rishika Jain, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 781039, Assam, Indiak.vishesh@iitg.ernet.in, rishika.j92@gmail.comAbstract: When designers set out to create a mathematics learning activity, they have a fairsense of its objectives: students will understand a concept and master relevant proceduralskills. In reform-oriented activities, students first engage in concrete situations, wherein theyachieve situated, intermediary learning objectives (SILOs), and only then they rearticulatetheir solutions formally. We define SILOs as heuristics learners devise to accommodatecontingencies in an evolving problem space, e.g., monitoring and repairing manipulablestructures so that they model with fidelity a source situation. Students achieve SILOs throughproblem-solving with media, instructors orient toward SILOs via discursive solicitation, anddesigners articulate SILOs via analyzing implementation data. We describe the emergence ofthree SILOs in developing the activity Giant Steps for Algebra. Whereas the notion of SILOsemerged spontaneously as a framework to organize a system of practice, i.e. our collaborativedesign, it aligns with phenomenological theory of knowledge as instrumented action.When mathematics-education designers set out to create a new learning activity, they bear in mind the activity’sultimate pedagogical objective. Reform-oriented designers, however, bear in mind intermediary objectives, too,for students’ immersive experiences in situated, multimodal, spatial–dynamical activities designed to fostergrounded understanding of the ultimate target concepts. Broadly, reform-oriented activities unfold in two steps: In Step 1, learners interact with media—physical or virtual materials and ready-made objects—tosolve problems that require manipulating, organizing, and/or transforming these media with attentionto quantitative relations as well as emerging patterns or principles pertaining to these relations. In Step 2, learners are guided to reflect on, and rearticulate their insights using normative semioticsystems, including frames of reference, vocabulary, and symbolic notation and to reenact discoveredprocesses as standard algorithms using the formal representations (Diénès, 1971; Freudenthal, 1983).This paper focuses primarily on Step 1. Step 1 is of immense importance to the construction ofknowledge (Kamii & DeClark, 1985; Piaget & Inhelder, 1969; Thompson, 2013). And yet, we find, educationaldesigners have little, if any, conventional forms, nomenclature, or methodology for articulating Step 1 learningobjectives prior to the design process. Perhaps, we submit, this disconcerting lacuna in the design toolkit isrelated to the ultimate futility of attempting to articulate Step 1 learning objectives prior to building and refiningactivities and observing people engage with them. Namely, Step 1 objectives emerge only through the designprocess. Yet this emergent nature of a design’s Step 1 objectives, we further submit, should not deter us fromeventually defining those objectives. This paper resulted from reflecting on an apparent omission in our owndesign process: Building a certain design, we kept referring nebulously to a set of latent, contextualized,mathematically oriented, informal ideas we wanted students to discover via engaging in its Step 1 activities. Theobjective of this paper is to name that unnamed class of ideas and define its role within the design process. Wewill name this class situated, intermediary learning objectives (SILOs) and demonstrate how this ontologicalinnovation lends coherence to a comprehensive, complex, multi-stage process. We hope that, through this paper,fellow designers will join us in “learning and becoming in [design] practice” (the ICLS 2014 theme).In the remainder of this paper we: overview relevant educational-research literature (Section 1); presentGiant Steps for Algebra (Chase & Abrahamson, 2013) (Section 2); explain how three SILOs emerged viadeveloping the design materials and analyzing pilot implementation data and how these SILOs inform ourtechnological redesign (Section 3); and offer implications for theories of knowing and learning (Section 4).Theoretical Background: Constructing Means for Constructing MeaningWhen we design concrete activities for mathematics learning, what are our learning objectives for theseactivities? These are not quite mathematical learning objectives per se, because they may not be articulated informal register and might not even involve numerical values. And yet we do eventually form clear ideas forwhat the students should be discovering about the target concepts through engaging in the concrete activities. Inso doing, we implicitly exercise a theoretical view on the relation between the manual and the mental. One suchview is ascribed to John Dewey, who characterized conceptual learning as the individual’s process ofICLS 2014 Proceedings23© ISLSformalizing their reflection on experience—their guided passage from implicit know-how through to articulatedknow-that. Such characterizations of grounded understanding are not only vital for building theories of learningbut also bear direct implications for the practice of designing effective learning environments that seek to guidechildren from informal experience to formal concept. This schematic conceptualization of groundedmathematics learning as an experience-to-concept two-step process cuts across multiple theories andframeworks, including our own.To begin with, our distinction between situated and general knowledge is a hallmark of RealisticMathematics Education (RME). Freudenthal (1983), founder of RME, developed a pedagogical methodologybased on the principle that children should create their own models of problematic realistic situations.Gravemeijer (1999) elaborates on the function of modeling activities in RME, emphasizing the imperative ofletting students’ models emerge: “The premise here is that students who work with these models will beencouraged to (re)invent the more formal mathematics” (p. 159, original italics). This progress from explorativeactions to consistent rules that generalize these actions is theorized more explicitly in RME via the formulationof two related constructs, “model of” and “model for.” A “model of” results from modeling a particularsituation. A general “model for” eventually emerges from noticing homology across mathematically analogous“models of.” Our SILOs (situated, intermediary learning objectives) can be viewed as a checklist detailingstructural properties and relations inherent to a “model of.” In turn, we deliberately articulate the SILOs inlinguistic forms that would also capture general conceptual structures, just as in a “model for.”This ontological relation between actions, objects, and concepts has long fascinated theorists of humanactivity. For example, distributed cognition is a theory of human practice that elucidates relationships amongparticipants to a collective human practice and the artifacts that mediate this collaboration (Clark, 2003).Broadly, the array of tools supporting our cognitive activities—pen and paper, calculator, computer, and soon—are cognitive artifacts, that is, artificial tools or devices that carry, elaborate, and report information duringproblem solving (Norman, 1991). As such, mathematical learning can be theorized as developing psychologicalstructures for regulating the mental activity of distributing quantitative problems over available cognitiveartifacts. This effect is dialectical: even as we learn to act and think in new ways as facilitated by these tools,they in turn bear the potential of reifying for our reflection what and how we act and think (Hutchins, 2010). Itfollows that different material instantiations of one and the same mathematical concept may bear differentpedagogical affordances, because their uptake forges different cognitive routes, different neural residue. SILOsarticulate this residue pragmatically in terms of the models’ structural properties that students learn to monitor.And yet, this emergence of cognitive structures from mediated actions with external media is not at allguaranteed. A novice might learn to problem-solve using a cognitive artifact that embodies a mathematicalfunction yet without ever understanding this function or how the artifact embodies it. Is this cause for concern?We turn to discuss the psychological construct of transparency, which captures relations between, on the onehand, artifacts inherent to a cultural practice and, on the other hand, a social agent’s understanding of howfeatures of these artifacts mediate the accomplishment of their objectives. Thus when we say that an artifactis transparent, we refer to the subjective relation between a particular agent and the artifact (Meira, 2002).For educational designers, the notion of transparency suggests a particular framing. Namely, the role ofdesigners can be conceptualized as creating learning tools that learners can render subjectively transparent. In aword, the transparency perspective confers upon educators the role of enabling students to see and learn howmathematical artifacts do what they do. For example, in a study of physically distributed problem solving,Martin and Schwartz (2005) found that participants generated more salient and transferable conceptualizationsof fractions when using “obdurate” square tiles as opposed to classical pie-shaped manipulatives. Why? Fromthe theoretical lens of transparency, the pie pieces obscured the notion of “whole” precisely because the studyparticipants did not need to assume agency in distributing onto those media their tacit sense of whole—the circleimplicitly did that work for them. On the other hand, those students who worked with square tiles were obligedto construct the whole themselves, and that more challenging, agentive experience apparently endured.Whereas mathematical models per se are often static, such as those fraction squares, they are createdthrough active engagement. Indeed, scholars of embodiment pay close attention to perceptuomotor routines asthese relate to conceptual knowledge. In particular, when students operate physically within concretizedconceptual domains, design-based researchers attend to how the students carry out spatial–dynamical analogs offormal operations (Antle, 2013). An application of embodiment theory to mathematics education is embodieddesign (Abrahamson, 2009), “a pedagogical framework that seeks to promote grounded learning by creatingsituations in which students can be guided to negotiate tacit and cultural perspectives on phenomena underinquiry” (Abrahamson, 2013, p. 224). When students participate in embodied-design activities, they solveproblems that initially do not bear symbolical notation, do not require calculation, and do not call forquantitative solutions; they call only for qualitative judgments, informal inference, or naïve physical actions.Embodied designs clearly demarcate the two-step design framework that is thematic to this essay and,as such, underscore the informal nature of Step-1 situated, intermediary learning objectives (SILOs). That is, ifwe theorize perceptual judgment and motor action as bearing seeds of mathematical concepts, then we needICLS 2014 Proceedings24© ISLSlanguage for bridging actions and concepts. SILOs articulate subtle elements of learners’ informal inferentialreasoning about perceptual judgments or motor-action solution strategies that they are to discover and refine.With the introduction of embodied design, our literature survey shifts from evaluating implications oflearning theory for pedagogical design to educational research work dealing directly with the development ofdesign frameworks for grounded mathematical learning.A profound contribution to the design of mathematics learning environments comes from Richard Nossand collaborators, whose learning theory and design frameworks co-emerged dialectically through empiricalresearch studies (Noss, Healy, & Hoyles, 1997). Of particular relevance to our thesis is their set of designheuristics promoting students’ situated abstractions, “in which abstraction is conceived, not so much as pullingaway from context [i.e. the particular features of a situated learning activity], but as a process of constructingmathematical meanings by drawing context into abstraction, populating abstraction with objects andrelationships of the setting” (Pratt & Noss, 2010, p. 94, citing Noss & Hoyles, 1996). Pratt and Noss (2010)implicate the epistemological root of mathematical concepts in children’s purposeful construction of utility fornew ideas that are instantiated into designed artifacts in the form of interaction potentialities. The SILOsframework differs from that of situated abstractions in terms of grain size, ontological and epistemological foci,and pedagogical underpinnings. In particular, SILOs articulate a set of initially unavailable interactionconstraints that the learner determines, implicates, and wills as potentially conducive to more effective problemsolving with a given cognitive artifact; in response, each of these willed constraints is then materialized into theartifact by the instructor who grants the learner’s will by enabling into functionality a pre-programmed “hidden”constraint. SILOs are thus functional concretizations of the user’s wish-list into working technological featuresof an interactive device. Yet SILOs are complementary to situated abstractions in the sense that SILOs can beconceptualized as articulating prerequisite structural conditions for enabling and appreciating utility.In summary, although scholars may differ acutely in their epistemological positions on the constitutionof mathematical knowledge, they generally agree that models—forms or structures that learners use inorganized activities to promote problem-solving processes—can serve instrumental roles in conceptualdevelopment. Having both situated and singled out our proposed heuristic construct of SILO in a legacy ofeducational theory, philosophy of knowledge, and design frameworks, we now turn to demonstrate thisconstruct’s application in an actual case of design practice, namely Giant Steps for Algebra. The next sectionwill explain the design problem that gave rise to this design, and then we explain the design itself.Setting the Context: Designing Giant Steps for Algebra (GS4A)The story of learning algebra in schools is often told as the challenge of progressing from arithmetic to algebra.A main character in this story is the “=” sign or, rather, students’ evolving meanings for this sign (Herscovics &Linchevski, 1996). When students first encounter algebraic propositions, such as “3x + 14 = 5x + 6”, theirimplicit framing of these symbols is operational, because the framing will have been fashioned by a history ofsolving arithmetic problems such as “3 + 14 = __”, where you operate on the left-hand expression and then fillin your solution on the right (Carpenter, Franke, & Levi, 2003). Yet algebraic conceptualization of the “=” signshould be relational, as this sense contributes to correct treatment of algebraic equations (Knuth, Stephens,McNeil, & Alibali, 2006). Given that the arithmetic visualization of “=” apparently impedes students’ transitionto algebra, how might this visualization be countervailed? One way is to plant an alternative metaphor.The balance metaphor is undoubtedly the most common visualization of algebraic propositions. Thismetaphor is typically introduced to students by invoking interactions with relevant cultural artifacts such as thetwin-pan balance scale (see Figure 1a). The equivalence-as-balance conceptual metaphor enables a relational,rather than operational, view of algebraic equations. In particular, it grounds the rationale of algebraicalgorithms, such as “Remove 3x from both sides of the equation,” in interactions with a familiar artifact.a.b.Figure 1. (a) Balance scale and (b) number-line instantiations of “3x + 14 = 5x + 6”Still, students’ persistent difficulty in transitioning from arithmetic to algebra suggests that the balancemetaphor may not be the ideal method for building a relational understanding of equations (Jones, Inglis,Gilmore, & Evans, 2013). Moreover, the historical substitution of twin-pan scales with electronic scales mayICLS 2014 Proceedings25© ISLShave rendered the metaphor unfamiliar to many students. We thus wondered, “What alternative metaphor mightfacilitate students’ passage from arithmetic to algebra?” Our search revealed that Dickinson and Eade (2004)tackled a similar problem. They used the number line as a diagrammatic form for modeling linear equations (seeoriginal work in Figure 1b.). Giant Steps for Algebra (GS4A) is based on this “double-measuring-stick” model.Looking at the number-line diagram in Figure 1b, note the combination of above-the-line and underthe-line symbolic indices of one and the same line segment. This element offers two perceptually contrasting yetconceptually complementary visualizations of a single perceptual stimulus (Abrahamson & Wilensky, 2007).Further note how this number-line diagram “discloses” that 2x + 6 = 14, so that 2x = 8, and therefore x = 4.In accord with distributed-cognition theory, this model of algebraic equivalence appears to facilitate theoffloading of a rule onto a diagram’s inherent logico-figural constraints, so that the problem solver can focus oncritical inferences, all the while sustaining a sense of understanding for the solution steps. In the number-linemodel, but not in the twin-pan model, we are able to construct logical relations between variable and integersdirectly by attending at a single location to spatial properties such as adjacency and containment.Finally, inspired by the RME principles, GS4A begins not directly with diagrammatic models ofexisting symbolic expressions but with an asymbolic situation that the student is required to modeldiagrammatically. This situation is presented in the form of a narrative about an agent who travels along a path,and the number-line emerges as a “model of” this journey. Per embodied design, we thus sought to engage andleverage students’ tacit knowledge about simple ambulatory motion and spatial relations, and per constructivistpedagogy we draw on students’ elementary arithmetic fluency.The GS4A problem narrative depicts a quasi-realistic situation, in which the agent performs twoconsecutive journeys that begin at the same point of departure and end at the same destination yet differ inprocess. These two journeys correspond to two equivalent algebraic expressions. For example the algebraicproposition “3x + 2 = 4x – 1” is told as a Day-1 journey of “3x + 2” and a Day-2 journey of “4x – 1”, as follows:Egbert the Giant has stolen the elves’ treasure. He escaped their land and voyaged to a desertisland. After docking, Egbert set off walking along a path. You are Eöl the Elf. You arepositioned on this island to spy on Egbert and find out what he does with the treasure. Startingfrom the port and walking straight along the only path, Egbert walked 3 giant steps and thenanother 2 meters. He buried some of the treasure, covered it up really well, and then wentback to the ship, covering up his tracks. On the next day, Egbert wanted to bury more treasurein exactly the same place, but he was not sure where that place was. Setting off along thesame path, he walked 4 steps and then, feeling he’d gone too far, he walked back one meter.Yes! He’d found the treasure! He buried the rest of the treasure in exactly the same spot as theday before. Egbert then covered up the treasure as well as all his tracks, so that nobody willknow where the treasure is. He returned to the ship and sailed off. Your job is to tell yourfellow elves exactly where the treasure is: tell them how many meters they need to walk fromthe docks to the hidden treasure.We thus designed GS4A as an environment wherein students develop a notion of variable as a specificquantity: a numerical value that is consistent within a local situation. The specific value of the variable wouldinitially be unknown to the student but could eventually be determined by triangulating available informationabout the Day-1 and Day-2 journeys. Yet triangulating depictive information—as we learned by tinkering withthe design ourselves and observing children attempt to solve the problem—carries certain implicit demands ofstructural precision and coordination. These “trivial” mechanical details surfaced as conceptually critical.The Emergence of Situated, Intermediary, Learning Objectives in a Design ProcessThe GS4A SILOs emerged during our research team’s meetings and coalesced over iterated cycles of analyzingempirical data collected in pilot implementations of the design. The SILOs enabled us to coordinate within asingle linguistic nexus divergent aspects and objectives of our multi-disciplinary tasks: (1) the target concept(algebra); (2) elements of the design (GS4A); and (3) observations of student behavior (in videotaped studies).During early trials of the design, we used a variety of different modeling media. This turned out to befortuitous, in that it ultimately led to us identifying the SILOs. As we argue in Chase and Abrahamson (2013),when the students built a model from scratch, they understood its latent mathematical content better—it wasmore transparent to them—than in cases where the prefabricated media “did the work” for them (as in Martin &Schwartz, 2005). For example, students were more likely to understand the notion of a variable when they usedpaper and pencil to painstakingly scale up a drawing that depicted an unfolding sequence of giant steps, thanwhen they were allowed to painlessly stretch an elastic ruler whose intervals scale up uniformly.Qualitative data analyses suggested the following set of three SILOs for GS4A. (Note that although wearticulate the SILOs here as rule-based propositions we do not wish to imply that participants used these forms.)ICLS 2014 Proceedings26© ISLS1.2.3.Consistent measures. All variable units (giant steps) and all fixed units (meters) are respectivelyuniform in size both within and between expressions (days);Equivalent expressions. The two expressions (Day 1 and Day 2) are of identical magnitude—theyshare the “start” and the “end” points, so that they subtend precisely the same linear extent (even ifthe total distances traveled differ between days, e.g. when a giant oversteps and then goes back);Shared frame of reference. The variable quantity (giant steps) can be described in terms of the unitquantity (meters).Articulating the SILOs gradually increased the coherence and effectiveness of our work. In particular,it dawned on us that we should use these SILOs in planning a technological version of our mechanical design.In this technological redesign, the SILOs would form a blueprint for an activity architecture, whereintransitioning from each interaction phase to the next would be linked to demonstrating mastery over one of theSILOs. The idea was thus to step learners through an activity sequence, all the while enabling them to build andsustain subjective transparency of the emerging model. Each SILO would be implemented in this design in theform of some aspect of the model that the learner would be required to build manually (virtually) before thatproperty was instantiated and monitored automatically. Borrowing the notion of “levels” from popular computergames—that is, the gradual rewarding of manifest competency with increased power that is linked to increasedtask demand—in GS4A we level transparency. That is, as the users master each SILO, they receive new controlover the environment in the form of enhanced affordances that instantiate that specific SILO automatically.In GS4A, leveling transparency is engineered as follows. The user encounters a problem narrative andis encouraged to solve it on the screen. A continuous blue path extends horizontally across the screen (seeFigure 2). On the left of this line there is a small flag (the “start” location). Below the line there is a standarddrawing toolbox with buttons for either selecting a color (giant steps are red, meters are green), togglingbetween journey days (Days 1 or 2), or editing (removing or clearing model elements). A floating “treasurebox” (see in Figure 2, in the top-right corner) can be placed at any location. If a user selects the “Giant Step”button and then clicks on the screen, a red arch will appear that connects the giant’s last location along the path(a grey node) to the clicked location (a new grey node). Similarly, “Meters” are green arcs.Figure 2. In Level 1, “Free Form,” users create all parts of the model manually. Note that the giant steps (redarches) are not quite uniform in size; neither are the meters (green arches).SILOs are psychological constructs—they are about what a child knows (or, at least, about thedesigner’s best understanding of what the child knows). Levels, on the other hand, are technical constructs—they are about an activity’s technological affordances, that is, what a pedagogical system performs for you. Andyet SILOs and levels are closely related: each SILO articulates a knowledge criterion for entering a new level,and then each level, in turn, orients the child to achieve some next SILO, as outlined in Table 1 (see next page).We shall now elaborate on this table, referring to its screenshot images. In Level 1, “Free Form,” usersconstruct all elements of their model in freehand, analogous to drawing with pencil and paper. Some productionimprecision naturally ensues, such as steps that are not quite the same size. The importance of precision (SILO1) will arise only once the learner attempts to coordinate measures across two journeys, marked above andbelow the path, and encounters misfits impeding the modeling process. Once users have articulated theimperative of consistency and labored over implementing this aspect in their models, they are evaluated ashaving graduated SILO 1, “Consistent Measures.” As a first concession, the program enters Level 2, “FixedMeter,” in which the system relieves the learner of producing uniform meter units (see also Figure 3, next page).At this new level, the system supplements manual interaction with optional symbolic interaction.Namely, the learner can now use a control (see in the bottom-right corner of Figure 3) to set a numerical valuethat determines how many meters will be generated; at a click of a button, the program creates these units asfigural elements on the screen. Unburdened by the tedious task of maintaining uniform meters, the user nowattempts to equalize the two journeys (Day 1 & Day 2) by adjusting the variable size. Note that one and thesame variable, a giant step size, applies both within each journey day and across both days. As in the case ofmeters, it is difficult to manually coordinate both within-day and between-days equivalences of variables. Oncethe user articulates that the variable should be consistent across the entire model, the interface enters Level 3.ICLS 2014 Proceedings27© ISLSIn Level 3, “Stretchy,” not only is the meter unit size maintained automatically, but the variable sizechanges uniformly. So when the user drags any of the nodes along the path line, all variable units change sizeaccordingly (please also compare Figures 4a and 4b, two page down). This supplementary affordance enablesthe user more felicitously to match the end points of Day 1 and Day 2, as follows.Table 1: Leveling Transparency: Matched SILOs and Levels in Giant Steps for Algebra Technological Design.SILO1. ConsistentMeasuresLevel1. Free FormSystem Constraints, User Activity, andBehavior CriterionInterfaceSystem offers no support in coordinating unitsor expressions.Activity User builds all parts of the model manually; isperturbed by units’ unequal lengths within andbetween days; tries to equalize units via smalladjustments but witnesses that increasing oneunit decreases an adjacent unit sharing a node.Criterion User expresses frustration in equalizing units.2. Equivalent 2. FixedExpressionsMetersSystem generates meter units in predeterminedsize and maintains uniform size automatically.Activity User builds variables manually; is perturbedby variable units’ unequal lengthswithin/between days; tries to equalize variableunits but witnesses that increasing one unitdecreases an adjacent unit sharing a node.Criterion User expresses frustration with managinguniform variable units particularly in anattempt to equalize the two propositions (thespatial extents of Days 1 & 2).3. SharedFrame ofReference3. StretchySystem monitors for manual adjustment to thesize of any of the variable units andaccordingly adjusts the size of all variableunits.Activity User adjusts the variable size to equalize thetwo propositionsCriterion User reads off the value of a variable unit interms of the number of known units (meters) itsubtends, e.g., one giant step is 2 meters long.Figure 3. In Level 2, “Fixed Meter,” the (green) meters are automatically maintained as uniform in size (andtherefore equal to each other), while the variable (red) giant steps are not automatically controlled thus. Usersinteract with a symbolic control (bottom-right corner) to generate meters.ICLS 2014 Proceedings28© ISLSa.b.Figure 4. In Level 3, “Stretchy,” green arches (meters) are invariable and thus equal to each other, while redarches (giant steps) are variable yet always equal to each other via uniform scaling. A new control (bottom-rightcorner) now enables the user to generate a specified number of giant steps, not only meters.Note, in Figure 4a, that all the variable units are uniform, both above and below the line path, and yet the twojourneys do not end at the same location, so that the only way of aligning the two trips would be by changingthe uniform size of the variable (the red arcs). That is precisely what our hypothetical student did, so that thetwo trips ended in the same location thus determining the value of a single step as 2 meters (see Figure 4b).A new hypothesis arises from the “leveling transparency” technological design architecture—ahypothesis informing our next study as well as a tentative theoretical insight. Namely, if users were introducedto the activity initially at Level 3, with its full slate of convenient interaction shortcuts, they could not appreciatethese features as affordances, because they would not know what each feature accomplishes. As such, learningas constructing transparency is the process of coming to visualize an artifact’s features as affordances.Closing Words: SILOs Demarcate Structure-Oriented Mathematical CompetencyWe have introduced a mathematics-education construct we call SILOs—situated intermediary learningobjectives. We explained that this construct emerged through our reflective engagement in the process ofdeveloping a design for algebra. Sensing the potential of these heuristics as something we might wish tounderstand, generalize, and share, we reified and refined these tacit elements of our practice in the form of theconstruct “SILO.” SILOs are the structural and logical properties that a learner needs to figure out in order toutilize media made available in a particular learning environment so as to model a particular class of problemsituations posed by the activity. Knowing a design’s collective SILOs, we maintain, indexes conceptualontogenesis of a student who is learning target content. Moreover, the creation of a set of SILOs indexes theprogress of a designer who is learning about the student’s learning process: by articulating the SILOs, thedesigner comes to know what the students should know who participate in activities enabled by the design. In asense, SILOs are the educator’s heuristics for engineering, orienting, and monitoring the learner’s heuristics.SILOs are not a to-do list of requisite actions required by an expert responding to a particular class ofproblems (e.g., production rules for solving picture-based pre-algebraic problems, Koedinger & Terao, 2002).Rather, SILOs are an artifact’s set of necessary properties, any of whose violation would elicit from an expertadaptive action. We thus draw on the view of expertise not as the capacity of rote production but rather the skillof responsively recognizing and modifying perceived stimuli so that they embody target structures affordingroutine practice (Schoenfeld, 1998), such as inferring target information (e.g., the value of x). Of course thismodeling skill must be developed. The practical function of SILOs is to organize and coordinate educators’efforts to create, moderate, and evaluate opportunities for learners to reinvent this expertise.One might be tempted to describe GS4A as an exemplar of technological designs that scaffold algebracontent. We hesitate to use that common term. In fact, our proposed design architecture for levelingtransparency might be described as reverse scaffolding. Scaffolding is the asymmetrical social co-enactment ofnatural or cultural practice, wherein a more able agent performs for novices elements of a complex activity. Thenovices’ participation is thus simplified, so that they experience the activity’s purpose, meaning, and efficacy aswell as a sense of competence. In GS4A, by way of contrast, the scaffolding is inherent to the design rationalebut not the actual activity. That is, the design as a whole is a fortiori premeditated to enable and support guidedreinvention of a mathematical concept. However, within the environment there is no co-enactment of any stepsthat students have not yet figured out themselves. The system co-constructs the model only once the studentunderstands the necessity and functionality of each specific property of the model. Thus the pedagogical systemrelieves users of executing what they know to do rather than what they do not know to do.SILOs are subjective achievements—they articulate learners’ emergent, idealized system of targetrelations between reified elements in a problem space; they describe the “things” treated in the situation andimply how to treat them. As such, throughout this manuscript we have spoken of two emergent processes, eachof which involves tinkering, discovery, and the objectification of implicit knowledge: (1) the child modeling asituation to infer quantitative information; and (2) the designer modeling the child’s behavior to infer learningobjectives. These two problem-solving processes are isomorphic, parallel, iterative, and reciprocal.ICLS 2014 Proceedings29© ISLSIt is our hope that the idea of SILOs per se as well as the process by which they emerged will resonatewith the experiences of fellow designers. A potentially productive focus of such a dialogue would be regardingthe ontological status, or pedagogical role, of the external constructions children build as they work on a situatedproblem, whether concrete or virtual. Additionally, we are fascinated by the designers’ early process ofinstantiating mathematical concepts. How does this process transpire? How do designers evaluate the quality, orepistemic fidelity, of these initial conceptual instantiations? We suspect that these two lines of inquiry—aboutdesign process and learning process, respectively—will turn out to be more similar than has been formerlysuspected and, consequently, mutually informative.ReferencesAbrahamson, D. (2009). Embodied design: constructing means for constructing meaning. Educational Studiesin Mathematics, 70(1), 27-47.Abrahamson, D. (2013). Toward a taxonomy of design genres: fostering mathematical insight via perceptionbased and action-based experiences. In J. P. Hourcade, E. A. Miller & A. Egeland (Eds.), Proceedingsof IDC 2013 (Vol. “Full Papers”, pp. 218-227). New York: The New School & Sesame Workshop.Abrahamson, D., & Wilensky, U. (2007). Learning axes and bridging tools in a technology-based design forstatistics. International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 12(1), 23-55.Antle, A. N. (2013). Research opportunities: embodied child–computer interaction. International Journal ofChild-Computer Interaction, 1(1), 30-36.Carpenter, T. P., Franke, M. L., & Levi, L. (2003). Thinking mathematically: integrating arithmetic and algebrain elementary school. Portsmouth, NH: HeinemannChase, K., & Abrahamson, D. (2013). Rethinking transparency: constructing meaning in a physical and digitaldesign for algebra. In J. P. Hourcade, E. A. Miller & A. Egeland (Eds.), Proceedings of IDC 2013 (Vol.“Short Papers”, pp. 475-478). New York: The New School & Sesame Workshop.Clark, A. (2003). Natural-born cyborgs: minds, technologies, and the future of human intelligence. NY: Oxford.Dickinson, P., & Eade, R. (2004). Using the number line to investigate solving linear equations. For theLearning of Mathematics, 24(2), 41-47.Diénès, Z. P. (1971). An example of the passage from the concrete to the manipulation of formal systems.Educational Studies in Mathematics, 3(3/4), 337-352.Freudenthal, H. (1983). Didactical phenomenology of mathematical structures. Dordrecht: Kluwer.Gravemeijer, K. P. E. (1999). How emergent models may foster the constitution of formal mathematics.Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 1(2), 155-177.Herscovics, N., & Linchevski, L. (1996). Crossing the cognitive gap between arithmetic and algebra.Educational Studies in Mathematics, 30(2), 39-65.Hutchins, E. (2010). Cognitive ecology. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2(4), 705-715.Jones, I., Inglis, M., Gilmore, C., & Evans, R. (2013). Teaching the substitutive conception of the equals sign.Research in Mathematics Education, 15(1), 34-49.Kamii, C. K., & DeClark, G. (1985). Young children reinvent arithmetic. NY: Teachers College Press.Knuth, E. J., Stephens, A. C., McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M. W. (2006). Does understanding the equal signmatter? Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 37(4), 297-312.Koedinger, K. R., & Terao, A. (2002). A cognitive task analysis of using pictures to support pre-algebraicreasoning. In C. D. Schunn & W. Gray (Eds.), Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference of theCognitive Science Society (pp. 542-547). Mahwah: Lawrence.Martin, T., & Schwartz, D. L. (2005). Physically distributed learning: Adapting and reinterpreting physicalenvironments in the development of fraction concepts. Cognitive Science, 29(4), 587-625.Meira, L. (2002). Mathematical representations as systems of notations-in-use. In K. Gravenmeijer, R. Lehrer,B. v. Oers & L. Verschaffel (Eds.), Symbolizing, modeling and tool use in mathematics education (pp.87–104). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.Norman, D. A. (1991). Cognitive artifacts. In J. M. Carroll (Ed.), Designing interaction: psychology at thehuman-computer interface (pp. 17-38). New York: Cambridge University Press.Noss, R., Healy, L., & Hoyles, C. (1997). The construction of mathematical meanings: connecting the visualwith the symbolic. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 33(2), 203-233.Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1969). The psychology of the child. NY: Basic Books (Original work published 1966).Pratt, D., & Noss, R. (2010). Designing for mathematical abstraction. International Journal of Computers forMathematical Learning, 15(2), 81-97.Schoenfeld, A. H. (1998). Making pasta and making mathematics: From cookbook procedures to really cooking.In J. G. Greeno & S. V. Goldman (Eds.), Thinking practice in mathematics and science learning (pp.299-319). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.Thompson, P. W. (2013). In the absence of meaning…. In K. Leatham (Ed.), Vital directions for mathematicseducation research (pp. 57-94). NY: Springer.ICLS 2014 Proceedings30© ISLS