Re-Placing the Body in Children’s LearningChairKatie Headrick Taylor, Northwestern University, katie.h.taylor@northwestern.eduDiscussantRogers Hall, Vanderbilt University, r.hall@vanderbilt.eduAuthorsJasmine Y. Ma, New York University, j.ma@nyu.eduAnanda Marin, Northwestern University, amarin@northwestern.eduKatie Headrick Taylor, Northwestern University, katie.h.taylor@northwestern.eduNathan C. Phillips, University of Illinois at Chicago, phillipn@uic.eduSymposium OverviewIn this symposium we present four recent design studies with young people that leverage bodies-in-place as anopportunity for making sense of and taking place in practices. Our common aim in this session is to contributeto a more robust theory of embodied cognition by providing descriptive and comparative analyses of how youngpeople make “body sense” (Cajete, 2000) of the places in which they are engaging. In a recent special issue ofJournal of the Learning Sciences, researchers provided further evidence and arguments for the centrality of thecorporeal for learning mathematics (Hall & Nemirovsky, 2012). While that work has most recently promotedembodied cognition as a viable theory of learning, educators and educational researchers still struggle againstthe tendency to fetishize abstracted, “pure knowledge” over the ways in which our moving, feeling bodies makesense of the world. Additionally, and as Stevens (2012) pointed out in his commentary to the “Modalities ofBody Engagement in Mathematical Activity and Learning” JLS Special Issue, attempting to build a broadunderstanding of how the body and learning relate via solely classroom-based studies is a major limitation torobust theory-building. Thus, our collective narrative provides a (literally) grounded account of embodiedcognition that problematizes the absence of space and place in previous accounts of learning.Knowing how to make learning relevant and salient for young people across content areas is a recurringquestion in our field. As designers for this work in mathematics, ecology, media production, and geography, wewere informed by ideas put forward by studies of inquiry-based curricula (e.g., Salierno, Edelson, & Sherin,2005), “reality based education” (Emdin, 2010), families’ funds of knowledge (e.g. Moll, Amanti, Neff, &Gonzalez, 1992), and hybridity and thirdspace practices (e.g., Taylor & Hall, 2013). Building upon theseconcepts to increase learners’ agency and engagement, the four design studies presented here explicitlyresourced the mobile bodies of young people with tools for “hacking” the traditional uses of places for new andemergent purposes. For example, in one study (Taylor), teenagers wore GPS devices on their wrists to walk andinscribe a personal message over the terrain of the neighborhood. In this sense, a place that was once ageography of mundane activity became a canvas for authorship through which new realizations about the builtand developing environment emerged. In another example (Ma), groups of middle school math students weregiven ropes and lawn flags to transform the football field into a large-scale, 3-dimensional space for geometricproblem-solving. And in yet another example (Phillips), spatially-indexed demographic data sets were madevisible to high school media production students to create a counter-narrative of the imagined geography andspatial arguments contained in a map. In this way, unlikely places, in combination with bodies and tools,became unconventional portals to youth agency and learning/production.Our design studies with young people intentionally leveraged bodies as a resource for learning indynamic relation to a particular geography that was outside the classroom. These places varied in scale andprovided different affordances and constraints for the interacting bodies of learners. A football field, an urbanforest preserve, a neighborhood, and the imagined geographies of faraway places are the examples of placeconjured in this symposium, the particularities of which invoke Geertz’s (1983) comment that “no one lives inthe world in general” (p. 262). Each setting provided unique challenges for the bodies of learners that aretypically distilled out of classroom activities; intense humidity on the football field, damp socks in the forestpreserve, swarming cicadas in the neighborhood streets, and natural versus “relaxed” hair in the productionstudio, were not obstacles to learning, but were intrinsic and necessary parts of how young people made sense ofgeometric problem-solving, ecological observational inquiry, spatial analysis, and map argumentation,respectively. However, it is not the particularities, but the over-arching similarity of these seemingly disparateplaces that makes them so interesting for a story of embodied cognition; no matter the scale or the configurationof the activity within each place, the gendered, cultured, and racialized bodies of learners exploded theidentifiable boundaries (Nespor, 2008) of painted lines, signposts, highways, or state borders to make anembodied history present in every moment of learning and engagement.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1237© ISLSThe four design studies in this proposed symposium used common data collection and analyticmethods to understand and explicate the relevance of bodies-in-place for young people’s learning. We captureddetailed video recordings—often with the help of our participants—of collaborative engagement, problemsolving, and production during “on-the-move interventions.” Both Marin and Taylor, for instance, asked studyparticipants to wear cameras as they navigated the forest and neighborhood. Mobile video recordings helped usto see the different resources in circulation and how new resources emerged depending on the changing locationof participants. Moreover, through video records, we saw that new geographies elicited new actions. Gestures,facing formations, and stopping and starting sequences were co-constituted by the activity, the coordinatedobjectives of the participants, and the challenges and affordances of the place. Our analyses followed fromtheory and observations that meaning making occurred through all of the senses and possible arrangements ofthe body in relation to setting and activity. Multimodal (Kress & van Leeuwen, 2001; Norris, 2004) andmicroanalyses of interaction (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) allowed us to see that performance genres—“a set ofspecific forms of embodied action” (Stevens & Hall, 1998; p. 108)—were much less predictable when theterrain of interaction was constantly in flux (e.g., weather, hills, marshes, missing signage, eroding roads).The influential exchange between place and body has been a topic of renewed interest during thecorporeal turn in social science (e.g., Evans, Davies, & Rich, 2009). And while the learning sciences havewelcomed a resurgence of research that presents the body as central to cognition, there is still very little workthat contributes to a theory of embodied cognition by investigating novel practices in “naturally-occurring”places. The following talks do just that by offering new methods, new units of analyses, and new concepts fromresearch working within the theoretical framework of embodied cognition.Re-Placing the Body in Walking Scale GeometryJasmine Y. Ma, New York University, j.ma@nyu.eduThis paper describes findings from part of a design study investigating how middle and high school studentsengaged in a learning setting called Walking Scale Geometry (WSG). These tasks took students outside to agrassy field to construct, transform, and answer questions with and about large-scale geometric objects. Theobjects were constructed by students with everyday objects such as ropes, lawn flags, and their own bodies. Thepurpose of this paper is to share two findings from the study with respect to student bodies in dynamic relationto place. These findings problematize typical views of what counts as appropriate and productive in schoolingand in mathematics learning. I will begin with a brief overview of the design and framing and the data andmethods used in the study, then proceed to a summary of findings.Design and FramingWSG was designed to promote hybridity (Gutierrez, Baquedano, & Tejeda, 1999) in geometry learning—thedesign was meant to help students make connections to out-of-school funds of knowledge (Gonzalez, Andrade,Civil, & Moll, 2001) or repertoires of practice (Gutiérrez, & Rogoff, 2003) in order to support the emergence ofa transformed learning setting that inextricably incorporates students’ sense-making with classroom disciplinarypractices and learning goals. Unlike previous studies of hybrid learning settings, where instruction was designedto bridge school content with home resources (Calabrese Barton & Tan, 2009), or unexpected incidents werecapitalized upon (Gutiérrez, Baquedano, & Tejeda, 1999), WSG tasks were meant to disrupt aspects of typicalmathematics classroom activity in order to facilitate students’ recruitment of meaningful-to-them resources forspatial reasoning (see Ma, 2013). In other words, a key design conjecture was that disruptions to mathematicsclassroom activity like space, tools, and division of labor would make it difficult for students to depend onfamiliar means of problem solving. These familiar means included physical tools like paper and pencil, as wellas conceptual tools like what certain geometric figures “look like” at paper scale and rules for drawing orconstructing triangles and quadrilaterals. For students comfortable with these taken-for-granted tools andpractices, the disruption would problematize their tacit understandings and provide opportunities to adapt andinvent new tools for similar situations in the WSG setting. For other students, the disruption would release themfrom the usage of tools and practices that they had trouble reasoning with (but felt they had to make use ofthem), and so promote their own sense-making and connections to out-of-school experiences and knowledge.I treat place as not simply containers with physical features, but as constituted by a built environmentin interaction with participants’ past, ongoing, and anticipated engagements in them (Leander, Phillips, &Taylor, 2010; Lefebvre, 1991). I take an “interactionist” view of embodiment (e.g., Stevens, 2012), treatinghuman cognition and action (and therefore doing and learning mathematics) as distributed across the localsemiotic environment, which includes historically and culturally developed tools for sense-making, as well astalk, co-present others, and the material world. Bodies and materials (including the built environment) arefundamental resources for reasoning—not as separate, external elements in support of mental activity, but asconstituent components of cognition. As interaction unfolds, embodied, discursive, and material resources aredynamically recruited for meaning-making and communication, in service of the goals of the group. TheseICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1238© ISLSsemiotic resources mutually elaborate each other; they bring meaning to ongoing interaction, andsimultaneously take on particular significance in the context of that ongoing interaction.Methods and DataWSG, implemented as part of a design study, was investigated in two different settings: a 7th grade mathematicsclassroom at a struggling (by state testing standards) urban middle school (KCMS), and a two-week residentialsummer enrichment program (SEC) held at a university for high-achieving rising 9th and 10th graders. AtKCMS the WSG tasks took place in the school’s soccer field, while in SEC students worked in a grassyuniversity quadrangle criss-crossed with concrete walking paths. The study took place over the course of fiveconsecutive weeks at KCMS, and just two days in SEC. Lesson sequences were designed and revised withinstructors at each site, in response to ongoing analysis of student engagement. The mathematics coach andclassroom teacher were the primary instructors at KCMS, while researchers served as instructors in SEC.Data collected at both sites included video records of design sessions, interviews with students, fieldnotes during WSG implementation, student work artifacts, still images, and video and audio records of WSGactivity. Whenever possible video and still images were recorded from above the students’ WSG activity (atop anearby hill or building) as well as from ground level. This allowed close analysis of embodied engagementsusing a close-up but narrowly-framed view as well as a wide-angle, bird’s-eye-view of entire groups. Methodsof analysis began with rough coding of students’ recruitment of resources to engage in problem solving, inrelation to the designed disruptions of WSG. “Hot spots,” or episodes of interest due to an unexpected event, orintense engagement by students, or representativeness of types of student-recruited resources, were chosen andanalyzed using methods of multimodal discourse analysis (Norris, 2004) and interaction analysis (Jordan &Henderson, 1995). These findings serve to contribute to theories of (mathematical) bodily engagement in places,and to future design conjectures for leveraging bodies and space as resources for mathematics learning.FindingsThe WSG tasks moved problem solving to settings where students had a variety of past and ongoingengagements, but never classroom mathematics. The KCMS students spent time on that soccer field over thecourse of the day either participating in gym class activities or soccer practice and games. At the time, the boys’soccer team was in the midst of a winning season, and most of the students in the class were either on the teamor regular spectators. The university quad was often a space that the SEC students had to traverse in order to getbetween their dorms and the cafeteria and their classes. They also spent some of their free or residential activitytime on this lawn, reading in the sun, chatting and gossiping, or playing kickball or capture the flag. Theseplaces had vivid associations for the students, and they often engaged in conversations about past or futureevents while working on WSG tasks. They even made jokes about what would happen if these activitiescollided: “What if the star striker of the opposing soccer team tripped up on a yardstick we left stuck into theground?”; “The capture the flag flags better not be the same as these little WSG lawn flags; that would be sad.”Students’ bodies, of course, also had rich and varied meanings for the students, and they were deployedfrom head-to-toe to become parts of inscriptions (e.g., vertices in triangles), as integral parts of the physicalrepresentational infrastructure (e.g., holding piece of rope together), as measuring devices (e.g., using astudent’s height as a unit of measure), and as discursive resources for negotiation of strategies during problemsolving (e.g., gesturing, demonstrating, haptically “overhearing” others’ actions).One striking consequence of the WSG setting was that students inevitably incorporated play andplayfulness into their work outdoors. This included enacting alternative uses of the various WSG materials (e.g.,using a triangle side for jumping rope or tug of war) and telling stories about and partially performing imaginedscenarios involving the space and materials (e.g., pretending to be trapped in a quadrilateral). Sometimes playwas sustained and intertwined with mathematical activity, while other times problem solving was punctuatedwith quick episodes of play, constrained by ongoing mathematical engagements. This play was rarely observedin the classroom during instruction before the design experiment began, or when we returned inside to discusstheir WSG experiences. Outdoors, play was occasionally a distraction, but often accomplished in parallel toproblem solving. On a few occasions play contributed to developing problem solving strategies and innovations.A second finding of this study was that mathematics activity and problem solving became inextricablytied to particulars of bodies, space, and time so that bodies and space were sites of mathematical activity and“environmentally coupled” (Goodwin, 2007) in problem solving. The learning of mathematics concepts and ofinscriptions and representational practices co-develop, and are mutually influencing (Lehrer & Lesh, 2003).Here the inscriptional system itself is embedded in a complexly specific place and imbued with meanings,mathematical and otherwise, rather than the very general, very immutable and mobile (Latour, 1990) piece ofpaper. Inscriptions and inscriptional conventions (for WSG) were developed in relation to past and ongoingbodily engagements in the setting. When it had recently rained, the mud became “ink” for marking off sectionsof rope, and yardsticks could be pushed into the soft ground as vertices or just for fixing rope in place. Studentsran and jumped and danced, often as soon as their feet hit the grass. However, when it was unbearably hot,ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1239© ISLSstudents’ WSG figures became much smaller in size and their strategies factored in their reluctance to walkacross the field. When the field was freshly painted for a game that afternoon, the glaring white lines providedready-made line segments, right angles, and circles that could be incorporated into representational strategies.Contingencies like these tied the development of students’ inscriptional strategies to meaningful localconstraints and goals. Space, bodies, and mathematics were produced together for problem solving and learning.Re-Placing Walking in the Analysis of Children’s Observational InquiryAnanda Marin, Northwestern University, amarin@northwestern.eduMobility, or people’s movement from place to place and through places, is central to learning in everyday life.Social scientists and performance researchers are increasingly using ambulatory methods and walkinginterviews to examine relationships between place, spatial practices, and knowledge building (Myers, 2011).However, as Taylor and Hall (2013) explain, mobility “is rarely considered part of learning in the learningsciences, and it is almost never used as relevant, experiential content in teaching” (p. 66). In science educationthere is an increasing interest in place-based and field-based experiences (e.g., Lim & Barton, 2006), howeverlittle attention has been given to the role of walking in constituting these experiences or learning sciencecontent. In this paper, I focus on the relationship between mobility (i.e., walking), attention, observation andlearning about the natural world. I will begin by motivating the need to focus on learning about the naturalworld and the practice of observation. Then I will describe an exploratory study where I used case studies toexamine families’ experiences during walks in urban forest preserves (Marin, 2013). I will conclude bydiscussing how mobile video recordings from this dataset led me to re-conceptualize units of analysis.The Natural World, Culture, and Science LearningLearning about the natural world is a central human activity, part of the cultural process of development, andinfluenced by everyday experiences (e.g., Cajete, 2000). Observation is one methodology used to learn about thenatural world and plays a significant role in science teaching and learning in the primary grades and outside ofschool, particularly in domains that rely on field experiences and investigations (Windschitl, Dvornich, Ryken,Tudor, & Koehler, 2007). In addition, observation is almost always mentioned in reform documents but itreceives far less attention than other inquiry practices and is rarely theorized (Smith & Reiser, 2005). Perhapsobservation receives so little attention theoretically because it is often viewed as a mundane practice and asimple step in the scientific process. However, some researchers have argued that observation is a complexprocess and involves the relational activities of watching, listening, and feeling in order to selectively attend toand notice particular features of the environment (Kawagley, 2006). These activities are dependent upon thecoordination of theory, domain knowledge, and attention habits (Eberbach & Crowley, 2009).According to Ingold (2011), “all science depends on observation and all observation depends onparticipation—that is, on a close coupling, in perception and action, between the observer and those aspects ofthe world that are the focus of attention” (p. 75). From these perspectives, observational inquiry is rooted inparticular places and directly influenced by land and its inhabitants (Kimmerer, 2012), as well as the weatherworld or the medium between sky and ground that people inhabit and navigate (Ingold, 2007). Walking is aneveryday observing practice that individuals, families, and groups engage in to build relationships with thenatural world (e.g., Bang, 2009). As Waitt, Gill, and Head (2009) suggest, walking is a “way of doing nature”(p. 43). Direct experience and participation with nature through the use of one’s body and sensory perception iscentral to doing science and making sense of the environment (e.g., Cajete, 2000). The purpose of this paper isto illustrate the ways in which the practice of observation is constituted by bodies-in-place.Investigating the Relationship Between Mobility, Place, and Science LearningTo examine the relationship between body sense, place, movement, attention, and observation, I asked sixfamilies (three Native American families and three non-Native families) with children between the ages of fiveto eight years old to go on repeated walks in urban, forest preserves. I will refer to this activity as forest walks.In the context of this study, culture, or the routine practices that families engage in to accomplish goals, isenacted or “paced out along the ground” (Ingold & Vergunst, 2008, p. 1). This mobile research activityincorporated the urban, ecological context and afforded an examination of the moment-by-moment process ofattention and observation as families traversed land.The design for this study grew out of my participation in a community-based design research projectand my experiences on that project as a designer, teacher, and researcher. The aim of the project was to developculturally based curriculum for Indigenous youth and families (see Bang et al., 2014). Deeply grounding thiswork is the belief that humans are not apart from nature but a part of nature and that nature is all around us(Cajete, 2000). A foundational design conjecture of the project was that people learn about the natural world bywalking and talking land (Cajete, 2000). I extended the work of this community-based design project by using amore constrained research activity (i.e. forest walks) to examine the ambulatory aspects of learning andICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1240© ISLSobservational inquiry from a place-centered and body-centered lens.Developing Embodied Units of AnalysisDuring forest walks, families used two forms of digital technology: a digital camera and the POV 1.5, awearable camera that continuously captures video (see http://www.vio-pov.com). This camera was positionedon the shoulder and captured the embodied experiences of family members while on the walk. Overall, the datacorpus consists of over 30 hours of video. Videos of the forest walks were analyzed in Transana v2.51 (Woods& Fassnacht, 2012). Transana pairs transcript and video for analyses purposes and has been successfully usedfor multi-modal analysis (Halverson, Bass, & Woods, 2012). In each case, I focused on the routine interactionalpractices families engaged in while walking in order to highlight what is worthy of being noticed. I relied ontechniques from conversation analysis (e.g., Pomerantz & Fehr, 1997), ethnomethodology (Stevens, 2010) andmicroethnography (Phillips, 1983), to identify sequences within each forest walk. Through multiple viewings ofvideo, what became most evident to me was that the activity, or the walk, was demarcated by changes in gait.Working from this point, I developed a unit of analysis, which is bounded by change in gait. I term this unit ofanalysis ambulatory sequences. Once sequences were identified, video clips were created and organized incollections for each participant and coded for sequence components. These sequence components or semioticfields include physical location, walking patterns, spatial orientation, movement characteristics, and talk. I arguethat each ambulatory sequence is complex in nature and akin to a micro or situated activity system (Goodwin,2003) where action emerges from the layering of fields at the individual and social level.ConclusionMobility is integral to knowledge and meaning making practices (Gutiérrez, 2008; Ingold & Vergunst, 2008).What we attend to with respect to the natural world is organized, at least in part, by people’s movement throughplace. More specifically, walking or making our way from place to place and noticing phenomena in oursurroundings is both structured by land and structures our engagement with the natural world. How do weaccount for and analyze the relationship between mobility, attention, and observation from a systemsperspective? Researchers use a variety of techniques to identify routine phases and patterns in interaction. Onceconcepts of interest are identified, exchanges are often coded at the utterance or turn level. For example,analysts may focus on shifts in discourse in order to identify sequences. In this paper, I introduced two ideas: (a)that change in gait may serve as a marker for sequence boundaries and analytic units and (b) that sequencesbounded by change in gait constitute an ambulatory turn. I suggest that families’ walks follow a pattern ofcontinuously walking and stopping and that these unique sequences constitute situated activity systems. Thisunit recognizes the importance of body sense (Cajete, 2000) as a way of knowing the world and considers thelayered and emergent qualities of interaction. In addition, it provides a structure to explore relationships betweenthe physical and verbal organization of attention and observation with respect to land.Locative Learning: Constructing Sense-Scapes Through GPS DrawingKatie Headrick Taylor, Northwestern University, katie.h.taylor@northwestern.eduThis paper describes GPS drawing as a sociotechnical, intact activity system (Greeno, 1998) in which twogroups of three youth inscribed an image or word over the terrain of their neighborhood by walking a plannedroute with a handheld Garmin™ GPS device. GPS drawing was part of a larger social design experiment(Gutiérrez, 2008) to support youth in counter-mapping (e.g., Peluso, 1995) their neighborhood, or makingclaims to community resources for the future with urban planners and local stakeholders (Taylor, 2013; Taylor& Hall, 2013). GPS drawing was a designed activity that brought the sensuous experiences of the body-in-placein contact with mapping technologies to produce a narrative of urban life that is oftentimes ignored (i.e., that ofinner city youth). Within this tension—between the practiced and the abstracted—young people constructed“sense-scapes” (Grasseni, 2009), or spatially-indexed narratives of emotion, nostalgia, and morality as a newmap layer. While GPS drawing has traditionally been considered a form of “locative media” (e.g., Reiser, 2011)in some fields, I argue that GPS drawing is an example of locative learning where youth gained facility withgeospatial technologies and mapping practices (e.g., ground-truthing, scale-body translations) while inscribingand sharing new and emergent meaning into an intimately familiar landscape with their mobile bodies.Framing and DesignHow do you describe a place that you know intimately? What are the salient experiences you have in that place?How do you show that you know a lot about a place? How can you represent place-based feelings and affect as alegitimate (map) layer of experience? These were the questions I asked when designing GPS drawing as oneactivity in a series for youth to learn about counter-mapping their neighborhood—a racially segregated food andmobility desert in a midsouth city—with urban planners and local stakeholders.Having done an ethnographic study of a participatory planning process in the same neighborhood asICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1241© ISLSthis design study, two observations were important for designing the GPS drawing activity in particular. First,residents often treated the map as an invitation for storytelling. Planner-created maps provided entrée into thetelling of one’s rich history of many lived experiences within that place. These stories served to disrupt thedisembodied, abstracted narrative represented on the map to create a sense-scape of lived experience and desire.Sense-scapes bring the sensuous experiences of the body forward, but also layer abstracted space with commonnarratives of nostalgia, desire, fear, and morality that give the map personally relevant meaning (Grasseni,2009). The second observation important for designing this activity was that the experiences of young people inthe community were oftentimes ignored or misrepresented by both the adults and the maps that were central tothe participatory planning process (Taylor & Hall, 2013).Therefore, GPS drawing was a designed activity to facilitate young people in bringing all of theirsenses to bear on, not just the map of their neighborhood, but mapping technologies and the neighborhood itself.GPS drawing was a technologically re-mediated way of walking the neighborhood and telling a story about aplace in which the young study participants had their own rich histories and experiences. I describe this activityas a sociotechnical intact activity system because individuals, the resources and senses of their bodies,technologies (i.e., GPS devices, pencils, wearable cameras), representations (i.e., maps of the neighborhood), theterrain of the neighborhood, and the resources of that environment came together to pose challenges, solveproblems, and inscribe a new layer of meaning over that place.GPS drawing consisted of four phases and lasted three hours, though experiences from the activitywere referenced throughout the remaining weeks of the study. The first phase was a tutorial on GPS drawingthat occurred in a local, youth-serving organization located in the neighborhood. The second phase was aplanning phase, where study participants in groups planned their inscriptions with markers and maps of theneighborhood. The third phase was the walking/inscribing phase through the neighborhood with maps, GPSdevices, and wearable cameras. The fourth and final phase was a sharing/analysis session in a universitycomputer lab where youth’s inscriptions were uploaded into Google Earth™ and authors described theirproduction experiences on the ground to each other and adult volunteers and researchers. These inscriptionswere also shared with urban planners and local stakeholders a few weeks later as part of the culminating eventof the study—an “Open House” youth counter-mapping session.Methods and DataThe young people that participated in GPS drawing, and the larger social design experiment, were members of abicycle-building and riding workshop located in the neighborhood’s youth-serving community center. Part of“The Workshop’s” mission was to address issues of youth mobility and access to citywide resources. Localstakeholders in the community were eager to make the neighborhood safer and more conducive to independentmobility for youth, either on foot or on bicycles. Carissa, Leah, Beth, Fred, William, and Wallace were allAfrican-American youth between the ages of 12 and 15 years old (1). Designed activities took place over fiveweeks in The Workshop, through the neighborhood, or in the university computer lab. We met twice a week.GPS drawing occurred in the third week of the study; youth made other artifacts with mapping technologiesduring other sessions. After the five weeks of designed activities concluded, the youth met with professionalcartographers and urban planners to argue for changes in the community, displaying their artifacts as evidencefor “on the ground” research and analysis.Over the course of the study, my research team and I made video records of all the activities. I alsoconducted initial and concluding interviews with each participant. I collected participant-produced artifacts thatincluded time-diaries, GPS tracks of their mobility around their homes using a GPS data logger, and photos andcamera footage. For GPS drawing specifically, the activity was video recorded by two research team members,and was also captured by participants who were wearing head cameras while they participated in the activity.FindingsConstructing technologically mediated sense-scapes over the map of their neighborhood came easily to theyouth. The boys walked the shape of an hour-glass with sand/time dripping through it over the baseball fieldadjacent to their school; the girls inscribed the word “LOVE” over a five-block area that included all of theirhomes. For each group, the walk through the neighborhood was dense with talk and stories. Topics included, butwere not limited to, cicadas, the lack of sidewalks, being hot, the rain, music videos, cute boys living in theneighborhood, bad drivers, a girl in “booty shorts,” and dozens more. But from my analysis, the paths theycreated on foot were more than story lines. These pathways held their bodies together in coordinated activitywith technology, elevated their pulses, fleetingly brought neighborhood residents into the interaction, sent themcareening down hills on their bottoms, and elicited reactions from all the senses (even taste). Even though themobility of the “scribe,” or the person wearing the GPS device, was the only mobility that actually mattered forthe inscription, all of the teens walked the planned routes together. Neither group decided to send the scribedown a dangerous, slippery slope alone or walk up a steep hill while the others took a different route. TheseICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1242© ISLSnewly intentioned, collaborative pathways through a familiar landscape became lifelines—whole bodies wereengaged and held intact within and because of a place already teeming with action, memories, and sensation.Compared to the (literal) liveliness of the planning and production phases of GPS drawing, the analysisphase seemed void of life. Once viewable on the overhead projector in the computer lab, the lifelines thatemerged on the ground (sadly, to me) transformed into a litany of errors and inaccuracies for the youth. Leah,someone prone to elaborate, embodied dramatizations, no longer enthusiastically used her body to respond toadult queries and lead conversation; seated at a desk, she obsessed over the errors that the GPS device left in therecord of their movement with a deflated tone. Even though the word “love” was easily visible (and I wouldargue, beautifully done), both Leah and Carissa were hyper critical of their inscription. While the girls wantedto express in the GPS drawing the love they felt for their neighborhood, they felt very little of that toward thedevice itself in the viewing phase. The layering of stories, feeling, memory, embodied responses, collaboration,and group cohesion that existed on the ground was reduced to a critical self and technological appraisal ofperformance, as viewable and measurable by the track data on top of a satellite image of the neighborhood. Inthis way, the vibrancy, at the scale of doing—of bodies intersecting with an important place—all but vanished atthe scale of viewing, where place-making and technological production became another school-ish exercise ofdoing well on an assignment. The disparity of youth engagement between the scale of doing and the scale ofviewing the inscription shows that locative learning has enormous potential for fostering the kinds of ideallearning for which we design—relevant, collaborative, creative, and interest-driven. This disparity alsodemonstrates that the context and norms of a classroom setting (in this case a computer lab) have disciplinedyouth to make even the most novel activities feel like school.Re-Placing Bodies Across Imaginative Geographies In Classroom ActivitiesWith Map Argument PerformancesNathan C. Phillips, University of Illinois at Chicago, phillipn@uic.eduThis paper identifies findings related to bodies-in-place from a design study in classroom settings investigatingthe teaching and learning of the interpretation and production of thematic maps and map argument performanceswith young people. Two iterations of a design experiment investigated how map performance activitiessupported learning in innovative ways, primarily through media production with small groups of young people.Framing and DesignMap performances are practices that involve people in interaction with thematic maps and map argumentperformances. Thematic maps are maps that show the spatial distribution of a concept or phenomenon. Theywere first produced in the mid-1800s in the United States, but we know very little about how they areinterpreted, understood, and read by those who use them (Wiegand, 2003). What I call map argumentperformances are a new category of practices; they are segments of news or other media produced to makearguments or tell stories that include bodies and thematic maps in interaction. The term is meant to cover bodiesthat might be heard (e.g., a voice over accompanying a complex thematic map on television news or on theInternet) and/or seen. New forms of map argument performances have been developed within the last few years.For example, since 2008, political news analysis on the U.S. television news network CNN regularly includesuse of a “magic map,” a multi-touch interactive screen in which CNN analysts change map scale (e.g., fromcounty-level to state-level election results) and data layers (e.g., moving from previous election results in a stateto current polling) while quickly making arguments and predictions regarding upcoming elections.Both thematic maps and map argument performances are increasingly prevalent in media streamsintended for adults and for youth. And while media producers create and distribute complex maps and mapargument performances with increasing regularity, there is no effort, even in K-12 schooling, to support viewersin learning how to read these texts. Advances in technology and easy access to large public data sets have alsomeant that people with little or no technical training using free online computer applications can create complexthematic maps and map argument performances.Map performance practices include interpreting, playing with, remixing, and creating thematic mapsand media presentations with thematic maps and people in interaction. Any interaction of a person and athematic map will involve map performances. But map performances can also be leveraged as activities ininstructional settings to support young people in learning to interpret and produce thematic maps and mapargument performances. This paper reports on a study of the ways in which map performance activitiessupported learning in innovative ways, primarily through media production with small groups of young peoplein classroom settings. Map performance activities for the classroom design experiments conducted during thisstudy were informed by prior research I conducted analyzing map performance activities as texts utilizinganalytic perspectives from muiltimodality within literacy studies (e.g., Kress & van Leeuwen, 2001), historicaland critical cartography (e.g., Crampton & Krygier, 2006), and media literacy (e.g., Buckingham, 2003).ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1243© ISLSMethods and DataI report here on data collected from two iterations of a design experiment (Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer, &Schauble, 2003). While little is known about the teaching and learning of thematic map interpretation generally(Wiegand, 2003), pedagogies of map performance activities have not yet been studied at all. The purpose of thedesign experiment is to investigate teaching and learning with map performance activities in classroom settings.The first iteration was conducted during a Summer Enrichment Course (SEC; all settings and participants aredescribed here with pseudonyms) devoted to spatial thinking. Participating in the class were 12 students, allrising ninth and 10th graders, who lived in university on-campus housing at a large urban university in theUnited States for two weeks. The course included 54 total hours of instructional time across multiple facets ofspatial thinking. The data I collected related to map performance activities comprised approximately 7 hours ofinstructional time. The second iteration of the design experiment took place in three media production classestaught by the same teacher at Local County High School (LCHS), a large suburban public high school in theSoutheastern United States. Each of the media production classes had 25 students and each had one grade levelof students: one class each for 10th, 11th, and 12th graders.In this paper, I focus analysis on student participation in two designed activities from SEC and LCHS:the John King Remix activity and the Make Your Own MAP activity. Students participated in both activities insmall groups (4-5 students). Following are brief task descriptions for each of these activities: In the John KingRemix activity, students recorded a new audio track to plausibly match video footage from an 89-second clip ofCNN political analyst John King conducting analysis at the magic map prior to the 2008 U.S. presidentialelections. In the Make Your Own Map Argument Performance (MAP) activity, students created their own magicmap segment similar to CNN magic map segments described above. In groups, students made an argument infront of a set of maps in the style of John King doing political analysis with the magic map. Students firstcreated maps to be used in the segment and then performed the segment with two “on-camera” personalities:one student in the role of John King and another student in the role of Wolf Blitzer.Data collected were video and audio records of all phases of instruction and student work, interviewswith student work groups, artifacts of student work and final productions, and interviews with the teacher atLCHS.FindingsThis paper makes two claims relative to bodies-in-place: (a) new meanings and new identities are formed amongmaps and group members during the John King Remix and (b) technologies in the Make Your Own MAPprovided resources for embodied performances of identities and global and local spatial stories. Both claimsrelate to “the construction of difference in terms of the interrelatedness of spaces and histories of travel as theyare connected to the moment of the present” (de Haan & Leander, 2011, p. 323). That is, in both designedactivities reported here, participants formed and reformed their own racial, ethnic, and cultural identities and theidentities of others across the physical and social space of the room as well as across the imaginativegeographies (e.g., Gregory, 1995) of local and distant others represented on the maps and map performancesthat were the contested and central texts of the activities.The first claim is that in the John King Remix, resources for textual reinterpretation in the form of aremix made possible embodied improvisational engagement with co-participants such that reading the maptogether and recreating the map together became a way of forming new meanings and making new identitiesboth of the map argument performance and for co-participants. The clearly performative nature of theinteractions of participants, the ways that they jumped into spaces of improvisation and embodiment as theyproduced a new vocal track for a segment of political analysis at CNN’s magic map were invited and supportedby an activity that specifically tasked them with remixing a performance that included John King’s movementsand vocal performance as resources. In these interactions, the collection of map symbols, traces, gestures, gaze,body movement, vocal registers, popular culture references and practices, thematic data layers, mediapersonalities’ words, paper script, and embodied improvisational play positioned bodies, ideologies, and culturalpractices against one another to form new meanings or make new identities—new bodies in new places.The second claim is that in the Make Your Own MAP activity, technologies provided resources forparticipants to spatialize and other co-present bodies. Unlike other activity systems—even those with thematicmaps such as the John King Remix—the Make Your Own MAP uniquely made possible the performance oflocalized geo-bodies (adapted from Winichakul, 1994)—spatialized, othered bodies of co-present participants.For example, “Mexican-born residents of Texas” was a demographic layer added to a map being created by onegroup via mapmaking software. As this group’s members worked, this data layer on the computer was seen asextending out to Vincent, a student who was sitting nearby. For group members, his identity as a MexicanAmerican was foregrounded and they began to talk with him about his family heritage. This demographiclayering made possible the spatializing and othering of nearby bodies like Vincent’s, recruiting performedidentities that were used in spatial stories of difference and sameness. The unique aspect of the geo-bodyperformance via the technologies designed in the Make Your Own MAP is the way in which data layers came toICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1244© ISLSadopt, for learners, abstract and concrete resources of sameness and difference nearby for the performing ofglobal and local spatial stories and identity constructions by youth—new bodies in old places.Endnotes(1) All participant, place, and organization names are either pseudonyms or intentionally vague.ReferencesBang, M. (2009). Understanding students’ epistemologies: Examining practice and meaning in communitycontexts. Doctoral dissertation, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.Bang, M., Curley, L., Kessel, A., Marin, A., Suzukovich III, E. S., & Strack, G. (2014). Muskrat theories,tobacco in the streets, and living Chicago as Indigenous land. Environmental Education Research,20(1), 37-55.Buckingham, D. (2003). Media education: Literacy, learning and contemporary culture. Cambridge, UK:Polity.Cajete, G. (2000). Native science: Natural laws of interdependence. Santa Fe, NM: Clear Light Publishers.Calabrese Barton, A., & Tan, E. (2009). Funds of knowledge and discourses and hybrid space. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 46(1), 50-73.Cobb, P., Confrey, J., Disessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educationalresearch. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.Crampton, J. W., & Krygier, J. (2006). An introduction to critical cartography. ACME: An International EJournal for Critical Geographies, 4(1), 11-33.de Haan, M., & Leander, K. M. (2011). The construction of ethnic boundaries in classroom interaction throughsocial space. Culture and Psychology, 17(3), 319-338.Eberbach, C., & Crowley, K. (2009). From everyday to scientific observation: How children learn to observe thebiologist’s world. Review of Educational Research, 79(1), 39-68.Emdin, C. (2010). Affiliation and alienation: Hip‐hop, rap, and urban science education. Journal of CurriculumStudies, 42(1), 1-25.Evans, J., Davies, B., & Rich, E. (2009). The body made flesh: Embodied learning and the corporealdevice. British Journal of Sociology of Education, 30(4), 391-406.Geertz, C. (1983). Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology. New York: Basic Books.Gonzalez, N., Andrade, R., Civil, M., & Moll, L. (2001). Bridging funds of distributed knowledge: Creatingzones of practices in mathematics. Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk, 6, 115-132.Goodwin, C. (2003). Pointing as situated practice. In S. Kita (Ed.), Pointing: Where language, culture andcognition meet (pp. 217–241). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Goodwin, C. (2007). Environmentally coupled gestures. In S. Duncan, J. Cassell, & E. Levy (Eds.), Gesture andthe dynamic dimensions of language (pp. 195-212). Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.Grasseni, C. (2009). Developing skill, developing vision: Practices of locality at the foot of the Alps. New York,NY: Berghahn Books.Greeno, J. G. (1998). The situativity of knowing, learning, and research. American Psychologist, 53(1), 5.Gregory, D. (1995). Imaginative geographies. Progress in Human Geography, 19(4), 447-485.Gutiérrez, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading ResearchQuarterly, 43(2), 148-164.Gutiérrez, K. D., Baquedano, P., & Tejeda, C. (1999). Rethinking diversity: Hybridity and hybrid languagepractices in the third space. Mind, Culture and Activity, 6(4), 286-303.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice.Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19.Hall, R., & Nemirovsky, R. (2012). Introduction to the special issue: Modalities of body engagement inmathematical activity and learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(2), 207-215.Halverson, E. R., Bass, M., & Woods, D. (2012). The process of creation: A novel methodology for analyzingmultimodal data. The Qualitative Report, 17(2), 430-456.Ingold, T. (2007). Earth, sky, wind, and weather. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 13(s1), S19S38.Ingold, T. & Vergunst, J. L. (Eds.). (2008). Ways of walking: Ethnography and practice on foot. Burlington,VT: Ashgate Publishing Limited.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Kawagley, A. O. (2006). A Yupiaq worldview: A pathway to ecology and spirit (2nd ed.). Long Grove, IL:Waveland Press.Kimmerer, R. W. (2012). Searching for synergy: Integrating traditional and scientific ecological knowledge inenvironmental science education. Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences, 2(4), 317-323.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1245© ISLSKress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (2001). Multimodal discourse: The modes and media of contemporarycommunication. London, UK: Oxford University Press.Latour, B. (1990). Drawing things together. In M. Lynch & S. Woolgar (Eds.), Representation in scientificpractice (pp. 19-68). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Leander, K. M., Phillips, N. C., & Taylor, K. H. (2010). The changing social spaces of learning: Mapping newmobilities. Review of Research in Education, 34(1), 329.Lefebvre, H. (1991). The production of space. Cambridge, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.Lehrer, R., & Lesh, R. (2003). Mathematical learning. In W. M. Reynolds & G. E. Miller (Eds.), Handbook ofpsychology (Vol. 7, pp. 357-391). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.Lim, M., & Barton, A.C. (2006). Science learning and a sense of place in a urban middle school. CulturalStudies of Science Education, 1(1), 107-142.Ma, J. Y. (2013, April). Designing disruptions to classroom mathematics: Multi-Party, embodied and materialresources for participating in walking scale geometry. Paper presented at Annual Meeting of theAmerican Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.Marin, A. M. (2013). Learning to attend and observe: Parent-child meaning making in the natural world.(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.Moll, L. C., Amanti, C., Neff, D., Gonzalez, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitativeapproach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory Into Practice, 31(2), 132-141.Myers, M. (2011). Walking again lively: Towards an ambulant and conversive methodology of performance andresearch. Mobilities, 6(2), 183-201.Nespor, J. (2008). Education and place: A review essay. Educational Theory, 58(4), 475-489.Norris, S. (2004). Analyzing multimodal interaction: A methodological framework. New York, NY: Routledge.Peluso, N. L. (2005). Whose woods are these? Counter-mapping forest territories in Kalimantan, Indonesia. InM. Edelman & A Haugerud (Eds.), The anthropology of development and globalization: Fromclassical political economy to contemporary neoliberalism (pp. 273-281). Malden, MA: Blackwell.Philips, S. U. (1983). The Invisible Culture: Communication in Classroom and Community on the Warm SpringsReservation. New York, NY: Longman, Inc.Pomerantz, A., & Fehr, B. J. (1997). Conversation analysis: An approach to the study of social action as sensemaking practices. Discourse as Social Interaction, 2, 64-91.Rieser, M. (Ed.). (2011). The mobile audience: Media art and mobile technologies. Amsterdam, TheNetherlands: Rodopi.Salierno, C., Edelson, D., & Sherin, B. (2005). The development of student conceptions of the earth-sunrelationship in an inquiry-based curriculum. Journal of Geoscience Education, 53(4), 422-431.Smith, B.K., & Reiser, B. J. (2005). Explaining behavior through observational investigation and theoryarticulation. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(3), 315–360.Stevens, R. (2010). Learning as a members’ phenomenon: Toward an ethnographically adequate science oflearning. Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, 109(1), 82-97.Stevens, R. (2012). The missing bodies of mathematical thinking and learning have been found. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 21(2), 337-346.Stevens, R., & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience. In M. Lampert & M.L. Blunk (Eds.), Talking mathematics in school: Studies of teaching and learning (pp. 107-149).Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Taylor, K. H. (2013). Counter-mapping the neighborhood: A social design experiment for spatial justice.(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.Taylor, K. H., & Hall, R. (2013). Counter-mapping the neighborhood on bicycles: Mobilizing youth toreimagine the city. Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 18(1-2), 65-93.Waitt, G., Gill, N., & Head, L. (2009). Walking practice and suburban nature-talk. Social & CulturalGeography, 10(1), 41-60.Wiegand, P. (2003). School students’ understanding of choropleth maps: Evidence from collaborativemapmaking using GIS. Journal of Geography, 102, 234-242.Windschitl, M., Dvornich, K., Ryken, A. E., Tudor, M., & Koehler, G. (2007). A comparative model of fieldinvestigations: Aligning school science inquiry with the practices of contemporary science. SchoolScience and Mathematics, 107(1), 382-390.Winichakul, T. (1994). Siam mapped: A history of the geo-body of a nation. Honolulu, HI: University ofHawai’i Press.Woods, D. & Fassnacht, C. (2012). Transana v2.51. http://www.transana.org. Madison, WI: The Board ofRegents of the University of Wisconsin System.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1246© ISLS