Becoming More Mathematical: New Directions for Describing andDesigning for Positive Dispositions Toward MathematicsChairMelissa Kumar, University of California, Los Angeles, Moore Hall Box 951521, 405 Hilgard Avenue, LosAngeles, CA. 90095-1521, mjdkumar@ucla.eduParticipantsTesha Sengupta-Irving, University of California, Irvine. Education 3000B, Irvine, CA. 92697-5500,t.s.irving@uci.eduNoel Enyedy, University of California, Los Angeles. 2323 Moore Hall, 405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA.90095-1521, enyedy@gseis.ucla.eduMelissa Gresalfi, Vanderbilt University, 230 Appleton Place, Nashville, TN. 30206,melissa.gresalfi@vanderbilt.eduJennifer Langer-Osuna, University of Miami. 5202 University Drive, Coral Gables, FL. 33124,jlangerosuna@miami.eduDiscussantsAnna Sfard, University of Haifa. University of Haifa, Haifa, 31905, Israel. annasfar@math.msu.eduKris Gutierrez, University of Boulder, Colorado. Education Building, 249 UCB, Boulder, CO. 80309-0249,kris.gutierrez@colorado.edu	  Abstract: This symposium brings together researchers interested in studying mathematicalproficiency through a focus on students’ dispositions toward mathematics - their ideas andaffect about mathematics and their patterns of engagement with it. While dispositions areuseful for connecting important aspects of students’ proficiency, they are also broad andchallenging to operationalize in empirical contexts. This symposium aims to promote dialoguearound the meaning of dispositions as an analytic construct and to explore their relationship toother constructs relevant to helping learners become mathematical. We also aim todemonstrate that different methodological orientations allow us to see different aspects ofwhat we all agree to call “dispositions”. We present empirical work which address two fociwithin research on dispositions –operationalizing in ways that enable documentation in aclassroom context, and designing learning environments which foster positive dispositions tomathematics - in addition to a piece that bridges work between the two.IntroductionProficiency in mathematics is a longstanding but elusive goal for education. Many students fail to reachproficiency in math, and indeed do not move past introductory algebra. This lack of mathematical proficiencyhas consequences for school and career choices. Researchers now agree that becoming proficient in mathdepends at least partially on how students’ come to see themselves as math learners, what they think it means todo math, and their patterns of engagement with mathematics. In recent years, the construct of dispositions hasemerged to refer to this collection of ideas and attitudes about mathematics and math learning. The idea ofdispositions places social, affective and motivational factors as central to what students learn and who theycome to be as mathematical thinkers (Gresalfi, 2009). Research on dispositions explores the interconnectionsamong students’ patterns of thought, affect and action and the classroom environment through a focus onmoment-to-moment interactions and longer-term patterns over time (Gresalfi, 2009; Gresalfi & Cobb, 2006).While the construct of a disposition is useful to connect students’ ideas and affect about mathematics with theirpatterns of engagement, it is also broad and challenging to operationalize in empirical contexts. Also, severalrelated lines of research address similar issues with different terms, such as identity (Langer-Osuna, accepted;Nasir 2002; Sfard & Prusak 2005), goals (Nasir, 2002), affect (Sengupta-Irving & Enyedy, under review), andsocial and intellectual authority (Langer-Osuna & Iuhasz, 2013; Yackel & Cobb, 1996).This symposium brings together researchers studying mathematical dispositions, with the goal ofpromoting a dialogue about the meaning of dispositions as an analytic construct, and to explore its relationshipto other related constructs. There are two related foci regarding students’ dispositions, each requiring differenttypes of research. The first focus is: How do we operationalize dispositions in ways that enable theirdocumentation in a classroom context? The second focus is: How can we design learning environments to fosterpositive dispositions to mathematics?” Our symposium addresses both of these issues through presentations thataddress each foci, accompanied by commentary from two discussants who are well-versed in issues ofpromoting productive engagement with content.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1293© ISLSBackgroundMathematical proficiency, as defined in the new Common Core State Standards for Mathematics (CCSSM),includes being able to innovate, solve problems and engage in mathematical discussions (CCSS, 2011). Yetinternational and national assessments indicate that many students are not reaching advanced levels of problemsolving (Gonzales et al., 2008; U.S. Department of Education, 2011). In addition, there is growing concern thatmany students are developing a passive, disengaged relationship with mathematics (Boaler & Greeno, 2000)which stands in stark contrast to the confident, flexible use of mathematics required for advanced mathematicalwork (Boaler, 2008). It is becoming clear that focusing instruction on students’ learning of skills and knowledgealone greatly underdetermines their subsequent success in mathematics (Franke, Kazemi, & Battey, 2007).There are important aspects of the mathematical thinkers that students are becoming, including their attitudestoward mathematics, their ideas about what it means to practice, and their patterns of engagement withmathematics, which are increasingly recognized as important aspects of their development and an emergingfocus for research.Building on a socio-cultural perspective to learning, which focuses on the role of social interaction andcultural history in individual learning (e.g. Vygostky, 1978), we argue that becoming a strong mathematicalthinker is as much a process of acquiring “habits and dispositions of interpretation and sense-making” (Resnick,1988, p. 58) as about learning particular skills and knowledge. From a sociocultural perspective, studentsdevelop understanding of what it means to do mathematics through their interactions with others, and theseinteractions take place within and are shaped by the practices of a specific community over time. As students areexposed to and take up specific ideas about the value and purpose of math and what it means to practicemathematics, they develop an orientation to mathematics themselves. The development of this orientation,situated within the context of the classroom, is the primary focus of this symposium.This symposium aims to bring together several lines of related research that address aspects ofdispositions. One of the goals of the symposium is to provide an opportunity for cross-pollination of ideas bothbetween presenters and attendees. A second goal of the symposium is to demonstrate that differentmethodological orientations allow us to see different aspects of what we all agree to call “dispositions”. Theconstruct of dispositions is useful in focusing on important factors of students’ developing mathematicalthinking. At the same time, understanding, describing and designing for the development of productivedispositions will require a joint coordinated effort, which requires dialogue and understanding across relatedlines of work.PresentationsWe begin with work that addresses the first focus of operationalizing dispositions in the classroom. Twopresentations focus on empirical descriptions of students’ relationships with mathematics and relate this to theirengagement in a classroom environment. Tesha Sengupta-Irving and Noel Enyedy will present findings from ateaching experiment with 5th grade students in which they examine contrasts in affect between groups who hadthe guided vs. self-directed pedagogical approach, and relate contrasts in affect to students’ patterns ofdisciplinary engagement. Melissa Kumar will present findings from a year-long study with 3rd grade students inwhich she relates students’ reported adoption of four positive goals for learning with their patterns ofengagement in problem solving as a window on their dispositions, looking specifically at how students withdifferent goal profiles varied in patterns of engagement. We then turn to the second foci, designing to supportdevelopment of positive dispositions. Melissa Gresalfi will describe a design experiment with 8th grade students.She examines how the different design of tasks, one which asked students to practice using a formula and onewhich asked them to invent a formula to describe density, supported different forms of engagement, specificallydecision making during problem solving. The final presentation bridges the two research foci, beginning withdescriptions of students’ dispositions and moving to more recent work describing a design experiment based onfindings about students’ dispositions. Jennifer Langer-Osuna will present results of an analysis of how socialand intellectual forms of authority related to different types of engagement in problem solving. She then reportson how a design experiment in which each student was offered opportunities to take on the group leader rolesupported more equitable opportunities for students to construct forms of authority.Symposium StructureThe session will take the form of a traditional 90-minute paper session, with brief remarks by the chair followedby twelve minutes per paper presentation. We have included two discussants with different perspectives in ourproposal because one of our goals is specifically to facilitate dialogue around the overlap and contrast ofdifferent approaches to study what we agree to call dispositions, and we believe that this decision will facilitatea richer session to this end. Each discussant will have 15 minutes to respond to the papers, after which we willopen the space to a discussion with the audience. Our first discussant, Anna Sfard, is a leading authority onmathematics discourse in thinking and learning. She has examined the relationship between students’ identitiesand their engagement with mathematics, illuminating the way that group narratives shape the dispositions ofICLS 2014 Proceedings1294© ISLSindividual students (Sfard & Prusak, 2005). Our second discussant, Kris Gutierrez, is a leading authority onliteracy and learning. Her description of the 3rd space, where the narratives and identities of the teacher andstudents can coexist, has facilitated the examination of how students’ actively take up or repurpose availableideas, values and discourses within the classroom (Gutierrez, Rymes & Larson, 1995). Each discussant willspeak to common themes in the papers, offer commentary on areas for additional research and bring upquestions to be pursued in the general discussion.Smiles Don’t count: A Case Study Unifying Disciplinary Engagement withDispositions in the Study of Mathematical LearningTesha Sengupta-Irving, University of California, Irvine and Noel Enyedy, University of California, Los AngelesWhether seen as a triumph of Western traditions separating and valuing cognition over emotion, or the logicalconsequence of increasingly technocratic systems of accountability in public schools, the national discourse ofachievement has grossly obscured the importance of advancing student thinking and cultivating positivefeelings toward a discipline (Vadeboncoeur & Collie, 2013). In mathematics, we risk a generation of learnerswho score among the highest averages in achievement but who are also among the most negative in theirattitudes toward the discipline, as seen of other countries in international and comparative studies (e.g., Beaton,Mullis, Martin, Gonzalez, Kelly, & Smith, 1996; Mullis, Martin, Gonzalez, Gregory, Garden, O’Connor,Chrostowski, & Smith, 2000). This inverted relationship – achievement without enjoyment – is both learnedand problematic: innovation is cultivated through rewarding curiosity and effort, not disinterest and detachment.This risk is underappreciated in the national discourse on mathematics education – whether looking to theNational Research Council’s five strands of mathematical proficiency (Kilpatrick, Swafford & Findell, 2001), ormath practice standards of the Common Core Standards (CCSI, 2011), evaluating if students like learning israrely discussed. Recent studies on the notion of dispositions in mathematics education (e.g., Boaler & Greeno,2000; Gresalfi, 2009), however, demonstrate the potential for research in the learning sciences to anticipate thisrisk, and identify means of mitigating it.This paper draws on a 10 day teaching experiment comparing two pedagogical approaches (one guidedand one self-directed) used to teach data and statistics to 5th grade students (n=52). This study took place in asocioeconomically diverse elementary school in a large urban center in California. The progressive schoolencouraged teachers to adopt research-based teaching practices. The teacher, an African-American woman, hadfifteen years of teaching experience in mathematics.Elsewhere, we have described learning results for the teacher (Sengupta-Irving, Redman, & Enyedy,2013) and students (Sengupta-Irving & Enyedy, under review). Of relevance, we found that students in bothtreatments (n=27, n=25) improved in their proficiency in data and statistics, but reported significantly differentorientations in how much they liked learning the lessons. In this paper we take up the methodological questionthat emerged as a consequence of this result: How can we use video-based interactional analyses to characterizewhy students were “liking” what (or how) they were learning? We see this methodological question as part ofthe larger project of promoting research that uniformly attends to disciplinary engagement and cultivatingpositive affect among mathematics learners.In the study, we used video-based interactional analyses to explore why students had different affectiveresponses to treatments in the experiment (with no corresponding difference in performance). In the process, wemade several important methodological and practical decisions in order to operationalize “liking” that couldthen be characterized and quantified comparatively. What began with a tongue-in-cheek discussion of ‘Can’twe just count the smiles?’ evolved into a complex constellation of cultural, disciplinary, and pragmaticdecisions about how we characterize students “liking” (or not) what they are learning. Our paper discusses theevolution and results of these discussions, which directly relate to a guiding focus of the symposium: How dowe operationalize dispositions for individuals in a classroom context? In our work, we narrow the theoreticalscope of dispositions to focus specifically on how we characterized, contextualized, and quantified students’engagement in the mathematical tasks for each treatment. Moreover, we speak to patterns of engagement withinthe context of a 10-day pedagogical experiment, and not patterns over time and across learning contexts. Wedrew significantly from Engle and Conant’s (2002) principles of productive disciplinary engagement, anddeveloped our own measures of student autonomy (i.e., continuous activity without adult intervention) and ontask behaviors, which were grounded in the design of the experiment. What results is a depiction of learningthat inextricably links affect and patterns in disciplinary engagement to the classroom context and organizationof learning therein.This case study offers a model of how research can promote a perspective on learning that drawstogether students’ disciplinary engagement and affect toward the discipline. We discuss the design of learningenvironments and tasks that support this perspective, which speak both to research and teaching. Finally, weraise several questions and potential directions for future studies in the learning sciences that can help mitigateICLS 2014 Proceedings1295© ISLSthe widening gap between promoting disciplinary proficiency and developing disciplinary dispositions in ournational discourse.Elementary Students’ Dispositions, Goals and Engagement in Problem Solvingin MathematicsMelissa Kumar, University of California, Los AngelesMathematical proficiency by today’s standards includes being able to innovate, problem solve, and collaboratearound challenging problems. One important question is, What drives students’ engagement in these activities?In this paper I describe work from my dissertation in which I build on the construct of dispositions to explorethe goals that motivate student’s engagement in math class, such as wanting to understand concepts or solvechallenging problems. Studying students’ goals facilities more specific insight into the motives that studentshave for participating in mathematics, and how their relationships with mathematics emerge from a specificcultural practice. I focus on 3rd grade students because research points to an important shift (often negative) inperceptions of self-efficacy and value of mathematics at this age (Eccles, Wigfield, Harold, & Blumenfeld,1993). I examine students’ adoption of four positive goals for mathematics and relate this to engagement inproblem solving as a window on their dispositions to mathematics. The study was guided by the questions, (1)What goals are appropriated by the students? And to what degree do these goals align with the values of thereform-oriented mathematics education community? And (2) How do different profiles of goals relate tostudents’ engagement in problem solving?Goals have been used as a way to understand the link between cultural activity and individual cognitionbeginning with early Soviet psychology (Wertsch, 1981). More recent work has examined goals as a mediatinglink between society, culture and thinking (Saxe, 1999, as cited in Nasir, 2002) and to understand the concurrentdevelopment of students’ identities, mathematical goals, and learning in informal mathematics practices (Nasir,2002). Nasir (2002) argues that goals are critical to understanding learning because humans act specifically toaccomplish goals in social activity, and these goals “help structure the nature of the thought and problemsolving of individuals” (p. 216). The current study builds on the view that goals emerge through participation incultural practice, and links goals both to the larger construct of disposition as well as the moment-to-momentproblem solving activity of individuals. I contend that studying students’ goals can shed light on aspects of theirdispositions because the more “enduring” aspects of dispositions—the “ideas about” and “perspectives on”mathematics—must be transformed into engagement in the moment. Goals are a likely construct to mediate thistransformation from ideas and perspectives to action and thus may illuminate what students think is valued inmathematics in their classroom, how they appropriate these available goals, and how aspects of the context anddispositions combine to direct student effort in problem solving. Looking at students’ goals is therefore a usefullens in which to examine students’ dispositions in a mathematics classroom.While there are multiple goals that drive students’ engagement in math class, I focus on four goals thatI derived from the math education and educational psychology goal-orientation literature, the CCSSPM, andfrom descriptions of the practices and values of mathematicians. The goals are understanding the mathematics ata conceptual level (CCSI, 2011; Boaler, 2008), solving challenging problems (CCSI, 2011; Lampert, 1990),exercising agency and creativity in solving math problems (CCSI, 2010; Boaler, 2002), and being viewed as avaluable contributor in classroom discussions (CCSI, 2010; Boaler, 2002; Boaler & Greeno, 2000). These goalsare meant to represent the motivation that students would have as a part of a positive disposition to mathematicsin alignment with the reform-oriented mathematics education community. The position of this paper is that allof these goals are important to be successful in mathematics practice. These goals form the framework of myexploration of students’ reported goals and observation of their patterns of engagement in problem solving.I will report on data that was collected in a 3rd grade classroom (n=27) over the 2013-2014 school year.I selected the site because of its progressive, constructivist teaching philosophy and because it follows theprinciples of Cognitively Guided Instruction (Carpenter, Fennema, & Franke, 1996; Carpenter, Fennema,Franke, Levi, & Empson, 1999) a curriculum that attends both to fostering problem solving and the dispositionsof students to be problem solvers. The teacher embraces these philosophies and draws on her CGI training in herinstruction. Data sources include a video record and field notes of class activities, with a focus on six case studystudents during problem solving, student surveys and interviews, and student work. Video was collectedthroughout the year, and surveys and interviews were administered three times during the year. I focused oncollaborative problem solving because it is central to the practice of mathematics and because it affords multipleopportunities to see students pursue goals in specific conditions. The survey focused on students’ adoption ofthe four positive goals and two goals of relative performance using a Likert-type scale from “not at all true” to“very true”. The interview focused on clarifying and expanding survey responses and asking students about theirproblem solving using video clips from class.To characterize students’ engagement in problem solving, I identified problem solving sessions thatwere challenging, open-ended, and had multiple possible solutions from the first and second half of the year forICLS 2014 Proceedings1296© ISLSthree case study students. I identified decision points and created a “roadmap” for each problem, with particularattention to students’ entry into the problem. Decision points included: new information from other groups,peers or the teacher, roadblocks in problem solving that prompted the student to change or modify the strategy,revisions to the group work plan, and moments of insight. I then characterized students’ engagement at eachdecision points, including the degree to which they showed perseverance, creativity and flexibility in theirthinking.Preliminary analysis of survey results suggests that students in the class did indeed have different goalprofiles. To create students’ goal profiles, I first created composite scores for each goal, and then I categorizedstudents by how many of the goals had a high, medium or low score. Nine students were categorized as “high”because they had high scores for 3 or 4 goals. Three students were categorized as “medium high” because 2goals had high scores and the other two were medium or low. Seven students were “medium” because theyeither had medium scores for all goals, or a mix of high and low scores, and seven students were “low” becausethey had mostly low scores for each goal. These preliminary results will be compared with students’ surveyresults in the middle and end of the year. In addition, I will present preliminary analysis of the connectionbetween students’ goals and pattern of engagement in problem solving in the classroom based on the videoanalysis described above.This presentation describes empirical connections between the goals that students have formathematics, specifically the four goals considered positive for mathematical proficiency, and their engagementin problem solving as a window on their dispositions to mathematics. In doing so, I address the first goal of thissymposium, which is to address methodological issues of operationalizing dispositions in a classroomenvironment. In addition, this paper presents a unique approach to focusing on students’ motivation in mathclass by proposing four goals synthesized from the reform-oriented mathematics education community, andconnecting student’s adoption of the positive goals to their engagement in problem solving. This is significantfor those who wish to understand what motivates student engagement in math class in order to designinstruction that promotes understanding and supports positive dispositions to mathematics. Clarifying whatpositive goals for mathematics look like, how they translate into problem solving actions, and how they relate toother aspects of the classroom ecosystem is valuable to educators, researchers and parents, as well as students intheir later years.Framing Engagement Through The Design of TasksMelissa Gresalfi, Vanderbilt UniversityStudent mathematics learning and achievement is a topic of significant study and concern in both the UnitedStates and around the world. Although a range of issues is often discussed, one that yields some of the greatestdebate regards what and how students should know and understand mathematics. The past twenty years havebrought technological innovations that have changed the world as we know it. Continuous access to onlineinformation has supported a transformation of the relationship between individuals and knowledge; withinformation so readily accessible, people have been repositioned to move beyond acquisition of facts to considerwhen to access those facts, interrogate them, and integrate them into activity. For these reasons, knowledgeableparticipation in mathematics must involve more than proficiency using key procedures. Instead, knowledgeableparticipation must involve engaging in acts of decision-making, determining which procedures enable theresolution of defensible solutions, how, and why. Lampert (1990) has defined such mathematical activity asbeing “courageous and modest in making and evaluating [one’s] own assertions and those of others, and inarguing about what is mathematically true” (p. 33).It is clear that supporting students to engage with mathematics in this way is not simply a matter ofteaching them more mathematics. Instead, it is crucial that students have opportunities to learn new content inways that are consistent with how we actually want them to use that information (Boaler, 2000; Bransford &Schwartz, 1999; Greeno, 1991; Lave, 1997). When creating new curricula, it is therefore crucial that designersattend not just to the content goals of the unit (the mathematical ideas you want students to learn andunderstand), but also dispositional goals of the unit (how you hope students will engage). This does not meanthat becoming a successful engineer, for example, requires learning all mathematics at the elbow of a practicingengineer. Instead, this suggests that the kinds of practices that a practitioner is expected to leverage (such asexperimenting, reviewing, collaborating, justifying, testing, and inventing) are the practices engaged in duringthe learning experiences.In my work I have found it productive to consider how students are engaging information as an explicitframework to both support design and to analyze student learning (Gresalfi & Barab, 2011; Gresalfi & Barnes,2012; Gresalfi, Barnes, & Cross, 2013). Specifically, we have focused on four forms of engagement withmathematics: Procedural, Conceptual, Consequential, and Critical. Although procedural and conceptualengagement are familiar ideas, consequential and critical engagement are not. Consequential engagementinvolves recognizing the usefulness and impact of disciplinary tools; being able to connect particular solutionsICLS 2014 Proceedings1297© ISLSto particular outcomes. Finally, Critical engagement involves choosing particular tools and interrogating theirimpact in attaining desired ends. Related to consequential engagement, critical engagement captures thedecision making involved in problem-solving, and at some level involves critiquing the method itself in relationto the particular context in which it’s being used.In this presentation, I draw on this framework to consider how the design of particular tasks framestudents’ engagement with problems related to understanding ratio and density, drawing on data from a studyreported by Schwartz, Chase, Oppezzo, & Chin (2011). This study included students in four different 8th gradeclasses taught by the same teacher. Students in two of the classes completed a series of tasks that allowed themto practice using the formula for density across three different kinds of worksheets (the “tell” condition).Students in the other two classes used the same worksheets, but were instead asked to “invent an index” thatcould describe the density of different items (the word density in this case was not used (the “invent” condition).In analyzing these data, Schwartz et al. (2011) found that while students in both groups demonstratedproficiency at using the given formulas on word problems (a “near transfer” task); students in the “invent”condition were able to transfer the underlying idea of ratio to new content (a “far transfer” task). The analysisreported here focuses on videotapes of groups of students in both conditions solving these tasks over three days.Student interaction was coded using both apriori and emergent schemes; drawing on coding fromprevious work (Gresalfi, Barnes, & Cross, 2012; Gresalfi & Barnes, 2012), we classified students’ engagementwith the task as either procedural, conceptual, consequential, or critical. We then examined instances of studenttalk in relation to these codes in order to better understand what about the task was contributing to theirengagement. Our analysis specifically considers the affordances of the tasks for supporting different forms ofengagement, and considers whether and how those different affordances are realized through the group’sinteractions. In so doing, we consider both how students’ engagement changes over the course of three days,and how that engagement is framed by the tasks they are working on.Supporting the Construction of Student Authority During CollaborativeMathematics Problem SolvingJennifer Langer-Osuna, University of FloridaThe proposed presentation will focus on how students construct relations of authority in interaction, and theways in which differential authority relations serve to marginalize or privilege particular students’ engagementin collaborative mathematical problem solving. In particular, I will present preliminary results of a designexperiment meant to structure how students become positioned with forms of authority in an effort to supportequitable and productive engagement in collaborative mathematics activity.Students positioned with intellectual authority participate more frequently in small groups, are moreable to gain access to and hold the conversational floor and decide what is correct, tend to be seen ascontributing more meritorious ideas, and become more influential than students perceived as having lessintellectual authority (Engle, Langer-Osuna, McKinney de Royston, in press; Inglis & Mejia-Ramos, 2009).And though forms of student authority other than intellectual authority are rarely studied in mathematicseducation research, emerging research is beginning to show that social forms of authority—in particular beingpositioned with the right to issue directives to peers—is fundamentally related to both student engagementlevels and the development of intellectual authority itself (Langer-Osuna, 2011; Langer-Osuna & Iuhasz, 2013).Designing for Equitable Distribution of Intellectual and Directive AuthorityThe proposed presentation builds on the results of a previous analysis focused on how social and intellectualforms of authority relate to the construction of particular mathematical solution paths (Langer-Osuna & Iuhasz,2013). Results highlighted how particular interactions supported the construction of forms of authority – boththe social authority to issue directives to peers and the intellectual authority of being positioned as a crediblesource of information – and its role in determining whose ideas were taken up as part of the solution path. Inthis presentation, I briefly present and then build on these results to frame a new design experiment meant tosupport more equitable opportunities for students to construct forms of authority, such that multiple studentideas are attended to, debated and considered as potential contributions to a problem’s solution path.The study context is a weekly afterschool math program for third through fifth graders at two publicelementary schools with diverse student populations. Students worked individually and in groups of three.Below I detail how we framed the learning context for interactions around both intellectual and directiveauthority.Preliminary video-based interaction analysis will be presented, focused on how students positionedthemselves and one another with forms of intellectual and directive authority, how those positionings weretaken up by peers, and their effect on patterns of engagement and whose ideas were taken up as part of thesolution path. Results will be illustrated through vignettes of how students constructed forms of authority andICLS 2014 Proceedings1298© ISLSthe ways in which these positions affected both student engagement and the construction of particularmathematics solution paths based on what (and whose) ideas became influential.Fostering and Examining Positions of Intellectual AuthorityGroup participation structures such as distributed expertise (Brown et al. 1993) can support the development ofstudent intellectual authority. In classrooms that utilize distributed expertise, students are treated as researcherswho gather, analyze, and share information about a particular topic, gradually developing expertise in thatspecialty area, increasing the likelihood that all students become positioned with intellectual authority.Here, a key element of the mathematical activity is an explicit focus on representations as vehicles formathematical thinking and communication. The design experiment created opportunities for each member ofeach student group to develop expertise in a particular representation to then bring back to the collaborativeproblem-solving process.Fostering and Examining Positions of Social AuthorityDespite the varied forms of authority associated with particular kinds of participation structures (such as grouproles), there is no research focused on examining the conditions under which leader roles, which enable theleader to issue directives to peers, support or discourage equitable group work. The role of group leader hasoften been included in research on group work in ways that assume its benefit. Though such participationstructures may afford students positions of authority, the role of leader is not only up to the student assigned thatrole but also depends on how the other group members take up the leader’s directives rather than reject ormodify such positions (Langer-Osuna, 2011). Here, each student was offered opportunities to take on leaderrelated roles that contributed to the management of the problem-solving process of their group.ReferencesBeaton, A. E., Mullis, I. V., Martin, M. O., Gonzales, E. J., Kelly, D. L., & Smith, T. A. (1996). Mathematicsachievement in the middle school years: IEA's Third International Mathematics and Science Study(TIMSS). Chestnut Hill, MA: TIMSS International StudyCenter, Boston College.Boaler, J. (2000). Exploring situated insights into research and learning. Journal for Research in MathematicsEducation, 31(1), 113-119.Boaler, J. (2002). The development of disciplinary relationships, knowledge, practice and identity in themathematics classroom. . For the Learning of Mathematics, 22(1), 29-63.Boaler, Jo. (2008). What's math got to do with it : Helping children learn to love their least favorite subject and why it's important for America. London, England: Viking.Boaler, Jo, & Greeno, James G. (2000). Identity, agency, and knowing in mathematics worlds. In J. Boaler(Ed.), Multiple perspectives on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 171-200). Westport, CT:Ablex.Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking transfer: a simple proposal with multiple implications.Review of Research in Education, 24, 61-100.Brown, A. L., Ash, D., Rutherford, M., Nakagawa, K., Gordon, A. & Campione, J. C. (1993). Distributedexpertise in the classroom. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed cognitions (pp. 188-228). New York:Cambridge University Press.Carpenter, T., Fennema, Elizabeth, & Franke, Megan L. (1996). Cognitively guided instruction: A knowledgebase for reform in primary mathematics instruction. The Elementary School Journal, 97(1), 3-20.Carpenter, T., Fennema, Elizabeth, Franke, Megan L., Levi, Linda, & Empson, Susan B. (1999). Children'sMathematics: Cognitively Guided Instruction. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.Common Core Standards Initiative. (2011). Standards for Mathematical Practice. In Common Core StateStandards Initiative: Preparing America's Students for College and Career. Retrieved December 1,2012, from http://www.corestandards.org/thestandards/mathematics/ introduction/standards-formathematical-practice/Eccles, J. S., Wigfield, A., Harold, R. D., & Blumenfeld, Phyllis. (1993). Age and gender differences inchildren's self- and task perceptions during elementary school. Child Development, 64(830-847).Education, U.S. Department of. (2011). The nation’s report card: Mathematics 2011. Washington, D.C.:Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20(4), 399-483.Engle R.A., Langer-Osuna, J. & McKinney de Royston, M. (In Press). Towards an interactional model ofInfluence in persuasive discussions: Negotiating quality, authority, and access within student-ledarguments. Journal of the Learning Sciences.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1299© ISLSFranke, Megan L., Kazemi, Elham, & Battey, Daniel. (2007). Understanding teaching and classroom practice inmathematics. In J. F. K. Lester (Ed.), Second handbook of research on mathematics teaching andlearning (Vol. 2nd, pp. 225-256). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.Gonzales, P., Williams, T., Jocelyn, L., Roey, S., Kastberg, D., & Brenwald, S. (2008). Highlights from TIMSS2007: Mathematics and science achievement of U.S. fourth- and eighth-grade students in aninternational context. . Washington, D.C.Greeno, J. (1991). Number sense as situated knowing in a conceptual domain. Journal for Research inMathematics Education, 22(3), 170-218.Gresalfi, M. (2009). Taking up opportunities to learn: Constructing dispositions in mathematics classrooms. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 18(3), 327-369.Gresalfi, M.S., & Barab, S.A. (2011). Learning for a reason: Supporting forms of engagement by designingtasks and orchestrating environments. Theory into Practice, 50, 300-310.Gresalfi, M. S., & Barnes, J. (2012). Consequential Feedback as a Means of Supporting Student Engagementand Understanding. In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.), The Future ofLearning: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 403-410).Sydney, Australia: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Gresalfi, M.S., Barnes, J., & Cross, D. (2012). When does an opportunity become an opportunity? Unpackingclassroom practice through the lens of ecological psychology. Educational Studies in Mathematics.Gresalfi, M., & Cobb, P. (2006). Cultivating students’ discipline-specific dispositions as a critical goal forpedagogy and equity. Pedagogies: An International Journal, 1(1), 49-57.Gutierrez, K., Rymes, B. & Larson, J. (1995). Script, counterscript and underlife in the classroom: James Brownvs. Brown V. Board of Education. Harvard Educational Review, 65(3), 445-471.Inglis, M. & Mejia-Ramos, J. P. (2009). The effect of authority on the persuasiveness of mathematicalarguments. Cognition and Instruction, 27(1), 25-50.Kilpatrick, J., Swafford, J., & Findell, B. (2001). Adding it up: Helping children learn mathematics.Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Langer-Osuna, J. (2011). How Brianna became bossy and Kofi came out smart: Understanding the trajectoriesof identity and engagement for two group leaders in a projects-based mathematics classroom. TheCanadian Journal for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education, 11(3), 207-225.Langer-Osuna, J. M. (accepted). From getting ‘fired’ to becoming a collaborator: A case on student autonomyand the co-construction of identity and engagement in a project-based mathematics classroom. Journalof the Learning Sciences..Langer-Osuna, J. & Iuhasz-Velez, N. (2013, April). Relational power as what’s missing in understandingcollaborative student-led problem solving. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the AmericanEducational Research Association, San Francisco.Lampert, M. (1990). When the problem is not the question and the solution is not the answer: Mathematicalknowing and teaching. American Educational Research Journal, 27, 29-63.Lave, J. (1997). The culture of acquisition and the practice of understanding. In D. Kirshner & J.A. Whitson(Eds.), Situated Cognition: Social, Semiotic, and Psychological Perspectives (pp. 63-82). New Jersey:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Mullis, I. V., Martin, M. O., Gonzalez, E. J., Gregory, K. D., Garden, R. A., O’Connor, K. M.,Chrotowski, S.J. & Smith, T. A. (2000). TIMSS 1999 international mathematics report.Nasir, Na'ilah Suad. (2002). Identity, goals and learning: Mathematics in cultural practice. MathematicalThinking and Learning, 4(2-3), 213-247.NCTM. (2010). Principles and standards for school mathematics. Reston, VA: NCTM.Pintrich, P.R. (2000). Multiple goals, multiple pathways: The role of goal orientation in learning andachievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(3), 544-555.Resnick, L. (1988). Treating mathematics as an ill-structured discipline. In R. Charles & E. Silver (Eds.), Theteaching and assessing of mathematical problem solving (pp. 32-60). Reston, VA: NCTM.Schwartz, D., Chase, C., Oppezzo, M. & Chin, D. (2011). Practicing versus inventing with contrasting cases:The effects of telling first on learning and transfer. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103(4), 759775.Sengupta-Irving, T. & Enyedy, N. (Under review). Liking learning: A contrast in two approaches to teachingdata and statistics. The Journal of the Learning Sciences.Sengupta-Irving, T., Redman, E., & Enyedy, N. (2013). Re-storying practice: Using stories about students toadvance mathematics education reform. Teaching and Teacher Education, 31, 1-12.Sfard, Anna, & Prusak, Anna. (2005). Telling identities: In search of an analytic tool for investigating learningas a culturally shaped activity. Educational Researcher, 34(4), 14-22.Vadeboncoeur, J.A. & Collie, R.J. (2013). Location social and emotional learning in schooled environments: AVygotskian perspective on learning as unified. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 20, 201-225.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1300© ISLSVygotsky, Lev Semenovich. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Yackel, Erna, & Cobb, Paul. (1996). Sociomathematical norms, argumentation and autonomy in mathematics.Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27(4), 458-477.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1301© ISLS