Research-Practice Partnership Workshop forDoctoral and Early Career ResearchersBronwyn Bevan, Institute for Research and Learning, The Exploratorium,bbevan@exploratorium.eduAndrew Shouse, University of Washington Institute for Science and Mathematics Education,awshouse@u.washington.eduAbstract: This NSF-funded workshop is designed to support early career and doctoralstudents in STEM research to work with district and school leaders, formal and informaleducators, and community coalitions in order to build and sustain research-practicepartnerships to improve STEM education.Workshop LeadersBronwyn Bevan, Exploratorium, Director of the Institute for Research and LearningAndrew Shouse, University of Washington, Director of the Institute for Science & Math EducationMentorsKris Gutiérrez, Professor, University of Colorado BoulderTricia Harding, Synergies Project Community OrganizerBen Kirshner, Associate Professor, University of Colorado BoulderMatt Krehbiel, Kansas State Department of EducationFocus of the WorkshopThis workshop is designed to support a community of STEM researchers, district and school leaders, formal andinformal educators, and community coalitions engaged in building and sustaining research-practicepartnerships to improve STEM education. Research-practice partnerships are long-term collaborations betweenpractitioners and researchers that are organized to investigate problems of practice and solutions for improvingthe outcomes of educational systems (Coburn, Penuel & Geil, 2012). In STEM education, Mathematics-SciencePartnerships funded by the National Science Foundation are examples of design partnerships that bring togethersubject matter experts in higher education, mathematics and science education researchers, and school districts.There are also funded partnerships in which a network of formal and informal education organizations arelinked together and with researchers to organize more robust and equitable learning ecologies for youth (Bang,Medin, Washinawatok, & Chapman, 2010; Falk et al., 2013).Our aim for building a network of such partners is to increase the capacity of the field for continuousimprovement in STEM education. Our specific objectives for this workshop are to: (1) Build knowledge andskill of a network of doctoral and early career researchers who can form and maintain long-term partnershipswith districts, informal education organizations, and community coalitions focused on STEM improvement; (2)Develop knowledge about effective partnership strategies and about how best to support a network of scholarsfocused on partnership work and a network of research-practice partnerships.ReferencesBang, M., Medin, D., Washinawatok, K., & Chapman, S. (2010). Innovations in culturally based scienceeducation through partnerships and community. In M. S. Khine & M. I. Saleh (Eds.), New science oflearning: Cognition, computers, and collaboration in education (pp. 569-592). New York, NY:Springer.Coburn, C. E., Penuel, W. R., & Geil, K. (2013). Research-practice partnerships at the district level: A newstrategy for leveraging research for educational improvement. Berkeley, CA and Boulder, CO:University of California and University of Colorado.AcknowledgmentsFunding for this workshop has been provided by the National Science Foundation (DRL Award #1408510).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1711© ISLS