Exploring How Mobile Technology Provides Inquiry Supportsfor Middle School Students in Conducting Scientific Practicesin a Ubiquitous Learning ContextWan-Tzu Lo, Alex Kuhn and Chris Quintana, University of MichiganIbrahim Delen, Michigan State UniversitySteven McGee and Jennifer Duck, The Learning Partnership, Western Springs, ILEmail: {loclaire; kuhnalex; quintana}@umich.edu; delenibrahim@gmail.com, {mcgee; jenn}@lponline.netAbstract: In a ubiquitous learning context, students can conduct scientific practices by usingmobile and wireless technologies inside and/or outside of school. This particular learningcontext provides learning opportunities for students to collect and evaluate first-hand dataanytime anywhere. However, learning challenges emerge in ubiquitous learning context whenstudents are situated in both non-traditional classroom setting and information-rich out-ofclass setting. To identify and address students’ challenges in ubiquitous learning context, thisstudy takes a longitudinal view to examine students’ scientific practices throughout a schoolyear. This paper explores how mobile and wireless technology can provide students withinquiry supports in conducting scientific practices, which include collecting qualitativemultimedia data, evaluating and using first-hand collected qualitative data to constructscientific explanations in three different ubiquitous learning environments.IntroductionUbiquitous learning refers to a new learning paradigm in which students can learn anytime, anywhere, usingtools such as portable and wireless communication technologies (Burbules, 2009; Yahya, Ahmad, Jalil, & Mara,2010). Traditional technology-based learning environments allow students to use computers and the Internet in afixed classroom setting. However, in a ubiquitous learning environment, students have more agency when theirtools become mobile and personal. In other words, learning is no longer limited to a classroom setting; instead,students can move around between learning environments (Ogata & Yano, 2004) and conduct inquiry activitiesin different environments (Chen, Kao, Sheu, & Chiang, 2002, August; Chen, Kao, Yu, & Sheu, 2004, March;Hsi, 2003). Moreover, students are able to carry out investigations by collecting data inside or/and outside ofschool via mobile devices. They can further access and retrieve those data for later use through mobiletechnology and cloud services (Quintana, 2012). Hence, the distinction between formal and informal learninghas become blurred (Burbules, 2009) as learning can take place seamlessly inside and outside of school. Inaddition, science educators have called for the need to expand students’ learning opportunities in informalenvironments (e.g. everyday settings and family activities, designed settings, afterschool programs) (NationalResearch Council, 2009), which are also characterized as learner-motivated, guided by leaner interests, personal,and ongoing learning (Falk & Dierking, 2000). More importantly, informal science learning experiences arebelieved to lead to learners’ further inquiry and enjoyment (National Research Council, 2009). To respond tothe need for greater integration and connection of informal environments and learning experience, ubiquitouslearning environments has become a unique context in terms of potential learning opportunities.For science learning, a ubiquitous learning context allows students to utilize mobile devices andwireless networks to engage in scientific practices in a real world environment. A set of practices including“asking questions and defining problems,” “developing and using models,” “planning and carrying outinvestigations,” “analyzing and interpreting data,” “using mathematics and computational thinking,”“constructing explanations and designing solutions,” “engaging in argument from evidence,” and “obtaining,evaluating, and communicating information” have been defined and emphasized in the Next Generation ScienceStandards (NGSS Lead States, 2013). These practices such as collecting data, analyzing data, and using data toconstruct explanations are commonly seen in a ubiquitous learning context. However, students may also faceinquiry challenges when situated in this unique context. Essentially, inquiry comprises a series of hands-on andminds-on activities that students need to be engaged in. But, some studies have shown that students facechallenges when conducting data collection, including mindless observation and careless recording (Driver,1983; Eberbach & Crowley, 2009; Smith & Reiser, 2005). In addition, more challenges may emerge whenstudents move from a familiar classroom environment to a novel and unfamiliar environment outside of school.This unfamiliar learning context such as a museum may cause cognitive load when students conduct scientificpractices on their own (Falk & Dierking, 2000). Students may need different learning supports within theselearning settings from a highly structured setting (e.g., museum) to a less structured one (e.g., a park).Furthermore, teachers’ real-time and in-person feedback is limited especially when students are moving aroundoutside of school. Second, students may face difficulties in choosing appropriate data to collect when they aresituated in an information-rich learning environment (Vavoula, Sharples, Rudman, Meek, & Lonsdale, 2009).ICLS 2014 Proceedings947© ISLSLastly, students may struggle to evaluate their first-hand collected data and to select appropriate data asscientific evidence from a data pool. As discussed, these challenges introduce complexity for ubiquitouslearning in science contexts. Unfortunately, few studies have addressed the complexity of ubiquitous learningand discussed how educators can scaffold learners during inquiry processes in ubiquitous learningenvironments.Since ubiquitous learning can extend students’ science inquiry experiences, there is a need tounderstand how students perform in these environments and how we can support students to mindfully engagein scientific practices in a ubiquitous learning context, specifically collecting data, evaluating the qualitativedata they collected, and using those data to construct well-supported scientific explanations. Hence, we designedthis year-long study to examine how a mobile computing tool can provide inquiry supports in a ubiquitouslearning context. The main research question drives this study: “How do students use mobile-based inquirytools to facilitate their scientific practices in a ubiquitous learning context? We examine students’ performancewhen conducting scientific practices in different environments, and discuss if the technical support of mobiletechnology helps students to conduct scientific practices. This ongoing study has been enacted in a middleschool in the Midwestern USA over the past year. Currently, we have completed data collection and we are nowin the process of analyzing research data. Here, we will discuss the design of this longitudinal study, preliminaryfindings, and how this study may provide more information about how to support students in science-orientedubiquitous learning contexts.Study OverviewParticipants included 35 eighth grade students and one science teacher recruited from a middle school. Theteacher chosen for this study was comfortable using technologies and inquiry-based pedagogy in her class. Inorder to answer our research question, we situated students in a ubiquitous learning context where they used theZydeco mobile-based system (Quintana, 2012) to conduct scientific practices. Each student was assigned aniPad loaded with the Zydeco program, and students could work in a group that consists of three persons. Overone school year, students conducted three different investigations in three environments: a classroom lab setting,a museum, and an outdoor river site. For the first investigation, students were asked to conduct a project relatedto plant growth. Students carried out experiments in the classroom lab and collected data during their classperiods. The whole plant project lasted for two months. In the second investigation, students were introduced toa vehicle design project in which students needed to collect relevant data from the exhibits to figure out how tomake a vehicle move from a one-day museum field trip. In the last investigation, students conducted aninvestigation related to the water quality of a local river, where they collected data during one-day outdoor fieldtrip. When students returned from their fieldtrips, their collected data was accessed and used for later analyses.Both the museum and the river investigations lasted for one month. All the lesson plans were developedcollaboratively with the teacher, and the other Zydeco project researchers to make sure the plans were alignedwith the teacher’s curricular plan, Grade Level Content Expectations, and the Next Generation ScienceStandards (NGSS Lead States, 2013.)Zydeco, a combined mobile and web-based learning system (Quintana, 2012), has been developed tosupport scientific inquiry activities across different learning environments such as in a museum (Cahill et al.,2011; Cahill, Kuhn, Schmoll, Pompe, & Quintana, 2010) or in a science center (Lo et al., 2012). The Zydecosystem consists of two parts: a tablet program for iPads and a website. Students can conduct a set of scientificpractices via different phases on Zydeco: “Plan”, “Collect”, “Review”, and “Explain” (Figures 1-4.) Figure 1shows the “Plan” workspace where students can add sub-questions (or “helper questions”) to refine the drivingquestion, or hypotheses. Figure 2 shows the “Collect” workspace with a variety of data collection methodsincluding capturing photos, text notes, audio and video. When collecting data, students can link specific helperquestions or hypotheses to collected data, or use the “Other stuff” category for unsorted data. Additionally,Zydeco has a labeling system that allows students to attach a short textual label to a specific piece of data toeasily annotate and search for data. With this annotation support, students are encouraged to reflect on their datacollection and collect more meaningful data. Figure 3 shows the “Review” workspace where students canreview and filter data collected by all users within the same investigation. The filter system allows students tosort data by the data collector, the data type, labels attached to the data, helper questions, and hypothesesassociated with the data. Figure 4 shows the “Explain” workspace where students construct their scientificexplanations based on the “Claim, Evidence, Reasoning” model to address the driving question (McNeill &Krajcik, 2011). According to this model, a “claim” can be defined as an answer to a question, “evidence” is thescientific data collected by students that supports their claims, and “reasoning” is the justification that explainsthe link between the evidence and the claim. With Zydeco, students have easy access to personal and peer data,which give students opportunities to think over the data more carefully when making an explanation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings948© ISLSFigure 1. Zydeco plan workspaceFigure 2. Zydeco collect workspaceFigure 3. Zydeco review workspaceFigure 4. Zydeco explain workspaceData Collection and AnalysisIn order to answer the research question, students’ iPad data were collected through the Zydeco webserver. We examined whether students used the annotation system to help them collect more meaningful data onsite. Based on the coding rubric that was tested and modified from previous Zydeco studies (Cahill et al., 2011;Lo et al., 2012; Lo et al., 2013), we determined whether the data were attached with labels, titles, and otheradditional information. We further examined the quality of that annotated information (whether labels or otherinformation in relation to the object and the investigative question), and if those data and assigned to hypothesesor helper questions were related. This analysis is helpful to determine whether students make mindfulobservation and collect appropriate data. The coding rubric can be seen in Table 1.Table 1: Rubric for analyzing students’ on-site collected dataData Type Data Quality(Video,Coding Audio,TitleObjectPhoto,AccuracyText)the object is unclear0no datato be defined (e.g.,no titleblurred photo)the title isthe object ismismatched1with datamismatched with thewith theinvestigative questionobjectthe title isthe object is matchedmatched2with the investigativewith thequestionobjectData RelatednessLabelAccuracyHelperQuestionRelatednessno labelno questionattachedthe label ismismatched withthe objectthe label ismatched with theobjectthe object ismismatchedwith thequestionthe object ismatchedwith thequestionHypothesisRelatednessnohypothesisattachedthe object ismismatchedwith thehypothesisthe object ismatchedwith thehypothesisAnother supportive feature of Zydeco is the embedded “Claim-Evidence-Reasoning” template that isdesigned to help students construct evidence-based explanations. To analyze students’ explanations constructedon iPads, we adopted the rubric from McNeill et al. (2006) as shown in Table 2. Based on students’ICLS 2014 Proceedings949© ISLSexplanations created on iPads, it is useful to determine whether the embedded “Claim, Evidence, Reasoning”template helps students construct better supportive explanations throughout a school year.Table 2: Rubric for analyzing students’ explanations (modified from McNeill, 2006)Scale ClaimEvidenceReasoningA conclusion to aSceintifc data that supports the claim. A justification that explains the linkquestion.between the claim and the evidence.0No claimNo evidenceNo reasoning1Make inaccurate orProvide appropriate but only oneLink evidence to claim, withoutincomplete claimpiece of evidence.including scientific principles.2Make accurate andProvide appropriate and multipleLink evidence to claim, includingcomplete claim.pieces of evidence.scientific principles.Preliminary FindingsOn average, every student collected 11 pieces of data from the lab investigation, 15 pieces of data from themuseum investigation, and 6 pieces of data from the river investigation. In Figure 5, it indicates that in both laband river investigations, the object and the title accuracy of the data is over ninety percent. However, in themuseum investigation, students collected less accurate data and attached less appropriate title. In terms of datarelatedness, Figure 6 shows that when students were situated in the museum investigation, students tended notto attach any helper question to their data. In comparison of three investigations, the river investigation showsthe highest percentage of the data relatedness (50.68%) in terms of the accurate associated helper questions, andthere was only 36% in the museum investigation.Figure 5. Accuracy of students’ collected dataFigure 6. Helper question relatednessConcluding RemarksTo expand students’ science learning opportunities in K-12, researchers and school teachers have tried to seek away to integrate mobile technology into their curricula. By situating students within a ubiquitous learningcontext across environments, this study is helping us examine whether one single tool with embeddedsupportive features (i.e., the data annotation feature, accessible class data sets, the embedded “Claim, Evidence,Reasoning” template) can help students conduct scientific practices across environments. Our preliminaryfindings show that students may collect less accurate data and tended not to attach helper questions in themuseum investigation. This indicates that when students are situated in a less-structured environment, studentsmay collect less appropriate data. This suggests that educators may need to provide more inquiry supportsbefore and during museum visits. Although in this report paper, we only provide some preliminary findings.However, we believe that this longitudinal study can help us understand whether students’ practices changeovertime through the use of mobile tools in this ubiquitous learning context.With the increasing use of mobile devices in educational fields, more educators are aware of theeducational potential that mobile technology and cloud computing may bring into the school (Johnson et al.,2013). Therefore, before making an investment in mobile technology at school, district, or state level,researchers need to understand how students engage in complex practices like inquiry in a variety ofenvironments, what types of challenges students may face, and how educators or program designers can providesupport accordingly. Unlike previous studies that are constrained by a particular learning environment, thisstudy will provide a more generalized and holistic view since students’ performances were evaluated based onthree science projects in multiple settings. Furthermore, the findings from this study will be useful for educatorsfrom informal learning institutions (e.g., museums, zoos), and possibly formal classroom educators, to designmore ubiquitous learning activities. Additionally, the learning scenarios used in this study can be adopted andfurther modified to broaden and connect visitors’ learning experiences.ICLS 2014 Proceedings950© ISLSReferencesBurbules, N. C. (2009). Meanings of ubiquitous learning. In B. Cope & M. Kalantzis (Eds.), UbiquitousLearning (pp. 15-20). Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.Cahill, C., Kuhn, A., Schmoll, S., Lo, W.-T., McNally, B., & Quintana, C. (2011). Mobile learning in museums:how mobile supports for learning influence student behavior. In Proceedings of the 10th InternationalConference on Interaction Design and Children (pp. 21-28). doi:10.1145/1999030.1999033Cahill, C., Kuhn, A., Schmoll, S., Pompe, A., & Quintana, C. (2010). Zydeco: using mobile and webtechnologies to support seamless inquiry between museum and school contexts. In Proceedings of theInternationalConferenceonInteractionDesignandChildren(pp.174-177).doi:10.1145/1810543.1810564Chen, Y.-S., Kao, T.-C., Sheu, J.-P., & Chiang, C.-Y. (2002, August). A mobile scaffolding-aid-based birdwatching learning system. In Proceedings of the International workshop on wireless and mobiletechnologies in education (pp. 15-22).Chen, Y.-S., Kao, T.-C., Yu, G.-J., & Sheu, J.-P. (2004, March). A mobile butterfly-watching learning systemfor supporting independent learning. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Wireless andMobile Technologies in Education (pp. 11-18).Driver, R. (1983). The pupil as scientist? Milton Keynes, England: Open University Press.Eberbach, C., & Crowley, K. (2009). From everyday to scientific observation: How children learn to observethe biologist’s world. Review of Educational Research, 79(1), 39-68.Falk, J., & Dierking, L. (2000). Learning from museums: Visitor experiences and the making of meaning.Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.Hsi, S. (2003). A study of user experiences mediated by nomadic web content in a museum. Journal ofComputer Assisted Learning, 19(3), 308-319.Johnson, L., Adams, S., Cummins, M., Estrada, V., Freeman, A., & Ludgate, H. (2013). The NMC HorizonReport: 2013 K-12 Edition. Austin, Texas: The New Media Consortium.Lo, W.-T., Delen, I., Cahill, C., Kuhn, A., Schmoll, S., & Quintana, C. (2012). A New Type of LearningExperience in Nomadic Inquiry: Use of Zydeco in the Science Center. In Proceedings of the 7th IEEEInternational Conference on Wireless, Mobile, and Ubiquitous Technology in Education (pp. 57-61).doi:10.1109/WMUTE.2012.16Lo, W.-T., Delen, I., Kuhn, A., McGee, S., Witers, J. L., & Quintana, C. (2013, April). Zydeco: A mobile-basedinquiry learning system to support project-based learning. Paper presented at the American EducationalResearch Association, San Francisco, CA.McNeill, K., & Krajcik, J. (2011). Supporting grade 5-8 students in constructing explanations in science: Theclaim, evidence, and reasoning framework for talk and writing. New York: Allyn and Bacon.McNeill, K. L., Lizotte, D. J., Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. W. (2006). Supporting students' construction of scientificexplanations by fading scaffolds in instructional materials. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(2),153-191.National Research Council. (2009). Learning science in informal environments: People, places, and pursuits (P.Bell, B. Lewenstein, A. W. Shouse & M. A. Feder Eds.). Washington, DC: The National AcademiesPress.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Ogata, H., & Yano, Y. (2004). Context-aware support for computer-supported ubiquitous learning. InProceedings of the Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education, 2004. (pp. 27-34).Quintana, C. (2012). Pervasive science: using mobile devices and the cloud to support science education.interactions, 19(4), 76-80.Smith, B. K., & Reiser, B. J. (2005). Explaining behavior through observational investigation and theoryarticulation. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(3), 315-360.Vavoula, G., Sharples, M., Rudman, P., Meek, J., & Lonsdale, P. (2009). Myartspace: Design and evaluation ofsupport for learning with multimedia phones between classrooms and museums. Computers &education, 53(2), 286-299.Yahya, S., Ahmad, E. A., Jalil, K. A., & Mara, U. T. (2010). The definition and characteristics of ubiquitouslearning: A discussion. International Journal of Education and Development using Information andCommunication Technology 6(1), 117-127AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank Joy Reynolds for her support and guidance. This study is supported in part by theNational Science Foundation under grant number DRL 1020027. Any opinions and findings expressed in thisstudy are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings951© ISLS