Comprehension SEEDING: Providing Real-Time FormativeAssessment to Enhance Classroom DiscussionRuth Wylie (ruth.wylie@asu.edu), Michelene T.H. Chi (michelene.chi@asu.edu), Arizona State UniversityRobert Talbot (robert.talbot@ucdenver.edu), University of Colorado, DenverErik Dutilly (erik.dutilly@colorado.edu), University of Colorado, BoulderSusan Trickett (sbtrickett@gmail.com), Brandon Helding (b.a.helding@gmail.com),Boulder Language TechnologiesRodney D. Nielsen (rodney.nielsen@unt.edu), University of North TexasAbstract: The Comprehension SEEDING intervention aims to improve classroom discussionby providing real-time formative feedback to teachers based on student answers to open-endedquestions. Teachers pose questions using the SEEDING system, students type responses, andthe system automatically groups the responses according to semantic similarity. We describethe three features of the Comprehension SEEDING intervention: Self-Explanation, EnhancedDiscussion, and Inquiry Generation and how teachers can use the system to identifymisconceptions and facilitate a class discussion.Comprehension SEEDINGClassroom response technologies, like clickers, can improve student learning and engagement by allowing allstudents, rather than only the few a teacher calls on, to answer and by giving teachers real-time formativefeedback. Previous research on clickers has shown that they can be beneficial for enhancing student learningand engagement (Duncan, 2006; Fies & Marshall, 2006). However, there are limitations that may explain whysmall-scale efficacy tests for the use of the technology have seen mixed results (Bunce et al., 2006; Carnaghan& Webb, 2007; Duggan et al., 2007). Typically, in order to take advantage of the automatic scoring provided byclickers, teachers are restricted to asking multiple-choice questions. In our intervention, ComprehensionSEEDING, we aim to replicate the engagement advantages attained through clickers while removing thelimitations of the multiple-choice format through the development of a new classroom engagement technologythat provides real-time formative feedback to teachers based on student replies. In our system, teachers pose afree-response question, students generate and type their answers using tablet computers, and the systemautomatically groups the student replies into clusters. While the teacher can also view student repliesindividually in real-time, providing individual feedback to students may be time consuming, so the clustersallow teachers to quickly determine the current overall status of the students’ understanding.The Comprehension SEEDING intervention consists of three distinct but related features that combine tocreate an enhanced learning environment for students and teachers. Each component is strongly grounded incognitive science and learning sciences research. The three components are: self-explanation (SE), enhanceddiscussion (ED), and inquiry generation (InG). We review each component and highlight the theoreticallearning advantages of using the Comprehension SEEDING intervention.Self-ExplanationIn a Comprehension SEEDING classroom, a teacher poses a question and all students generate a response.Through the process of generating a reply and reflecting upon their answers, students are engaging in a form ofself-explanation. In a traditional class discussion, only a handful of students are called upon to share; however,in a SEEDING class, all students must generate and input an answer to the question. We expect this feature toincrease learning gains because all students are responding to the material and the process of generating ananswer is more cognitively engaging than some students passively listening to other students’ answers (Chi,2009). Additionally, there is a large body of research that has demonstrated that learning increases whenstudents engage in rationalizing or elaborating difficult concepts and relationships (cf. Wylie & Chi, 2014).Enhanced DiscussionAfter students respond, their answers are automatically clustered into semantically similar groups. The systemthen displays what it believes is the most representative answer from each cluster and the percent of studentanswers that fall within that cluster (see Figure 1). The teacher can choose to share these representative answerswith the class as a basis for further discussion which could be a typical classroom discussion (without furtherusing the system) or it could be guided by posing another question through the system. Teachers might askstudents to rethink their answers in light of the discussion and to edit their original answer via the system or theymight ask students to compare and contrast a pair of responses with a partner or in small groups.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1527© ISLSQuestion: What is an atom?Figure 1. The Enhanced Discussion component clusters student responses and displays representative answersfrom each of the four clusters as well as the percent of students whose answer falls within each cluster.Inquiry GenerationThe final component of the Comprehension SEEDING intervention is the inquiry generation feature. This featureaims to support teachers in asking good follow-up questions, by automatically suggesting appropriate questionsbased on student replies. Previous research indicates that teaching good question asking skills encourages thelistener to consider such questions while reading or contemplating subject matter and results in robustcomprehension improvements (Singer & Donlan, 1982; Palincsar & Brown, 1984; King, 1990). We aim tosupport teachers and students by modeling deep reasoning questions within the system. For example, if ateacher asks, “What is matter?” as an initiating question, the system might suggest follow-up questions such as:“What is the difference between a solid, a liquid, and a gas?” or “What is the difference between properties ofmatter and states of matter?” The goal of this feature is to encourage teachers to facilitate deep discussions onthe central topics in order to support learning.DiscussionIn this paper, we present Comprehension SEEDING, an intervention designed to improve classroom discussion byincreasing student engagement and providing immediate formative feedback to teachers. We discuss the threecomponents (self-explanation, enhanced discussion, and inquiry generation), and the theories underlying them.Future plans include the effects of student learning and classroom discussion quality in a yearlong classroompilot study.AcknowledgementsThe research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,through Grant R305A120808 to the University of North Texas. The opinions expressed are those of the authorsand do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.ReferencesBunce, D. M., VandenPlas, J.R., & Havanki, K. (2006). Comparing the effectiveness of student achievement ofa student response system versus online WebCT quizzes. Journal of Chemisty Education, 83(3), 488-493.Carnaghan, C. & Webb, A. (2007). Investigating the Effects of Group Response Systems on StudentSatisfaction, Learning, and Engagement in Accounting Education. Issues in Accounting Education, 22(3),391-409.Chi, M. T. H. (2009). Active-Constructive-Interactive: A Conceptual Framework for Differentiating LearningActivities. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(1), 73–105.Duggan, P. M., Palmer, E., & Devitt, P. (2007). Electronic voting to encourage interactive lectures: Arandomised trial. BMC Medical Education, 7(25).Duncan, D. (2006). Clickers: A New Teaching Aid with Exceptional Promise. Astronomy Education Review,5(1), 70.Fies, C., & Marshall, J. (2006). Classroom Response Systems: A Review of the Literature. Journal of ScienceEducation and Technology, 15(1), 101–109.King, A. (1990). Enhancing peer interaction and learning in the classroom through reciprocal questioning.American Educational Research Journal, 27, 664–687.Palinscar, A. S. and Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehensionmonitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117–175.Singer, M. and Donlan, D. (1982). Active comprehension: Problem solving schema with question generation forcomprehension of complex short stories. Reading Research Quarterly, 17, 166–186.Wylie, R., and Chi, M.T.H. (2014). The self-explanation principle in multimedia learning. To appear in R.Mayer (Ed.) The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning, 2nd Edition. Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1528© ISLS