Game-Enabled Agency: Outcomes that MatterSasha Barab, Arizona State University, Tempe, Sasha.Barab@ASU.EduAnna Arici, Arizona State University, Tempe, Anna.Arici@ASU.Edu	  Abstract: The Doctors Cure learning experience is a 3D immersive game that positionsplayers as protagonists in a virtual world where they must use their understanding ofpersuasive writing and how to gain evidence from complex texts in their role of investigativereporter. We report on the underlying educational theory, the game itself, and, to justify itsimpact, share data from a comparison study with 8 7th grade classes assigned the control and 8assigned the experimental conditions—about 450 total kids, 90% receive free-and-reducedlunch and 87% are Hispanic. While both the game-based intervention group and the controlshowed statistically significant learning gains on short-answer and multiple-choice items, theintervention group demonstrated statistically significant gains with a large effect size on anopen-ended persuasive essay task. Differences in engagement and learning are credited toplayer agency, affordances of the embedded scaffolds, and the power of consequentialoutcomes.	  Statement of the ProblemThere is currently a sizable gap in innovative, engaging, high-quality products designed to help middle schoolstudents build writing skills in a manner consistent with the Common Core. Specifically, literacy skills in theUnited States are failing to keep up with growth in other countries (Thompson et al., 2012) with a third of US8th graders being proficient in reading and writing (National Center for Educational Statistics, 2011, 2012).More generally, every 9 seconds, an American student drops out of school, more than a million every year. Oneof the primary reasons youth cite for dropping out of school is a lack of engagement, thanks to the perceivedlack of relevancy of the school curriculum to their lives. We need new curriculum models that excite and inspireyouth, not simply to remember or even apply academic content, but to foster in them a confidence andcommitment to use academic concepts (like those articulated in the Common Core Standards - CSS) in theirown lives.This requires the creation of new curriculum based on innovative learning theory, and that is intendedto position academic content, individual learners, and those situations in which the content has value asinterrelated. Videogames in particular are being touted as providing a powerful learning technology with thepotential to transform education (Barab, Gresalfi, & Ingram-Goble, 2010; Gee, 2003; Shaffer, 2009; Squire,2006), with many educators, researchers, designers, and even industry partners working to develop new forms ofgame-based curriculum. This is, in part, because games offer a well-designed mix of challenges, rewards, andgoals that drive motivation, time-on-task, and levels of engagement that can seamlessly move back and forthbetween formal and informal learning environments. Games can make learning engaging, social, and relevant.At the core of our theory of change model is that learning is not simply the acquisition of literacy skillscognitively, but involves meaningful participation in which the learner applies their emerging competencieswithin a situation in which they have agency and consequentiality to accomplishing something they value(Barab, Gresalfi, & Ingram-Goble, 2012; Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; National Research Council, 2002).They can give students real agency in ways that static textbooks simply cannot. Beyond addressing theengagement and relevancy challenges, games are also well positioned to address key foundational skills such asthose specified in the Common Core Standards.Theoretical FrameworkThe philosopher and educator John Dewey (1938) supported a transactive view of schooling, where learners areactive change agents rather than passive observers, and through their actions and consequences, they transformthe problem into a known. Technology has finally caught up to Dewey’s vision, and we now have tools thatmake it possible to individualize learning and provide authentic tasks and roles to students, particularly in thefield of game-based learning. Digital games are different from other media in that they are interactive,participatory and highly engaging. They enable players to step into different roles (e.g. scientist, explorer,inventor, political leader), confront a problem, make meaningful choices, and explore the consequences.Through immersing players in virtual worlds designed to support deep and engage learning, there isreal potential to position students (even in the context of schools) as agents-of-change who use real-worldknowledge, skills, and concepts to make sense of a situation and then make choices that actually transform theplay space and themselves; creating a place in which what you know is directly related to what you are able todo and, ultimately, who you become (Barab, Gresalfi, & Arici, 2009). Further, games have the potential toprovide the learner a motive and motivation for pursuing this expertise, with consequential feedback on theirICLS 2014 Proceedings697© ISLSstrategies, strengths, and even their own evolving identity (Barab, Gresalfi, & Ingram-Goble, 2010; Gee, 2003;Squire, 2006; Steinkeuhler, 2006).Many of the strengths of game-based learning can be summarized in the theory of TransformationalPlay; a 3-fold theory that positions the person with intentionality, the content with legitimacy, and the contextwith consequentiality (Barab, Gresalfi, & Ingram-Goble 2010). Transformational play as a theory has emergedthrough our design and research on games for learning. The idea of transformational play highlights relationsamong the three interconnected elements of person, content, and context. In these games, learners becomevirtual protagonists who use the knowledge, skills, and concepts of the educational content to first make sense ofa situation and then make choices that actually transform the play space and the player—they are able to seehow that space changed because of their own efforts.Figure 1. Screenshot from Doctors Cure.	  Such play is transformational in that it changes the context in which play is occurring, at the sametransforming the player and his or her potential to interact with the world. When creating learning environmentsto bring about transformational play, we use game-based technologies to position person, content, and context inthe following ways:• Person With Intentionality (positioning players as protagonists with the responsibility of makingchoices that advance the unfolding story line in the game)• Content With Legitimacy (positioning the understanding and application of academic concepts asnecessary if players are to resolve the game-world dilemmas successfully)• Context With Consequentiality (positioning contexts as modifiable through player choices, thusilluminating the consequences and providing meaning to players’ decisions)In this way, gaming technologies now make Dewey’s vision a reality, putting learners as active protagonists intheir own learning, taking on authentic roles via avatars, and seeing the consequences of their actions played outin a 3D immersive world.Atlantis Remixed: The Doctor’s CureInformed by this theory, and to further investigate its underpinnings, we evolved a 3D immersive role-playgame for learning literacy skills, called “The Doctor’s Cure.” While based on previous work (Barab, Pettyjohn,et al., 2012), in this study we have designed a new engine with powerful new learning affordances includingpedagogical scaffolds, embedded assessment, and a powerful argumentation mechanic and tool. This game isembedded within the Atlantis Remixed (ARX) Project, an international learning and teaching project that uses3D virtual environments to immerse children, ages 9-16, in educational tasks (the second generation of QuestAtlantis). Through interactions with in-game mentors (non-player characters, or NPCs) and by using in-gametools to engage the academic content, the students are given the scaffolds and affordances necessary to take onthe role of an expert in an authentic task and make influential decisions, which they see played out in theirvirtual world.“The Doctor’s Cure” (TDC) is a literacy game based on Mary Shelley’s novel Frankenstein, and set ina gothic world, where students take on the on the role of an investigative reporter via their avatar, and completea series of missions to uncover a moral dilemma involving Dr. Frankenstein’s work. As reporters, studentsactively collect evidence through interviews and investigations, build logical arguments to support their theses,submit these to an in-game logic machine for evaluation, and get feedback about the alignment between theirevidence and reasoning. Players are intentionally positioned as agents of change whose purpose is to help thevillage of Ingolstadt decide if they should allow "Dr. Frank" to keep looking for a cure in spite of hisquestionable research methods. Players soon learn that persuasive writing is a necessary tool to resolve theICLS 2014 Proceedings698© ISLSgame’s narrative conflict. As the game progresses, players experience how their choices and use of persuasivewriting dramatically change Ingolstadt, its citizens, and even the students’ own identity as a writer and leader.In-game tools provide support in the interrogation of texts, as well as a model for testing the logic oftheir argument, and immediate feedback in the process. One of the pedagogical scaffolds in the game is the‘Lens of Lumination’ tool (see Figure 2), which allows students to examine texts above their current readinglevel. The Lens of Illumination is designed to help the player engage in meaning making by “illuminating” therelevant claims in the documents, so players can decide if they want to collect that evidence. Once players havegathered what they think is a good collection of evidence to support their thesis, they visit Scoop Perry, and usehis Persuasive Argumentation Tool (PAT), which displays all the evidence they have collected thus far, theythen drag-and-drop their evidence to match their claims, and create a chain of logic to support their thesis (seeFigure 2. Screenshot of the Lens of Lumination.Figure 3). The immediate feedback and flexibility of the tool allows players to move elements around easily,repeat and test various logic orders. Once sound, players proceed with the game and write their persuasive essayfor the town newspaper, to convince the townspeople of their view. These tools are a small part of the muchlarger narrative.Figure 3. Screenshot of the argument tool.Consistent with our notion of games as a service, we provide a teacher toolkit and dashboard thatallows teachers to easily manage their classes: registering students, assigning content and reviewing studentwork. This toolkit will build on the existing work done for the Atlantic Remix platform. This system providesongoing data to teachers about the state of student gameplay, a review interface for evaluating and providingfeedback on student work, as well as access to other relevant choices that can be used to support classdiscussions or Socratic dialogues with students.Below is an image of the progress tracker, in which teachers can monitor what task and mission studentis working on. Also below, is an example of the teacher feedback in which they can use a rich text editor toleave feedback and notes in the body of the student essay, or as a formal review on the side panel in the guise ofan in-game character (e.g., Scoop). The fact that both the student work and teacher comments can be accessedand edited via basic html allows for continual feedback to support students in the writing revision process. Atany point teachers can click on the blue button and see the supporting data that the students used to craft theiressay. More than listing of facts the students have collected, teachers can see the actual embedded assessmentand conceptual models that students generated while they were working through the game.ICLS 2014 Proceedings699© ISLSFigure 4. Teacher Feedback on Student’suploaded essay.	  Figure 5. Class Mission Progress.MethodologyStudy OverviewTo test the theory of Transformational Play, we implemented The Doctor’s Cure game across a school district of7th grade Literacy classes. This study compared a 3D gaming curriculum and context with that of a similarlynovel curriculum based in the graphic novel Frankenstein. Interview measures showed the graphic novel to beincredibly popular, and equal to the game-condition in its engagement measures. The comparison study was aquasi-experimental design of intact classes, with 8 classes assigned the control and 8 assigned the experimentalconditions—about 450 total students with just over 400 completing the pretest and the posttest.ParticipantsThis school district, located in the southwestern United States and bordering on Mexico, is a fairly large districtwith more than 18,000 students, many disadvantaged, and have a demographic breakdown that includes 95%minority groups (87% being Hispanic), 83% low socio-economic status, and 20% English Language Learners.Additionally, the community recently approved over $25 million dollars in bonds for technology upgrades,bringing one-to-one laptops to all students. Participants were 12-13 years old.MeasuresMeasures included traditional instruments, quantitative assessments, as well as ethnographic techniques.Learning gains were measured by a pretest and posttest, which were identical for both conditions, andcounterbalanced within conditions. Questions varied from lower level multiple choice, to short answer, to a finalessay writing question, where all students crafted their own persuasive essay with a given prompt. A rubric wascreated to analyze all open-ended responses and two raters scored a subset of tests with an interrater reliabilityof alpha = .81. To quantitatively assess the engagement of the learner, a student self-report measure wasgathered. This Engagement Questionnaire was based on that of Csíkszentmihályi’s (1990) study with ‘flow’,where he interrupted students involved in various activities to respond to their current state of engagement,motivation and challenge in the task at hand.ICLS 2014 Proceedings700© ISLSResultsLearning DataA repeated measures ANOVA on the multiple choice/short answer test revealed a significant main effect fortesting time, F(1,402)=46.25, p=.000, a non-significant main-effect for condition, F(1,402)=1.72, p=.191, and anon-significant interaction, F(1,402)=.07, p=.793. In other words, while both the control and experimentalgroups demonstrated statistically significant learning gains on the multiple choice/short answer tasks withsmall/medium effect sizes (Con ES=.33, Ex ES=.33), there were no differences for group gains. See Figure 1,left side. A repeated measures ANOVA on the persuasive essay task revealed a significant main effect fortesting time, F(1,353)=14.47, p=.000, a non-significant main-effect for condition, F(1,353)=.87, p=.350, and asignificant interaction, F(1,353)=18.32, p=.000. Follow-up analyses indicate that while the control, t(167)=.36,p=.72, did not have statistically significant learning gains, the experimental condition, t(187)=5.73, p=.000,improved significantly with a moderate effect size (ES=.51) from pre-post on the essay writing task (see Figure1b). See Figure 1, right side.Figure 6. Learning Gains: Left side is comparison of groups over time on multiple choice/short answer.On the right side is comparison of groups over time on essay prompt.These data show that both the comparison (graphic novel) group and the experimental (game) grouphad significant learning gains from pre to post test on low-level concepts related to literacy and persuasiveargumentation. That is, both groups were able to identify and describe the basic elements of persuasive writingequally well. However, when looking at the final essay composition, requiring the highest levels of thinking,application, synthesis and evaluation, the students in the game condition students scored significantly higher intheir compositions.These findings lend support for Transformational Play, in that students who were actively engaged asfirst-person protagonists in the game narrative, with an authentic role and purpose for writing persuasively, didbetter in their writing than did those who had similar assignments based around a passive narrative in a graphicnovel. Further, the game students had the contextual tools embedded in the virtual world to help them makesense of the evidence and create meaningful logic models. Students later demonstrated they were able to writepersuasively even in the absence of these tools on the posttest, suggesting near transfer of these skills to a nongame context.Engagement DataWe collected engagement data using a modified version of Cziksentmihalyi (1993) flow’s instrument thatconsisted of 7 Likert-type questions (e.g., did you enjoy what you were doing, was the activity challenging,were you succeeding at what you were doing) and had .77 internal consistent using Cronbach’s Alpha. Resultsshowed that there were statistically significant differences between groups, t(125)=5.41, p=.000, with theexperimental group (M = 3.86, SD = .62) outscoring the control group (M = 3.29, SD = .58) with a large effectsize (ES=.95). Additionally, a Chi Square carried out on data in which students were asked: “What was yourmain reason for doing the task?” Results were significant, with the distribution being statistically different fromchance, X2(121)=35.67, p < .001. In fact, 74% (49/66) of students in the treatment condition attributed thatchoice to “because I’m interested in the task,” as opposed to 22% (12/55) of the control. In contrast, 75%(43/55) of the control chose either “to get a grade” or “my teacher told me to,” while only 23% (17/66) of thetreatment condition chose this option. These findings are summarized in Table 1.ICLS 2014 Proceedings701© ISLSTable 1. Engagement Data. When students were asked “What is your main reason for doing this task?” asignificant number of game-based students attributed it to being intrinsically interested in the task, rather thanfor an external grade or teacher direction.Attribution)‘I’m%Interested%in%task’%‘Teacher%told%me%to%do%it’%‘To%get%a%good%grade’%‘Other’%Treatment)(Game))49%(74%)%2%(3%)%15%(23%)%0%(0%)%Control)(Graphic)Novel))12%(22%)%14%(26%)%28%(51%)%1%(1%)%Qualitative LessonsInterviews and written feedback were collected from the students throughout the implementation, and at itsconclusion. When asked to describe their experiences in this unit, these are comments that are representative ofthe most commonly offered from students. First, there were several reactions that were similar for both theGame and the Graphic Novel students. Both groups described the experience as:“Challenging”, “Engaging’, “Fun’, “I am learning a lot”.“It will help improve my writing”,“This is something I’d like to continue on my own”.“When the story ended, I was shocked because I wanted to read more” (Graphic Novel)“Once I finished the game I was like, "Aw, man!" I wish there was another part. It was cool and fun toplay.” (Game condition)In fact, both conditions continued to access the games and novels after the study ended, and switched toparticipate in the activity they were not originally assigned.Next, there were some reactions that were more isolated to only the Game Condition students. Thefollowing are representative reactions to the game that differed from the graphic novel condition, withcategorical interpretations in parentheses:“I’m surprised that they let us play this game at school!” (engagement)“The game involved a lot of reading and writing.” (challenge)“I look forward to see what is happening next, and how it will turn out.” (consequentiality)“My opinion about who is right and who is wrong has changed over time.” (multiple perspectives)“I’m investigating the other side of the debate now.” (active participant, multiple perspectives)“The people agree and disagree with the Doctor. It will be interesting to see how they act after myarticle is published!” (embodied role, multiple perspectives)“I like it because it gives you some feedback and you can go back to fix it.” (engagement)“The game helps me be much more persuasive, so I can convince the people [in the game] about whatI’ve found [as an investigative reporter].” (embodied role, engagement)“I’m looking forward to writing my essay so I can convince people that they should support thedoctor!” (strong opinions, motivated to articulate)Some felt strongly that the doctor should not experiment on the creature because he has rights. Othersfelt that the ends justified the means, and the cost of the creature was worth saving the thousands ofothers from the plague. Others took middle ground, suggesting alternative ways to find a cure for theplague.Game classes were incredibly on-task, and had little conversation going on that wasn’t related to the game.Many students were up and helping others, cooperating in game play, and celebrating when they weresuccessful. The field observations and interview data are encouraging in that they further support the strengthsof Transformational Play. While space limits prohibit extensive transcripts here, we will briefly overview threefindings.Importantly, teachers felt both conditions were equally engaging to students, with some teachers evenarguing that the graphic novel might have been more exciting to students:I think the kids found the game engaging, but they found the graphic novel equally engagingtoo. I think the difference is in the game they also feel empowered, even though I think thattheir world in the graphic game was in some way, I think, overwhelming. And it wasn’t somuch the ‘3D-ness’ of it, as much as they saw direct cause and effect…They’re exploringthe world at that age, of “Can I make a difference?” The first time they do something orwrite something that makes a difference, they think “That was a real big deal!”ICLS 2014 Proceedings702© ISLSHowever, what really seems to be powerful from this teachers’ perspective was how the game providedplayer agency, consequentiality, and a sense of purpose that was relatively absent in the novel condition. Moregenerally, one of the key observations was the sense of purpose or intentionality that students in the gamingcondition as they often discussed the important of their essay in accomplishing their goals. Reflecting across thefield notes, the following three areas seemed to be especially important with respect to motivation learning andengagement.Pedagogical ScaffoldsThe pedagogical scaffolds and in-game tools were key for student success. Teachers and students reported howmuch they loved the scaffolding tools in the game, and the feedback they received on the quality of their logicmodel. Teachers felt that this was the largest contributor to student success in argumentation. The ability forstudents to drag and drop ideas alleviated much of the language barrier present in this population of students,and they could focus on just the logic model itself.Consequential FeedbackOne of the most engaging aspects of the experience for students was the consequential feedback they receivedaround their choices. When players made a choice or performed a series of actions and the game responded,they would literally “hoot” out loud, or laugh and look around at other computers. We saw numerous examplesof students discussing different outcomes with each other in the classroom, hallway, or in some cases we heardabout students still discussing choices at home. As the unit progressed, a number of students’ enthusiasm startedto wane, however, and we need to figure out better ways of providing reinforcement and successes to keepstudents engaged for longer periods.Professional DevelopmentGame-based learning brings with it new pedagogies. Teachers need training in how to provide valuablefeedback on student work, how to use embedded data in the system to support meaningful class discussions, andwhat is one’s role and responsibilities for successfully implementing a game-infused curriculum. Moregenerally, teachers needed ongoing support to engage the system successfully. Simply training them beforeimplementation was inadequate, and we found that prompting teachers to review student work, to probe studentunderstanding, and to provide just-in-time lectures was necessary.SignificanceThe Doctor’s Cure was created and grounded in the theory of Transformational Play, leveraging the threeinterconnected elements of person, content, and context in immersive gameplay. This study explored thenuances of learning and engagement, when those three elements are supported, demonstrating significantlearning gains and deeper engagement at higher levels of authentic practice. Qualitative findings uncoveredadditional strengths, such as the in-game tools for providing practice and fluency in working through difficultlogic models and complex texts. However, teachers need additional support to shift their pedagogy into a gamebased approach. Importantly, this study took place in a challenging context with mostly struggling learners, andwith a high percentage of at-risk learners who frequently opt out of school, in part because the lack of meaningwith respect to academic content in terms of their personal lives. Through the game we were able to establish arich context for learning that justified the use-value of the content, and gave these youth a sense ofconsequentiality to their learning and to potentially to their sense of self. We see this as an invaluablecomponent of games.Importantly, however, is that players are able to use this new found confidence and ability, to realizegoals in their own lives outside of the game world or school. While constructing an individual bounded gamehas the potential to result in strong engagement and foster desired learning outcomes, central to our theory ofchange is to expand this vision of impact games to think of the medium as on-going services that supportmultiple game-infused experiences and real-world extensions where core lessons are brought outside thefictional gaming context. In this way, we are currently building in more features to scaffold rich conversationsaround the game play—multiuser experiences and collaborative smart tools to facilitate player interactions.We are also adding in professional networks and the ability to extend the lessons learned but also thescaffolding tools into the real-world where players can build logical arguments and eventually support change intheir own community. This involves, for example, having online profiles where one’s professional networkbegins with “achievements” that are taken from the game world, and then as they use the argument tool oninterest-driven agendas are able to expand towards accomplishing real-world goals in their community. A keychallenge here is to balance player agency and emergent situations with productive constraint, and providingICLS 2014 Proceedings703© ISLSdesigned experience where they can level up in ability, and build the necessary confidence and commitment topersist on complex real-world tasks.ReferencesArici, A. (2009). Meeting kids at their own game: A comparison of learning and engagement in traditional and3D MUVE educational-gaming contexts. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Indiana University,Bloomington.Barab, S., Gresalfi, M. and Arici, A. (2009) “Transformational play: Why educators should care about games”.Educational Leadership, 67(1), 76–80.Barab, S., Gresalfi, M., and Ingram-Goble, A. (2010) “Transformational play: using games to position person,content , and context”, Educational Researcher. v39 i7. 525-536.Barab, S.A., Pettyjohn, P., Gresalfi, M., Volk, C., & Solomou, M. (2012). Game-based curriculum andtransformational play: Designing to meaningfully position person, content, and context. Computers &Education 58(3): 518–533.Csíkszentmihályi, M. (1996) Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention, New York:Harper Perennial, ISBN 0-06-092820-4.Dewey, J. (1938). Experience & Education. New York, NY: Kappa Delta Pi. ISBN 0-684-83828-1.Gee, J. P. (2003) What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave.Halverson, R. (2005) What can K-12 school leaders learn from video games and gaming? Innovate. 1(6).National Center for Education Statistics. (2011). The Nation's Report Card: Reading 2011 (NCES 2012–457).Washington, D.C.: Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.National Center for Education Statistics. (2012). The Nation's Report Card: Writing 2011 (NCES 2012–470).Washington, D.C.: Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.Shaffer, D. W. (2007) How computer games help children learn. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.Squire, K. (2006) From content to context: Videogames as designed experience. Educational Researcher, 35,19–29.Steinkuehler, C. A. (2006) “Massively multiplayer online video gaming as participation in a discourse”. Mind,Culture, and Activity, 13(1), 38–52.Thompson, S., Provasnik, S., Kastberg, D., Ferraro, D., Lemanski, N., Roey, S., & Jenkins, F. (2012).Highlights From PIRLS 2011: Reading Achievement of U.S. Fourth-Grade Students in an InternationalContext (NCES 20131010). Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics, IES, U.S.Department of Education.	  ICLS 2014 Proceedings704© ISLS