Learning to Practice Data-Driven Instructional Leadership:Confronting Cultural and Historical ContradictionsRaymond Kang, University of Illinois at Chicago, 1240 W Harrison St, Ste. 1570, rkang2@uic.eduAbstract: Within schools, data-driven practices have served as the centerpiece for educationalreform initiatives focused on improving instruction and student learning, but this process haslargely remained insufficiently conceptualized. This case study follows an InstructionalLeadership Team (ILT) in the Chicago Public Schools (CPS) during the 2012-2013 schoolyear as they enacted the data-driven practice of Instructional Rounds (IR). Taking a CulturalHistorical Activity Theory with Institutional Theory framework (CHAT-IT), a discursiveanalysis of ILT meetings displays the seeming resolution of manifestations of culturalhistorical contradictions within the ILT’s enactment of the IR practice. Yet, further analysis ofand interviews with individual members troubles these resolutions, particularly when seeingIR as a coercive, mimetic, and normative mechanism. As one of few studies adopting theCHAT-IT framework, this case study supports the fruitful, dialogical understanding oforganizational learning as culturally and historically situated activity.IntroductionAs an increasingly popular approach to improving teaching and student learning, teachers’ use of data hasbecome central to public policy discourse for educational reform. In their review of the literature, Young andKim (2010) assert that the “importance of using ‘data’ is now taken-for-granted as an essential strategy foreducational improvement” (p. 3). Despite or, perhaps, due to the assumption of its importance, numerous writerscontend that the connections between data and instructional practice remain insufficiently conceptualized(Spillane, 2012; Cosner, 2012). This assumption further stems from other problematic assumptions, particularlythe notion that data, per se, offers clear guidance to practice as opposed to understanding how data use issituated within activity systems (Spillane, 2012). Essentially, data-driven practices cannot be viewed as anunequivocal good but must, instead, be viewed as an activity system comprising multiple, inherentcontradictions that must be resolved if an organization is to learn (Engeström, 1999).Ogawa and colleagues (2008) put forth a theoretical framework that draws upon conceptual tools fromcultural-historical activity theory with institutional theory (CHAT-IT) for understanding organizational learning.Understanding the nature of change within any activity system begins with locating the manifestations ofcontradictions within its enactment, following their “dynamic movement and evolution” over time (Engeström& Sannino, 2011, p. 384). This study aims to adopt the CHAT-IT framework to guide the analysis of anInstructional Leadership Team (ILT) as they work to design and implement the data-based practice ofInstructional Rounds (IR). IR involve an iterative cycle of four steps: (1) identifying a problem of instructionalpractice; (2) observing practice in small groups; (3) debriefing together after the observation; and (4) focusingon the next level of work needed to improve instruction relative to the problem of practice (City, Elmore,Fiarman & Teitel, 2011). Within this context, our specific research questions are:1. How and what does the ILT learn from engaging in the practice of IR?2. What contradictions manifest in the activity of IR, and how are they (if they are) resolved?Theoretical FrameworkThe CHAT-IT framework guides the analysis reported here. In merging CHAT and IT, this framework takes onthe assumptions of those theoretical frameworks. By adopting CHAT, we assume that the individual actions andsocial structures are mutually constitutive, resulting in an activity system that is both culturally and historicallysituated. Due to this situativity, activity systems also inherently contain contradictions, and activity must gothrough cycles of internal, critical self-reflection and external searches for solutions to become expansive, or, tolearn (Engeström, 1999). Moreover, this assumes that the contradictions of activity systems must be “creativelyand painfully resolved by working out a qualitatively new ‘thirdness’, something qualitatively different from amere combination or compromise between two competing forces” (Engeström & Sannino, 2011, p. 371).Organizational learning thus becomes an activity in which contradictions manifest, and attempts to resolve thesemanifestations ideally lead to a qualitatively transformed organization.Any activity system comprises multiple, mutually constitutive elements. Ogawa et al. (2008) adopt themodel first put forward by Engeström (1999), which describes six elements: subject, object, mediating artifacts,community, rules, and division of labor. Within this model, the object of an activity system is the purpose thatorganizes individual actions and connects them to the collective activity, leading to sought after and unforeseenoutcomes. The subject of the activity system can be either individuals or groups of individuals that are more orless organized. CHAT acknowledges that the subject of an activity system exists within dialectical relationshipsICLS 2014 Proceedings911© ISLSwith all other elements of the activity system, where the subject both influences and is influenced by the otherelements. Mediating artifacts enable this dialectical relationship, through both physical tools and symbolicsigns. These mediating artifacts afford and constrain activity, and the creation or appropriation of new mediatingartifacts allow for subjects to shape their activity.These three elements form the core of activity, but CHAT expands upon this model by incorporatingelements of community, rules and division of labor in its model. The subject-artifact-object relationships occurwithin communities, which are defined by collective social and cultural practices that organize these dialecticalrelationships (Lave & Wenger, 1991). These practices become enacted and embodied through rules and divisionof labor. Ogawa et al. (2008) see rules as what “embody and reproduce ideologies in the broader societalcontext,” constraining and affording participation within the activity system (p. 87). Similarly, division of laborlegitimates certain forms of participation based upon the subject’s culturally and historically constrainedposition within the activity system relative to the object. In other words, the central or peripheral nature of asubject’s participation as well as its legitimacy stem from the subject’s dialectical relationships with the otherelements of the activity system. Critically, all of these elements dialectically relate to each other ultimatelyresulting in an outcome of activityWith this necessarily brief overview of activity systems, Ogawa et al. (2008) add an additional layer ofmechanisms that carry institutions, “the systematic expression of dominant cultural values” into formalorganizations such as schools (p. 89). By expanding this dialectical view from CHAT to include howinstitutions sustain and legitimate the practices of organizations, they argue that how organizations learn mustinclude acknowledgement of the coercive, mimetic, and normative mechanisms that enact and carry institutionsinto activity. Coercion includes the formalized rules and regulations of the state. Within the context ofschooling, this can be seen embodied within accountability and threats of school turnaround or closure (Smylie,2010). Mimicry occurs when organizations attempt to adopt practices and structures that are perceived as key tosuccess within their field. This results in “isomorphic behaviors” where organizations within a field begin toincreasingly resemble one another (Smylie, 2010, p. 32). Norms include “professional codes” as well asorganizational values that afford and constrain actions deemed as acceptable within an activity system (Ogawaet al., 2008, p. 89).Ogawa et al. (2008) argue that “CHAT and IT identify conceptually similar elements of social systems,which, taken together, link the immediate settings in which learning occurs to the social contexts oforganizations and to the social and cultural forces that shape organizations” (p. 84). A dialectical view oforganizational change, or learning, “offers a way to parse, in depth, the multiple contributing pieces that giveshape to any particular activity” (Ogawa et al., 2008, p. 87). Following the “dynamic movement” of an activitysystem within the formal organization of schooling must consider the potential affects of these institutionalcarriers. Critical to this conception is the dialectical nature of these relationships. Any account of organizationallearning with CHAT-IT must account for how these carriers affect and, in turn, are affected by the activitysystem of a school.MethodologyMethodological FrameworkWhile organizational learning can conceptually be understood as the resolution of contradictions within anactivity system, we have no direct access to contradictions and must instead attend to their manifestations,particularly within the discourse of practitioners. Engeström and Sannino (2011) presented the evolution of thediscourse of individuals and groups as “windows into systemic contradictions in the activity system” (p. 385),suggesting a potentially fruitful methodology for exploring the dialectics inherent within the work of the ILT. Intheir preliminary framework, they discuss four types of discursive manifestations of contradictions: conflicts,dilemmas, crucial conflicts, and double binds.Within their guiding framework, the authors expanded upon four discursive manifestations ofcontradictions: (1) dilemmas, or “an expression or exchange of incompatible evaluations, either between peopleor within the discourse of a single person,” (p. 373); (2) conflicts, which “take the form of resistance,disagreement, argument and criticism,” (p. 373); (3) critical conflicts, which are the “situations in which peopleface inner doubts that paralyze them in front of contradictory motives unsolvable by the subject alone,” (p. 374);and (4) double binds, or “processes in which actors repeatedly face pressing and equally unacceptablealternatives in their activity system, with seemingly no way out” (p. 374).In their analysis of the management group for the city of Helsinki’s municipal home care for theelderly, Engeström and Sannino (2011) linked rudimentary linguistic cues from discourse to thesemanifestations of contradictions. For example, dilemmas were characterized by acknowledgements ofcompeting statements (e.g., “yes, but”; “on the one hand … on the other”). Conflicts were characterized bydisagreements in the discourse, linked to cues such as “I disagree” or “this I can accept.” Critical conflicts oftenpresented as personal accounts and/or the use of vivid metaphors (e.g., “I now realize that…”). Finally, doubleICLS 2014 Proceedings912© ISLSbinds manifested in rhetorical questions or expressions of helplessness (e.g., “we must”). Further guidance forlocating contradictions within activity systems comes from an earlier work by Engeström (1999), where helocated contradictions between the central components of the activity system (i.e., subject, object, mediatingartifacts, rules, community, and division of labor). Adopting this guiding framework, this report attempts tolocate manifestations of contradictions within the discourse of the ILT in an effort to further understand whatcontradictions it needed to resolve in order to transform its activity and, thus, learn as an organization.Data Collection and AnalysisTo examine the potential of the theoretical and methodological frameworks for gaining insight into data-usepractices in schools, the author participated in a single-site case study during the 2012-2013 school year in theChicago Public Schools (CPS), a large urban school district in the Midwest United States. The ILT of DouglasM. Wilson High School (Wilson; all names including the school’s are pseudonyms) was followed for the courseof the 2012-2013 school year. During the course of observation, Wilson enrolled approximately 1500 students,85% of whom were low-income and 17% were of limited English proficiency.The specific organizational practice studied was that of the meetings of the ILT that took place onceevery two weeks, particularly as they attempted to design and implement the new routine of IR for the school.The ILT comprised the department chairs of the school (Math, Science, Social Studies, Fine Arts, English,Foreign Language, Special Education); heads of other organizations in the school (Service Learning, JuniorROTC); administrators (primarily the principal and one assistant principal); an Instructional Support Lead (ISL)from the Network, a partition of CPS that included Wilson; and, at times, would be joined by members from thecounseling department. A typical meeting would be organized by an agenda established during the week that theILT did not meet, and all members of the ILT were able to place items on the agenda for discussion. Topics ofdiscussion primarily focused on instructional matters, including implementation of IR (which constitutes thebulk of this analysis), but also including discussion of school metrics (e.g., freshman on-track rate, attendancerates), reorganizing the utilization of the schools facilities, and student test-scores on EPAS (EXPLORE, PLAN,ACT system). Meetings lasted for one class period (50 minutes) and usually discussions took the entire time.Analysis occurred through an examination of four data sources: (1) transcripts from audio-recordingsof 16 ILT meetings that occurred throughout the 2012-2013 school year and three IR Subcommittee meetingsheld outside of regular ILT meeting time; (2) transcripts from audio-recordings of semi-structured interviews(one to four interviews per informant) with fifteen individuals comprising members of the ILT as well as otherdistrict personnel (i.e., the consultant hired to train this school and others in the practice of instructional roundsas well as a district official overseeing a subset of district schools that included Wilson) that occurred one tofour times over the course of the 2012-2013 school year; (3) documents or instruments produced or used by theILT in their practice, including but not limited to their implementation of IR (e.g., agendas for meetings,evaluation forms, test score reports); and (4) field notes and memos created by the author.These data sources were triangulated in order to create an account of the activity of IR over time.Focusing on the activity of IR constrained the data. While many discussions about data occurred within the ILT(e.g., student test scores), this analysis focuses on the use of data collected through IR. Excerpts from transcriptsof ILT and IR Subcommittee meetings were first identified using Engeström and Sannino’s (2011) framework,and then further coded using a grounded methodology (Charmaz, 2006). As the case study progressed, focuscodes such as evaluation, purpose of data use, purpose of IR, history of CPS, and history of Wilson emerged.These codes informed the structure of subsequent interviews, which primarily took place at the beginning,middle, and end of the school year. Interviews were then used to saturate these focus codes (Charmaz, 2006).The transcripts were then arranged chronologically, in order to provide an account of how the ILT engaged inthe activity of IR over the course of the entire school year.An Enactment of Instructional RoundsThe cultural and historical context of the research context is critical for identifying manifestations ofcontradictions in the ILT’s work. Prior to this school year, the Chicago Teachers Union (CTU) voted to go onstrike, which lasted for eight days and delayed the beginning of the school year by seven days. In the resolutionof this “bitter dispute” (McCune, 2012, ¶1), the CTU agreed to a new teacher evaluation system called REACHStudents (Recognizing Educators Advancing Chicago’s Students). Based on Danielson’s (2013) framework forteaching, this new evaluation system places significant emphasis on students’ growth on teacher- and districtdeveloped performance assessments administered at the beginning and end of the school year (CPS, 2012).This new accountability system is part of the dominant political discourse in the United States aroundusing data to measure the quality of instruction teachers provide. Beginning with No Child Left Behind andcontinuing with the current administration’s initiative of Race to the Top, differentiating the most- and leasteffective teachers continues to be a significant priority for national educational policy. The CTU strikeembodies a growing movement against these accountability-focused policies. In the press release for the strike,CTU argued that using students’ test-score data “is no way to measure the effectiveness of an educator” (CTU,ICLS 2014 Proceedings913© ISLS2012, ¶5). While ultimately agreeing to the new evaluation system, the use of student test-score data forevaluating teachers remains a contentious issue, both socio-politically and in the research literature (Haertel,Rothstein, Amrein-Beardsley, & Darling-Hammond, 2011).The preceding context serves two purposes. First, it foregrounds the contradiction of data-use. Datause can be characterized as serving either formative, improvement-centered interpretations or summative,evaluation-centered interpretations. Within the context of a formal organization, both interpretations are alwayspresent, and a constant negotiation must occur to focus an iterative cycle of data-based practice. Second, itframes IR as a carrier for CPS to “touch” the activity of its constituent schools, including Wilson. As a carrier,IR may serve coercive, mimetic, and/or normative purposes for influencing the object of data-based activity.This manifests another dialectical contradiction: the contradiction of organization. Schools must always andalready be seen as comprising agentic individuals while simultaneously constituting social, cultural, andhistorical institutions. Both contradictions significantly manifested in the work of the ILT, leading to atransformation of activity seen as ambiguously expansive.Manifestations of the Contradiction of Data-UseDuring the previous year, the ILT initiated a series of “learning walks,” where a small group (three to four) ofteachers visited another teacher’s classroom focusing on a “problem of practice,” which the ILT decided wasstudent engagement for that year. Although similar to IR, City et al. (2011) note that this learning walks “hasbeen corrupted in many ways by confounding it with the supervision and evaluation of teachers” (p. 4). AtWilson, however, the ILT made significant effort to distinguish the practice of learning walks fromadministrators’ evaluation of teachers. An assistant principal, Ms.Day, reiterates their learning walk protocol:So, if we want to have the same protocol, where the data team—without me being present atthat time, at the data team at all—receives all the documents, and processes, and reports onlydata that cannot be traced to any particular teacher, any particular classroom. So, we want tokeep this part, I think it's an easy to agree part. I believe that we've worked out the issues lastyear, and that might be easiest to agree on. (ILT Meeting, November 26, 2012)Despite the decision to retain the previous year’s protocol, disambiguating evaluation frominstructional improvement remained a significant conflict for the ILT into this school year. As the ILTdiscussed their implementation of IR, the introduction of REACH played a significant role in constraining theproblem of practice that would become the focus for this year. Initially, the administrators suggested that theproblem of practice be connected to REACH, specifically questioning techniques. Several teachers balked atthis proposal. Ms. Hentges, the Fine Arts department chair, stated “this is how we’re also going to beevaluated—actually evaluated … it might actually be disconcerting if this becomes the focus of the learningwalk, where it’s their peers.” Ms. Walters, the Special Education department chair agreed, saying, “I thinkwriting kind of objectifies it a little bit more, makes it just a little less personal, a little less threatening … andwe can say whatever we want, there's still a grain, a seed in the back of everyone's head saying, ‘This isevaluating me’” (ILT Meeting, November 26, 2012).Here, we see that despite the work done in the previous year, the critical conflict of evaluation requireda re-resolution in the new school year manifesting in this emotional, generalized account of teachers’ reactionsto IR. Ms. Hentges echoed this sentiment in an interview, saying, “[the CPS Board] know they can't come inhere and just spy on us, so they're getting us to spy on each other,” presenting an extreme metaphor for theintroduction of IR (Interview, January 10, 2013). Borrowing Roth & Lee’s (2007) notation for dialecticalrelationships, this critical conflict touches upon both subject|rules and subject|division of labor. With theintroduction of REACH, teachers and administrators needed to renegotiate how data-based practices, whetherthey were learning walks or IR, could threaten their positions as teachers and their relationships withadministrators. Instead, several members of the ILT proposed focusing on the school-wide initiative of writingin the classroom, creating a new meaning for the data collected, and which became the focus for the IR.Although resolving the critical conflict of evaluation, once decided, the ILT faced anothermanifestation of the contradiction of data-use: the conflict of purpose, or defining the purpose of the datacollected and, thus, the form it takes. Within an activity system where the subject is a collective, negotiating thesubject|object and subject|mediating artifact relationship became the focus of considerable discussion, becausedata as a mediating artifact affords and constrains object of the ILT. Initially, the ILT had decided to focus onthe presence of informal and formal writing tasks across classrooms. Yet, this decision did not resolve theconflict of purpose, specifically of defining the distinction between informal and formal writing tasks. Thefollowing excerpt from a subsequent ILT meeting represents one manifestation of this conflict. In this exchange,Ms. Tolbert, the Social Studies department chair and Ms. Marston, the English department chair, argue for theneed of a common definition of informal/formal writing with the principal, Mr. Osborn and Ms. Day:Ms. Tolbert: We have a list of all the things, but we need that definition in order to move forward.ICLS 2014 Proceedings914© ISLSMs. Marston: I agree. I don't think we, for English, I don't think we can move forward until we havethat. Because, even within English we have different definitions of what that is.Ms. Waters: So, that definition would be common to all the departments.Ms. Marston: Yeah.Ms. Tolbert: So this could be meaningful.Mr. Osborn: Yes. Right. That's the thing that links. (ILT Meeting, January 7, 2013)Despite the trepidation that bringing the decision to the departments would lead to an untenablenumber of different definitions, the ILT decided to have individual departments assign writing tasks to informalor formal categories. Examples of these writing tasks that were ultimately returned from the departmentsinclude: (1) formal writing tasks such as written explanations to mathematical problems (Math), annotatedbibliographies (English), REACH style written responses from a prompt (Social Studies), research paper(Science); and (2) informal writing tasks such as showing work and mathematical reasoning when solvingproblems (Math), reflection journals (English), source content acquisition, analysis tools, and worksheets(Social Studies), Frayer Model (Science) (IR Document, January 28, 2013).At another ILT meeting, Ms. Hillman, the Instructional Support Leader (ISL) from the districtchallenged this purpose: “I'm not sure if knowing if it's happening or not matters, because you're going to seeformal and informal writing in the building … so I just really want to get back to what is the purpose of lookingfor it” (ILT Meeting, January 7, 2013). Other members of the ILT pushed back, supporting the idea ofunderstanding what types of writing were occurring across the school:Ms. Walters: I mean, I think part of the-, [Ms. Marston] and I both agree that, at the beginning ofall of this, when we started talking about writing, and [Ms. Marston] brought it upwas, that this is our school-wide initiative and, is it really happening school-widewas the question where it started with [Ms. Marston], and I think just getting abaseline of how much writing is actually going on outside of an English or a SocialStudies classroom, particularly, these two subjects lend themselves to more writingthan others, might be helpful.Ms. Hillman: Okay, so then, for me, that clarifies it because then your purpose is to see if yourschool-wide initiative is implemented. So, that's actually a good purpose for thewalk. “Did we implement the school-wide strategy of writing and how are weseeing it?” So, that, to me, becomes, now, I have a sense of your purpose forcollecting this information. (ILT Meeting, January 7, 2013)While this resolution of form for the IR allowed the ILT to move forward with their implementation, afurther conflict of authenticity arose around the validity and reliability of the data collected. During onemeeting, Ms. Tolbert worried that “the teachers can produce a writing assignment for that day and forget aboutit, and I'm afraid that's what's going to happen, I mean, I know that's what's going to happen” (IR SubcommitteeMeeting, December 18, 2012). Ms. Day agreed, stating, “I definitely don't want it, again, to be a dog-and-ponyshow,” suggesting that she believed this was the case during their learning walks last year (IR SubcommitteeMeeting, December 18, 2012). From this, we see that the conflict of authenticity involves the subject|communityrelationship, as the ILT members presumed inauthentic engagement from the faculty with the IR leading toquestionable, if not worthless, data. In a later IR Subcommittee meeting, Mr. Metts, the Math department chair,reiterated these concerns:Mr. Metts:This is not a good way of collecting data. I mean, we get information but, youknow, the best is, as you said, over time, or at random, are a little bit more valuable.And you don't really look at a little better idea of how much is it happening. I don'tknow if that's what you want to do, as that will cause a lot of stress or whatever.You don't know when they're coming in, but, then again, you know, you're reallyinfluencing what you're trying to observe.Ms. Walters: You're definitely influencing the frequency of the writing by saying, “We're comingto look for writing,” but you're not necessarily going to influence the types ofwriting that people are doing, so you still might gather data, I mean, you still will,may see some, you know, information about is it informal or is it formal. (IRSubcommittee Meeting, January 18, 2013)After this point, the discourse within ILT meetings did not question the potential quality (or lackthereof) of the data collected through IR, seeming to provide a resolution to the conflict of authenticity as Ms.Walters argued that the data-form would allow for authentic data regardless of the authenticity of engagementfrom faculty members. At this time, though, a conflict of outcome arose around the outcome of IR, specificallyICLS 2014 Proceedings915© ISLSwith regards to the actions that would arise within the school based on the data collected. Earlier in the year, theILT spoke about the data from IR “[driving] future professional development” (ILT Meeting, November 26,2012). Ms. Day reinforced this idea of the IR data providing a focus for professional development (PD) duringan interview, where she stated the data from IR “might give us a clear indication as to how those PDs might bestructured” (Interview, January 9, 2013).In spite of this seeming consensus on IR informing future PD for the faculty, other members of the ILThad reservations about how the data they were to collect could serve that purpose. During an IR Subcommitteemeeting, Ms. Tolbert raised this concern by saying, “I'm saying that if we're hoping to have a clear direction forPD out of this learning walk, I don't think it will be there. I think that it will do a wonderful job in stimulatingconversation and reflection within the departments.” (IR Subcommittee Meeting, January 18, 2013). Mr. Osbornagreed with this statement, “And that’s instructional rounds. That’s reflection.” Consequently, the overarchingpurpose of IR, the object of the activity, for Wilson shifted from an initial focus on guiding PD toward one ofpromoting reflective dialogue within and across departments about the school-wide writing initiative.By February, the ILT had resolved numerous conflicts around IR: within the division of labor and rulesadministration would not see any of the raw data or be involved in its analysis; the mediating artifact of datawas to categorize tasks as informal or formal to assess the implementation of the school-wide writing initiative;and IR had the object of fostering reflective dialogue amongst the faculty. Through these resolutions, thedialectical relationships constituting the activity system of the ILT changed and, critically, an object of theactivity of IR had been negotiated. After these conflicts and critical conflicts were resolved, discussions of IRwere absent in further ILT meetings as the staff began implementing the process. ILT meetings became centeredon topics such as reorganizing classroom utilization, upcoming performance management reviews with districtrepresentatives, and ACT preparation.Manifestations of the Contradiction of InstitutionsThe next and last time IR were discussed in an ILT meeting was several months later when the aggregate resultswere presented. The entirety of the ILT’s discussion about the results lasted less than ten minutes, with three ofthose taken up by a discussion of observing IR at another school. Ms. Tolbert, who aggregated and analyzed thedata from the IR, summarizes these results “so, I think we can say we writing across the board in all ourdisciplines here at [Wilson]” (ILT Meeting, April 22, 2013).Curiously, the ILT never discusses IR during their meetings after this report of the data. Of further notehere is the fact that department heads did not share their teachers’ reflections on the data nor did they evensuggest that such discussions were had. These observations structured the interviews held at the end of the year,where teachers were asked to discuss what value they gained from participating in IR. Within these interviews,ILT members discussed their perspectives on the IR process, revealing a disconnect between the resolution ofconflicts during the ILT and IR Subcommittee meetings and individual members’ ongoing struggle with thesemanifestations of contradictions. Throughout their accounts, an underlying contradiction of organizationmanifested in a double bind of agent|worker. Eliciting this double bind were the different perceptions of IR as amechanism of institutions that threatened their identities as agents and reinforced their vulnerability as workers.ILT members believed IR to be either coercive, mimetic, normative or some combination of the three, leading tothe perception of a lack of autonomy or helplessness.When asked about what challenges they encountered when engaging in IR and addressing the conflictsmanifested during that process, many ILT members pointed to the coercion from the Network, the partition ofthe CPS district that Wilson was a part of, for having to engage in IR in the first place. For example, Ms.Hentges expressed a perceived lack of agency for the ILT as a whole when she said, “we became just a functionof the Network, which isn't bad, of course, we want to please our bosses, but it didn't really work on theinstructional issues that are in this building” (Interview, June 12, 2013). Ms. Tolbert made a similar statement,“learning walks are driven by our Network, so it took up a lot of our time where I don't think most of us wouldhave voted to put our time there” (Interview, June 18, 2013). From these statements, participation in IR becamemerely an act of compliance and was not perceived as a means for exercising their agency as teachers anddirecting the improvement of their instruction.Exacerbating the double bind of agent|worker were further issues pertaining to the conflict ofevaluation. Although the previous year’s work established a protocol that separated administration fromanalysis of the data, the confluence of the new REACH evaluation system with the mandate for engaging in IRunsettled this resolution for several members of the ILT. Both administrators from the ILT mentioned this issuewhen asked about the challenges of implementing IR. Ms. Day summarized this concern and connected it to theinstitution of schooling, saying, “obviously, again with the strike and the union involvement, it is a part inteachers feeling uneasy about anything that looks like evaluation” (Interview, June 6, 2013).Recall from the enactment of IR, the conflict of evaluation initially became manifest throughadministrators raising the idea of IR being focused on questioning techniques. However, this connectionbetween REACH and IR did not begin with the administrators at Wilson. Rather, connecting the two was aICLS 2014 Proceedings916© ISLSdeliberate push from the Network and this was communicated within the PD sessions some ILT membersattended during the school year. Ms. Smith, a high-ranking member of the Network, characterized thisconnection by saying, “one [series of professional development] is dealing with incorporating question anddiscussion techniques in the classroom, and we've kind of done that through the lens of instructional rounds”(Interview, May 24, 2013). Accordingly, tying IR to a domain of the REACH evaluation process was aconscious effort from the Network embodied within their messaging and training they conducted foradministrators and teachers.From the perspective of the Network, this connection was seen as a way of establishing IR as a meansfor improving teachers’ instruction. Mr. Hensen, the consultant who ran several of these PD sessions, also notedthis connection between questioning and IR, framed this connection as a focal point for collaboration, sayingfrom a teacher’s perspective, “let's sit down and hammer those things out together, so that when an ILT comesthrough my classroom on instructional rounds, or if my principal or my assistant principal comes in for myREACH evaluation, it's all kind of connected” (Interview, June 15, 2013). Furthermore, Ms. Smith underscoredthe efforts of the Network to establish this connection in all of its schools, “so we've been meeting with schoolteams one on one to discuss how that can be implemented … and so, really we've been planning on how toincorporate it for the next school year in all the schools” (Interview, May 24, 2013).In this sense, the implementation of IR was a form of leveraging the institutional mechanism ofmimicry, attempting to push all Network schools towards focusing on a specific domain of REACH. At Wilson,ILT members immediately rejected this connection to their professional evaluations. In so doing, the ILTresolved the conflict of evaluation, yet were left with the challenge of resolving the conflicts of purpose andauthenticity that such a connection may have facilitated. This led to multiple ILT members experiencing thedouble bind of agent|worker as they had to comply with a practice that they struggled to authentically connectwith their instruction or acquiesce to a connection with their evaluations and a potential breach of the CTUcontract. Mr. Robinson made this clear in an interview earlier in the year, stating, “there's the wholedifferentiation, which has to be made, between evaluation in the legalistic sense of the term as the Board appliesit, and observation … because there's only four people in the building [the principal and assistant principals] …who can make evaluative judgments” (Interview, January 14, 2013). Ms. Marston stated her discomfort withthis position, saying, “the Network really wanted, was really trying to push this idea that department chairs arepseudo-administrators, and we're not, we're teachers working under the same contract as every other teacher inthe building” (Interview, June 10, 2013).Despite the imperfect transformation of IR, many members of the ILT viewed their participation asvaluable in establishing norms around classroom visitation and observation and all members of the ILT sawpotential in this type of activity, though perhaps not in IR, per se. Ms. Tolbert described this normative processas “reducing, lowering the barrier … concerns seem to relax over time as they become less threatening becausethe data isn't used in a negative way,” suggesting that engagement in IR eased teachers apprehensions towardclassroom observation and data collection (Interview, June 18, 2013). Ms. Walters saw this value in theircollective work, saying, “there was true collaboration [in the IR] and I think [the ILT] has become morecollaborative” (Interview, June 17, 2013). From these perspectives, engaging in IR became part of a normativeprocess, lowering barriers to sharing classroom practices and finding value in that activity.The ISL and administrators shared similar views. Ms. Hillman observed, “[the ILT] don't want to saythat a purpose for something [like IR] until they know that that purpose they set is going to fit in the school'svision and fit with each teacher, and that each teacher will actually implement it” (Interview, May 28, 2013).Ms. Day expressed hope for future iterations of IR because it “opens the discussion about the teaching practices,… so there's a lot to be gained, a lot that we never had a chance to implement because of this tendency forteachers to stay in their classroom” (Interview, June 5, 2013). From these statements, IR provided the ILTanother opportunity to increase comfort with having observers in classrooms, helping to establish similarsituations as the norm for teachers at Wilson.Indeed, all the interviewed ILT members made note of the power of classroom observations. Whilealso noting the increased comfort of having people enter and exit the classroom, Mr. Metts suggested that, “ifwe actually had some serious program we were trying to implement, we would be really interested in how itwas being used in other classes and what were the results from the students” (Interview, May 22, 2013). Ms.Marston made a similar remark, stating, “I think that instead of instr- maybe a version of instructional rounds …if I can go into a teacher's room who’s teaching the same content that I am and focus on something that ourteam specifically needs” (Interview, June 10, 2013). Ms. Hentges asserted that regardless of the form it takes,classroom visitation is valuable because, “teachers can't help themselves when they go into a classroom, theyjust love learning and looking at other teachers and what they're doing” (Interview, June 12, 2013).Collectively, it seems that while IR may not have achieved the outcome established by the ILT, engaging in theactivity was valuable in that it supported establishing classroom observation as a normative practice at Wilson.ICLS 2014 Proceedings917© ISLSConclusionAt the beginning of this paper, we asked two questions: How and what does the ILT learn from engaging in thepractice of IR? What contradictions manifest in the activity of IR, and how are they (if they are) resolved? Fromour analysis, we saw that the ILT at Wilson engaged in a cycle of internalization, renegotiating and redefiningthe dialectical relationships comprising their activity system as they engaged in IR. We then saw an attempt atexternalization, where data was gathered from classrooms, yet the outcome of reflective dialogue nevermaterialized. This resulted in an incomplete transformation of the activity system and, thus, imperfect learning.However, through increasing the internalization of norms of observation, the ILT was able to find value andlearn from engaging in IR.Within the theoretical framework of CHAT-IT and the methodological framework targeting discursivemanifestations of contradictions, organizational learning requires the resolution of inner contradictions. Whilethe ILT was able to resolve manifestations of the contradiction of data-use, in so doing, its members alsoopened itself up to being placed in the double bind of agent|worker, a manifestation of the contradiction oforganization. In many ways, this double bind undermined the potential learning that may have occurred throughIR, but its tentative resolution through establishing new norms was critical to the learning of the ILT.As one of few studies adopting Ogawa et al.’s (2008) CHAT-IT framework and applying themethodological framework proposed by Engeström and Sannino (2011), this case study supports the fruitfuldialogue between these research communities in understanding organization learning as culturally andhistorically situated activity. By applying these frameworks in this case study we begin to see the power ofconceptualizing organizational learning as an activity occurring within social, cultural, and historical contexts.ReferencesCharmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis. ThousandOaks, CA: SAGE.Chicago Public Schools. (2012, March 30). CPS unveils new comprehensive teacher evaluation systemcollaboratively designed to support and empower educators to boost student learning. Retrieved fromhttp://www.cps.edu/News/Press_releases/Pages/03_30_2012_PR1.aspxChicago Teachers Union. (2012, September 9). Press release: CPS fails to negotiate fair contract to prevent firststrike in 25 years. Retrieved from http://www.ctunet.com/blog/cps-fails-to-negotiate-fair-contract-toprevent-first-labor-strike-in-25-yearsCity, E. A., Elmore, R. F., Fiarman, S. E., & Teitel, L. (2011). Instructional rounds in education: A networkapproach to improving teaching and learning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Cosner, S. (2012). Leading the ongoing development of collaborative data practices: Advancing a schema fordiagnosis and intervention. Leadership and Policy in Schools, 11(1): 26-65.Danielson, C. (2013). The framework for teaching: Evaluation instrument. Princeton, NJ: The Danielson Group.Engeström, Y. (1999). Activity theory and individual and social transformation. In Y. Engeström, R. Miettinen,& R.-L. Punamäki (Eds). Perspectives on Activity Theory (pp. 19-38). New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2011). Discursive manifestations of contradictions in organizational changeefforts: A methodological framework. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 24(3): 368387.Haertel, E., Rothstein, J., Amrein-Beardsley, A., & Darling-Hammond, L. (2011, September 14). Gettingteacherevaluationright:Achallengeforpolicymakers.Retrievedfromhttp://www.aera.net/uploadedFiles/Gov_Relations/Getting_Teacher_Evaluation_Right_summary_brief-FINAL.pdfLave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.McCune, G. (2012, October 4). Chicago Teachers Union ratifies deal that ended strike. Chicago Tribune.Retrievedfromhttp://articles.chicagotribune.com/2012-10-04/news/sns-rt-us-usa-chicagoschoolsbre89309m-20121003_1_chicago-teachers-union-karen-lewis-part-on-student-performanceOgawa, R. T., Crain, R., Loomis, M., & Ball, T. (2008). CHAT-IT: Toward conceptualizing learning in thecontext of formal organizations. Educational Researcher, 37(2): 83-95.Roth, W.-M., & Lee, Y.-J. (2007). “Vygotsky’s neglected legacy”: Cultural-historical activity theory. Review ofEducational Research, 77(2): 186-232.Smylie, M. A. (2010). Continuous school improvement. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.Spillane, J. P. (2012). Data in practice: Conceptualizing the data-based decision-making phenomena. AmericanJournal of Education, 118(2): 113-141.Young, V. M., & Kim, D. H. (2010). Using assessments for instructional improvement: A literature review.EducationalPolicyAnalysisArchives,18(9).RetrievedJuly22,2013,fromhttp://epaa.asu.edu/ojs/article/view/809ICLS 2014 Proceedings918© ISLS