Making Mathematical Meaning through Robot Enactment ofMathematical ConstructsScot Sutherland, Tobin White, Jason Huang and Harry ChengUniversity of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616ssutherland@ucdavis.edu, twhite@ucdavis.edu, jvhuang@ucdavis.edu, hhcheng@ucdavis.eduAbstract: Learners of algebra struggle to understand the meaning of the symbolic andgraphical representations they encounter. This paper explores the possibility of using robotenactment of mathematical constructs as a surrogate to support mathematical meaningmaking. We describe the Number Line activity design in a classroom network of handhelddevices informed by the results of a pilot study indicating that students connectedmathematical values to robot position and the sign of a value to robot motion.Mathematical Meaning and Physical EnactmentMaking the transition from arithmetic to algebra presents learners with complex cognitive challenges(Herscovics & Linchevski, 1994). The same mathematical construct can have many different meanings andrepresentations that must be connected and coordinated. Studies have explored the use of computer simulationsand collaborative network technology to support learning necessary for algebra success (Hegedus & Roschelle,2013). Nemirovsky, Tierney & Wright (1998) explored graphing supported by enacted physical phenomena.The paper presents an initial exploration of robot motion as a surrogate (Fadjo, Hallman Jr, Harris, &Black, 2009) to enact and model mathematical objects through positioning and movement in relation to aCartesian coordinate plane or number line. We present the results of an initial pilot study in which studentsinput values into a command line interface on a laptop computer to move a group of robots to points on acoordinate plane that define the graph of a quadratic function. We describe how these results inform the designof the Number Line collaborative learning activity environment developed for a classroom network of iPodTouch handheld devices connected to a robot server. The preliminary results of this ongoing study are reportedin the proposed poster.Pilot Study MethodsThe pilot study took place in two diverse K-8 schools, involving 132 seventh and eighth grade students in 5algebra classes taught by two teachers. One wide-angle camera and 1 or 2 focus group cameras were used tocapture video and audio for all sessions. Two researchers recorded field notes of the sessions. The two teachersand the research team jointly developed the technology supported classroom activities.The goal of the activity was to enact a model of a quadratic function using robot position and motion.The x and y axes of two Cartesian coordinate planes with one foot units were taped to the floor. Five robotswere placed equidistant from each other at integer values symmetric at zero facing in the y-positive direction-each robot becoming a moveable point on the coordinate plane. Students entered the y-value into a commandline interface (see Figure 1) to tell the robot how far to move in the y direction. The robot moved forward inresponse to positive values and backward for negative values. Students entered a shift value to align the robotpositions with the quadratic function if the y-axis of symmetry was not at zero.A pair of students, assigned to each robot, entered values into the command line interface andpositioned and monitored the robot, pressing the “E” key to initiate robot enactment. The robot first turned andmoved to the right or left to enact the shift value before facing in the y-positive direction and moving eitherbackward or forward to enact the y-value. One researcher reviewed the audio and video recordings and fieldnotes to identify a) students making connections between robot movement and mathematical meaning, b)evidence of collaboration, and c) evidence of joint construction of meaning.ResultsGroups completed a total of 17 enactments during the 9 sessions with 7 enactments accurately modeling thequadratic function. Only 3 of the enactments involved shifting the axis of symmetry and all were unsuccessful.Connections made by students between robot motion and mathematical meaning fell into three categories: 1) theposition of the robot on the coordinate plane, 2) the forward and backward motion of the robot for positive andnegative values, and 3) the relation of the values entered into the computer and motion of the robot. We foundlittle evidence of collaboration or joint construction of meaning. One student generally directed the activities ofthe others in a group, and connections between the robots and the quadratic function were voiced by the teacherrather than discovered by the students in the course of the activity.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1609© ISLSNumber Line Activity EnvironmentThe command line interface afforded minimal support for students to make connections between y and shiftvalues and robot movement. To better support these kinds of connections the team envisioned a handhelddevice interface with an animated display in the mathematical space. To introduce support for collaboration aHubnet (Wilensky & Stroup, 1999) classroom network of iPod Touch handheld devices was connected to aNetLogo (Wilensky, 1999) server with a robot server extension.Figure 1. Quadratic Robots Command Line interface.Figure 2: Number Line device interface.The reassignment of the two pilot study to pre-algebra classes for the 2013-2014 school year, shiftedthe design focus to robots enacting integer expressions as movement along a number line. Groups of 2 to 4students jointly construct integer expressions by entering values into the hand-held device interface (see Figure2). The robot enacted the expression by turning in the direction of the operation and moving forward orbackward depending upon the sign of the value. The expression 4+3--2 resulted in placing the robot at 4 on thenumber line before moving forward 3 units before spinning to face the negative direction and moving backward2 units. This design built upon pilot study results showing that students talked primarily about robot position aspoints in the mathematical space and the relation between movement and positive and negative values.Any device could be switch to simulation mode, causing the robot icon on the device to simulate theenactment of the expression, affording an intermediary opportunity for the student to connect the values theyentered to robot motion without affecting other devices. The design encouraged a collective decision to executethe robot enactment by asking every student in the group to predict the end result and the highest and lowestvalues during the run. The device interface presented a comparison table of predictions and outcomes beforesetting the collective expression to the endpoint of the run.DiscussionThe pilot study indicated that students primarily discussed the location of the robot as a point in mathematicalspace and the relation between the direction of motion and the sign of the values they entered. The Number Lineactivity design refines and extends the opportunity to examine these relations by asking students to predict theoutcome of the run and by enacting both the operation and the sign of the value in the motion of the robot.Connecting the robots to a classroom network server supports opportunities for joint meaning construction andcollaboration. We think robot movement in combination with an appropriate user interface and networkinfrastructure can support mathematical meaning construction, both jointly and individually, and provide uniqueopportunities for collaboration. We implemented the Number Line activity environment in the classrooms of thesame two teachers in mid-November, 2013, and have included the preliminary results in the poster.ReferencesHegedus, S. & Roschelle, J. (2013). Democratizing Access to Important Mathematics through DynamicRepresentations: Contributions and Visions from the SimCalc Research Program. Advances inMathematics Education Series, Springer.Nemirovsky, R., Tierney, C. & Noble, T. (1998). Body motion and graphing. Cognition and Instruction, 16(2),119-172.Wilensky, U. & Stroup, W. (1999). HubNet. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/hubnet.html. Center forConnected Learning and Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University. Evanston, IL.Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/. Center for Connected Learning andComputer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University. Evanston, IL.Fadjo, C. L., Hallman Jr, G., Harris, R., & Black, J. B. (2009). Surrogate embodiment, mathematics instructionand video game programming. Paper presented at the World Conference on Educational Multimedia,Hypermedia and Telecommunications.AcknowledgementsThis work is supported by the National Science Foundation. Findings and opinions are those of the authors.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1610© ISLS