Differing Notions of Responsive Teaching across Mathematics andScience: Does the Discipline Matter?Andrew Elby (chair), Jennifer Richards, Janet Walkoe, Ayush Gupta, U. of Maryland, TLPL,elby@umd.edu, jrich@umd.edu, jwalkoe@umd.edu, ayush@umd.eduRosemary Russ, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Dept. of C&I, rruss@wisc.eduMelissa Luna, West Virginia University, Dept. of C&I, melissa.luna@mail.wvu.eduAmy Robertson, Seattle Pacific University, Dept. of Physics, robertsona2@spu.eduJanet E. Coffey, Moore Foundation, 1661 Page Mill Road, janet.coffey@moore.orgAnn R. Edwards, Carnegie Foundation, ann.edwards@carnegie.orgMiriam Sherin, Northwestern University, SESP, msherin@northwestern.eduElizabeth A. van Es (discussant), University of California – Irvine, School of Education, evanes@uci.eduAbstract: Research in science and mathematics education suggests that the pedagogicalpractice of responsive teaching—teaching that notices, attends and responds to the substance(not merely the correctness) of students’ thinking—supports student engagement indisciplinary practices. However, researchers in science education and researchers inmathematics education have tended to conceptualize “teacher responsiveness” differently.This structured poster session brings together researchers of teacher responsiveness inmathematics and science to begin hashing out, with each other and with attendees, the reasonsfor these differences. Do the different notions of responsiveness stem from epistemologicaldifferences between mathematics and science? From differences in the knowledge basesabout student thinking in science vs. mathematics? This session will frame and initiateongoing discussions of these issues, which are central to work on teacher cognition andpractices in the context of teacher professional development—the focus of a growing numberof learning scientists.Overview: Focus of the symposiumScience and mathematics education researchers agree that effective instruction involves noticing, attending to,and responding to students’ ideas (NCTM, 2000; NRC, 2012). So, researchers have studied teacher noticing,attention, and responsiveness in classroom and professional development settings (e.g., Ainley & Luntley, 2007;Ball, 1993; Brodie, 2011; Carpenter, Fennema, Peterson, Chiang, & Loef, 1989; Carpenter, Fennema, Franke,Levi, & Empson, 2000; Coffey, Hammer, Levin, & Grant, 2011; Crespo, 2000; Davis, 1997; Empson & Jacobs,2008; Fennema et al., 1996; Franke, Carpenter, Fennema, Ansell, & Behrend, 1998; Franke, Carpenter, Levi, &Fennema, 2001; Gallas, 1995; Hammer, 1997; Hammer, Goldberg, & Fargason, 2012; Hammer & Schifter,2001; Jacobs, Lamb, & Philipp, 2010; Kazemi & Franke, 2004; Lampert et al., 2013; Lau, 2010; Levin, 2008;Levin, Hammer, & Coffey, 2009; Levin & Richards, 2011; Lineback, 2012; Luna, 2013; Maskiewicz &Winters, 2012; Pierson, 2008; Richards, 2013; Rosebery & Puttick, 1998; Rosebery & Warren, 1998; Russ &Luna, 2013; Schifter, 2011; Sherin & Han, 2004; Sherin, Jacobs, & Philipp, 2011; Sherin & van Es, 2009; Star& Strickland, 2008; van Es & Sherin, 2008, 2010; van Zee & Minstrell, 1997; Walkoe, 2013; Windschitl,Thompson, Braaten, & Stroupe, 2012). However, explicit and tacit disagreements about what counts as noticingor responsiveness have arisen in the literature (e.g., Carpenter et al., 1989; Hammer, Goldberg, & Fargason,2012; Pierson, 2008; Sherin, Jacobs, & Philipp, 2011; Sherin & Star, 2011). At first glance, some of thedifferences seem to fall along disciplinary lines, mathematics vs. science. Our session explores questions arisingfrom this apparent divide: Is there a real split between mathematics and science education researchers aboutwhat responsiveness looks like and what counts as “progress” toward greater responsiveness? If so, from wheredoes it stem, and why does it matter? Should the discipline matter in defining and assessing responsiveteaching, or are discipline-independent conceptions more productive for guiding research and professionaldevelopment? By gathering researchers of responsive teaching in both mathematics and science in the sameroom to discuss these issues, we hope to help different researchers understand each other’s perspectives andclarify points of agreement, disagreement, and continuing discussion. Only through this type of dialogue amongthe perspectives can we develop robust characterizations of the practice of responsive teaching and subsequentlyuse those characterizations to guide our research and our work with teachers.Specifically, this session will feature six posters on teacher noticing and responsiveness, representing arange of institutions and perspectives. Five posters will focus on data from both pre-service and practicingteachers, gathered from both professional development and from classroom settings. Session chair AndrewElby will take 5 minutes at the beginning to introduce the purpose of the session (as described above) and toquickly introduce those five posters and their presenters. (The slides from this introductory talk will constituteICLS 2014 Proceedings1406© ISLSthe sixth poster in the session.) Then, for the next 50 minutes, attendees will visit the posters to engage indiscussion with the presenters and with each other. Finally, during the last 35 minutes, discussant Beth van Eswill synthesize the posters, offer her own perspectives from working in both mathematics and science teacherPD, and lead a discussion about the central issues of this session.This session is of interest to learning scientists for several reasons. Given the proliferating approachesto teacher education and professional development that incorporate some notion of responsive teaching(ambitious teaching, high-leverage practices, etc.), it is essential that researchers either reach consensus aboutthe nature of this construct or else understand the differences among various versions of the construct, and theadvantages and disadvantages of those different versions for guiding research and professional development.That way, researchers can more effectively build on each other’s work. With separate volumes published orsoon-to-be-published on responsive teaching in mathematics (Sherin, Jacobs, and Philipp, 2011) and science(Hammer, Robertson, and Scherr, forthcoming), the time is ripe for bringing mathematics and science educatorstogether to continue hashing out these issues.Major issues addressedIn this section, we first present a brief overview of the major issues spanned by the five posters. Then, wepresent extended abstracts of the five posters.The major issues addressed in this symposium include the following:••What does responsive teaching look like? Work in mathematics and science education that exploresteacher attention often takes a unidimensional perspective; it focuses on defining to what extent ateacher’s practice is or isn’t responsive to student ideas. The posters in this session push to flesh out thenotion of responsiveness by exploring whether and how contextual features change what constitutesresponsiveness. Walkoe and Sherin’s poster explores how the specific domain (or subdiscipline) ofteaching influences what counts as teacher responsiveness; they document changes in noticing thatarise out of participation in a video club focused specifically on algebraic (as opposed to generalmathematical) thinking. In contrast, Luna explores how responsiveness looks different depending onwhether the teacher framed the classroom activity as sharing information or making sense of ideas.Finally, Coffey and Edwards document that pre-service elementary school teachers displayed differenttypes of responsiveness when teaching mathematics vs. science. A thread connecting these posters isthe role of context in defining and explaining teachers’ responsiveness. The symposium seeks to shiftthe focus away from the unidimensional and toward multi-faceted characterizations of responsivenesssituated in the particulars of context (whether it be disciplinary domains, types of classroom activities,or school subjects).What does progress toward responsiveness look like? We are interested in characterizing responsiveteaching so that we can come to understand both (1) how teachers come to practice responsiveness and(2) how we can support teachers in enacting that practice. So, a second theme of the symposium is theexploration of what constitutes progress, or productive change, in responsiveness. This focus flows outof the first: the field has to date taken progress toward “greater teacher responsiveness” to be greaterattention and responsiveness to the detailed substance of students’ reasoning. Such a definition ofprogress is a necessary side effect of unidimensional descriptions of what constitutes responsiveness.These posters suggest, however, that as our images of responsiveness become more complex andnuanced, so can our conceptualizations of progress. Building on prior work (e.g., Jacobs, Franke,Carpenter, Levi, & Battey, 2007), Walkoe and Sherin’s poster described above shows that, at a finegrained level, “greater responsiveness” might look different in different areas of mathematics (e.g.,geometry vs. algebra). Richards, Gupta, and Elby, analyzing video of the same science lesson taughtby the same science teacher in two different years, argue that progress toward greater responsivenesscan consist not just of greater attention to substance, but rather, greater attention to certain disciplinespecific facets of the substance of student reasoning. Stepping back from particular cases of progress,Russ et al. argue that what constitutes progress in responsiveness is driven by teacher and researcherassumptions about student cognition and the state of education research. Specifically, they argue that aneducator’s sense of what constitutes “good” vs. “less good” responsiveness depends on the extent towhich the educator (i) assumes student learning consists of moving through a hierarchy ofprogressively more sophisticated ideas, and (ii) understands education research as having fully mappedthe terrain of student thinking about that topic.Together these two issues add complexity to our understanding of the practice of responsive teaching. Theaddition of that complexity provides us with a range of theoretical and empirical machinery to explore thequestion of the disciplinarity of responsiveness. In other words, when taken together, these posters allow us toaddress the question, Should conceptualizations of responsive teaching be (sub)discipline-dependent? OurICLS 2014 Proceedings1407© ISLSsense from these posters is that, in some ways, disciplinary divides may actually obscure the very complexityand substance of issues surrounding responsive teaching, issues that warrant deeper examination.Given this overview of the most important issues addressed by our session, we now present the fiveposters.Characterizing a New Form of Productive Change in Teacher ResponsivenessJennifer Richards, Andrew Elby, and Ayush GuptaA growing body of work examines how teachers’ attention and responsiveness to student thinking changes overtime. This work considers the specificity with which teachers attend to students’ ideas (e.g., van Es, 2011), thestance teachers take toward students’ ideas (e.g., Crespo, 2000), and/or the types of follow-up moves teachersmake (e.g., Pierson, 2008). While these foci foreground how teachers treat students’ ideas, they do not clearlyaddress how teachers link students’ ideas to disciplinary ideas and practices. Our aim is to bring disciplinespecific considerations into the discussion of changes in teachers’ responsiveness.Our perspective aligns with work emphasizing the “twin imperatives of responsiveness andresponsibility” (Ball, 1993, p. 374) – grounding instruction in students’ ideas while helping them learnimportant disciplinary ideas and practices. By looking for the beginnings of science in what students are sayingand doing (Hammer & van Zee, 2006), teachers can help students see their contributions as productive in thedoing of science and can help students refine their scientific thinking and content understandings.We report on a comparative case study of two class discussions from Mr. S’s seventh-grade scienceclass. These discussions feature the same experienced teacher teaching the “same” lesson in consecutive years,attending and responding to students’ ideas about the same physical scenario. We drew on a range of discursivemarkers to characterize his responsiveness in each case – how he revoiced students’ ideas (e.g., O’Connor &Michaels, 1993), how and when he pressed on students’ ideas (e.g., Brodie, 2011), and when he made bids toclose the conversation (e.g., Schegloff & Sacks, 1999). We also examined video of teacher meetings and oneon-one interviews to probe Mr. S’s perspective on these classroom discussions.In the year 1 discussion, Mr. S foregrounded students’ identification of the causal factors, the entitiesresponsible for the motion they predicted. In general, if the factor causing the motion was not apparent in astudent’s explanation, Mr. S pressed the student to articulate it; if the factor was apparent, Mr. S accepted thestudent’s response. In contrast, in the year 2 discussion, Mr. S foregrounded students’ articulation of causalstories—mechanistic explanations—of what they thought would happen. This foregrounding involved hiscontinued pursuit of different stories and details that fleshed out how the factors students identified resulted inthe posited outcomes. Our poster will also examine influences on Mr. S’s responsiveness in each case.This work adds a disciplinary lens to the ongoing discussion of change in teachers’ attention andresponsiveness to students’ ideas. Doing so raises important questions about what should count as—and wherewe might look for—progress in teachers’ changing practices over time, and whether discipline-independentnotions of responsive teaching are sufficient to capture a teacher’s progress toward greater responsiveness.The Subdiscipline Matters: Teacher Noticing of Student Algebraic ThinkingJanet Walkoe and Miriam SherinThe work on teacher noticing in mathematics primarily looks at teacher noticing of students’ mathematicalthinking in general without focusing on particular mathematical domains. However, exploring teacher noticingin specific domains may be important: paying attention to specific content areas can matter in professionaldevelopment (e.g., Garet, Porter, & Desimone, 2001; Kennedy, 1998), and PD programs that are specific to thecontent teachers teach have more positive outcomes in terms of student achievement and student conceptualunderstanding (e.g., Kennedy, 1998). Therefore, exploring teachers’ attention and responses to students’thinking in a specific content domain is likely to inform PD efforts to support the teaching and learning of thatdomain.Following Schoenfeld (1988, 1998), we take the perspective that teachers’ beliefs about what counts asknowing the discipline and about what students need to know to succeed influences what they attend to respondto in the moment. In the algebra classroom, attending to productive student thinking can be difficult for reasonsthat may be particular to algebra. Historically, algebra instruction focuses on symbol manipulation andprocedures, often at the expense of a more conceptual understanding (e.g. Chazan, 1996, 2000; Kieran, 1992).As a result, many students end up manipulating symbols by rote (Kieran, 1992). We believe teacher attentionmay play an important role: many teachers tend to focus on symbol manipulation above more conceptual formsof algebraic thinking (Stephens, 2008; Walkoe, 2010). If teachers believe algebraic thinking is synonymous withmanipulating symbols and carrying out procedures, they may fail to attend to aspects of students’ reasoning thatcould serve as a foundation for helping students understand the content on a more conceptual level. In thisposter, we describe a study that addresses this issue head-on.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1408© ISLSThirteen pre-service mathematics teachers in a large Midwestern city participated in the study. Allthirteen teachers were asked to complete a pre and post task as well as six weekly tagging assignments using anonline tagging tool that prompted teachers to watch a video and tag and discuss compelling moments ofstudents’ algebraic thinking. However, seven of the thirteen were asked to participate in a video club thatfocused on algebra classes.We analyzed what moments the teachers tagged and what they wrote about those moments. Bottom-upcategorization of the teachers’ tagged commentaries, followed by quantitative analysis of changes in depth ofvarious types of categories, enabled us to explore differences in noticing of algebraic thinking among membersof the video club group and non-video club group.Compared to the non-video club group, the video club group showed more change over time in the typeof algebraic thinking they noticed and the depth with which they discussed student thinking. In addition, certaintypes of student algebraic thinking (e.g., reasoning about representations) appeared to prompt more in-depthanalysis by the teachers than did other types (e.g., symbol manipulation).This study illustrates that researchers and teacher educators can gain insights into improving PD byattending to sub-disciplinary aspects of students’ thinking, such as algebra-specific types of symbolmanipulations and use of representations. It also illustrates that conceptualizations of teacher responsivenessmay need to be subdiscipline dependent, in focusing on the particular “distractors”—such as algebra students’rote manipulation of symbols—that tend to compete with attention to the substance of student thinking in thesubdiscipline.Framing the Task: Variation in One Teacher’s Attention to Students’ IdeasExpressed While Engaged in Disciplinary PracticesMelissa J. LunaThis study focuses on an elementary teacher’s noticing and responding to his students’ ideas as they engage inscience disciplinary practices. I show that what the teacher counts as “noticing student ideas” can varyaccording to the type of activity in which the students are engaged.What teachers notice in student thinking, and even what counts as noticing student thinking, is contextdependent and particularly sensitive to the teacher’s epistemological framing of the activity—his sense of whatcounts as knowledge and learning in a given moment. Thus, two bodies of prior research inform this work: (1)teacher noticing (Sherin, Jacobs, & Philipp, 2011) and, (2) teacher epistemological framing (Levin, Hammer, &Coffey, 2009). Specifically, this work examines a teacher’s epistemological framing of the very specific activityof noticing students’ science ideas.To accomplish this, I equipped the teacher with a wearable camera that continuously records what theteacher is seeing and hearing; but it only saves the 60 seconds of footage that occurred immediately before theteacher pushes a button. The camera can save several hours of these 60-second snippets, thereby capturingevents the teacher noticed immediately after the fact.The teacher wore this camera on thirteen occasions while teaching and was instructed to “capture students’science ideas.” After each lesson, I reviewed each captured moment with the teacher to clarify the student’s idea and whyit was chosen. Data consist of 411 video clips each with a corresponding reflection. The analysis presented in thispaper uses a similar analytical approach to Russ & Luna (2013), using bottom-up coding to classify differenttypes of captured moments, to identify patterns in those moments, and to infer from these patterns the differentframes the teacher draws on when attending to students’ ideas.Across the 13 tapings, the teacher captures many different kinds of moments, from students sharingexamples, to guessing outcomes, to describing instances. However, he captures three specific kinds of momentsmore often than others: (1) factual statements offered by students while telling information, (2) descriptionsoffered by students while constructing meaning, and (3) explanations offered by students while drawingconclusions. Category (1) “captures” occurred primarily during classroom activities the teacher identified asinformation sharing; category (2) captures primarily occurred during activities the teacher identified as sensemaking; and category (3) captures occurred when the activity was drawing conclusions. This paper discusses hisnoticing patterns and the connection to disciplinary practices in more detail.This research contributes to our understanding of how teachers frame the nature of “responsiveness,”especially the noticing of student ideas. Responding to students’ science ideas involves more than the presenceof ideas and the ability to notice those ideas. It also involves a teacher’s in-the-moment understanding of whatcounts as note-worthy ideas. This study shows that a teacher’s sense of note-worthy ideas depends on thedisciplinary practices in which he perceives the students to be engaged, motivating future research to investigatethis connection in more detail.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1409© ISLSThe Subject Matters for Teachers’ Perceptions of Responsive TeachingJanet E. Coffey and Ann R. EdwardsThis paper argues that the subject matters for what teachers consider to be responsible, responsive teaching.Analysis focuses on establishing patterns of responsive teaching in science and mathematics, and understandinghow the discipline influences how teachers respond to student ideas and reasoning. We argue thatunderstanding these dynamics is important for teacher educators working with elementary teachers, whogenerally teach across disciplines and who often do not have strong backgrounds in mathematics or science.We situate this work within efforts to establish more empirically-grounded and practice-based accountsof pedagogical content knowledge (Ball & Bass 2003; Kazemi et al, 2009; Putman & Borko, 2000). We alignwith work that seeks to better understand and support teachers' learning of "high leverage" practices withindisciplinary areas (Franke & Chan, 2006). We consider the ways in which content knowledge and backgroundsbecome consequential as teachers interact with students in different disciplines.Primary data come from a semester-long course within a STEM certificate program for practicingelementary teachers. Data include (i) video records of course meetings and (ii) course assignments such aswritten reflections and activities involving analyses of students' scientific and mathematical thinking, field-basedassignments involving instructional design and implementation, observations of teaching, and writtenassignments probing the teachers' own mathematical and scientific thinking.Analyses sought to examine the nature of differences and similarities across subject areas. Iterativecoding yielded categories and revealed patterns of variation. Several cases were chosen for closer analysis thateither represented typical patterns or that contrasted to prevailing patterns. Categories were then used tostructure a closer comparative analysis of parallel assignments and participation in course activities for selectedcases.We build on a previous study of mathematics and science methods pre-service coursework thatrevealed that the same prospective teachers often attended differently to student thinking and participationacross subjects, due to their orientation towards and relationship with the disciplines of mathematics and science(Coffey & Edwards, in revision). This paper focuses on data from a professional development setting. Contrastsin what participants noticed in videos of math and science teaching suggest the extent to which school standardsand school curricula shape teachers' ideas of the nature of the discipline, constraining their sense of what countsas "responsiveness." The teachers in the professional development course responded critically to interactions inDeborah Ball's classroom (the "Sean's numbers" video) where an elementary classroom argued about whether 5was an even or odd number. They were critical of Ball's choice to encourage the argument, particularly whenone boy, Sean, took the position that 5 was both an even and odd number. They were unanimously concernedthat Sean's idea was incorrect and that allowing the idea to persist would undermine students' understanding ofeven and odd. By contrast, the same group of teachers had a very different reaction to a video of students at thesame grade level discussing whether air is matter or not matter. When in the video a student offered that aircould be both matter and not matter and the student's teacher encouraged other students to respond to this idea,teachers in the professional development expressed excitement about the nature of the student reasoning andwere supportive of the teacher's moves facilitating the discussion. The parallel nature of the examples anddiffering reactions highlight how teachers' perceptions of math and science as school subjects, in addition to asdisciplines, shape their responsiveness.This work contributes to teacher education literature that shifts the focus of pedagogical contentknowledge from requisite teacher knowledge to practices through which that knowledge is employed,importantly in interaction with and in response to students' ideas and reasoning (Kazemi et al, 2009). Wehighlight the capacity of teacher education and professional development to help teachers establish practices ofdisciplinary attending that contribute to more robust notions of disciplinary learning and understanding anddeeper conceptual understandings - for teachers and their students. We argue for the importance of supportingteachers' navigation across subject areas - including across the nature of the discipline and the disciplines asrepresented in school and text. We also intend this work to inform the debate on the discipline-specificity of"teacher responsiveness" by illustrating how variations in teacher responsiveness across school subjects mightnot align with variations in experts' responsiveness across different authentic disciplinary practices.Is the Discipline Really the Issue? Why Mathematics and Science EducatorsSometimes Disagree about What Counts as “Responsiveness”Rosemary Russ, Andrew Elby, Jennifer Richards, Janet Walkoe, Amy Robertson, and Melissa J. LunaA variety of professional development (PD) has been designed to support teachers in enacting the practices ofresponsive teaching (e.g. Fennema et al., 1996; Hammer & van Zee, 2006; Sherin, Jacobs, & Philipp, 2011;Windschitl, Thompson, & Braaten, 2011). Examination of these PD efforts reveals differences in how PDdesigners conceptualize responsive teaching and its development in teachers. In this work we propose aICLS 2014 Proceedings1410© ISLSframework for characterizing and helping to explain the differences in the (sometimes tacit) conceptualizationsof responsive teaching evident in these diverse research and professional development efforts. We suggest thatthis framework allows us to see through seemingly disciplinary differences among professional developmentefforts to the assumptions that underlie those efforts.Our framework arises out of the perspective that an educator’s conceptualization of responsive teachingreflects her (tacit or explicit) views about (i) the nature of student learning, and (ii) the ways in which researchabout students’ learning of a given domain can and should inform teaching in that domain. Therefore,articulating researchers’ tacit or explicit understandings of student cognition (e.g. Hammer, 1996) and theirviews about the role of research in teaching is essential for making sense of differing conceptualizations ofresponsive teaching.To explore conceptualizations of responsive teaching, we conducted secondary analyses of publishedwork on professional development (PD) and research targeting responsive teaching. We looked for patternsconnecting the conceptualization of responsive teaching enacted in the PD or operationalized in the research, theresearchers’ assumptions about students’ cognition and learning, and their views about the role of research inPD and teaching.We argue that the differences between conceptualizations of responsive teaching can be characterizedand explained largely by the educators’ views about the extent to which (1) education research has fully mappedthe terrain of student thinking in that domain, and (2) student learning in a given domain consists of movingthrough a hierarchy of progressively more sophisticated stages of thinking.Some of the work on responsive teaching in mathematics (tacitly or explicitly) assumes what we call aCovering Model, according to which student thinking has been mapped in sufficient detail to specify a hierarchyof ways of thinking through which students typically progress. A paradigmatic example of a Covering Modeldrives PD in Cognitively Guided Instruction (CGI) (Fennema et al., 1996; Franke et al., 2001). CGI PD buildson the extensive, fine-grained body of research about early elementary students’ thinking in arithmetic. The PDteaches teachers about the common stages of reasoning (set of strategies) students use and how to help studentsbuild on their current strategies to reach the next stage. So, CGI and other Covering Model-based PD assumesthat the terrain of students thinking in the domain is quite well mapped and that student learning—with properinstructional support—generally progresses through predictable stages. Therefore, expert responsive teaching inthe CGI paradigm consists largely of (a) recognizing which previously-documented strategies a student is usingand (b) choosing problems and instructional moves designed to help students reach the next level of thinking—though of course, teachers should be ready to “hear,” interpret, and improvisationally respond to unexpectedreasoning.By contrast, PD in the Learning Progressions in Scientific Inquiry project (Hammer, Goldberg, &Fargason, 2012) proceeds from the assumptions that (i) there is substantial variability and unpredictability abouthow students will reason about a given scenario relating to a topic such as energy, and (ii) learning is highlyindividualized, involving a complex interplay of evolving conceptual understandings, habits of mind, epistemicstances, and emotions. Therefore, PD in this project focuses largely on helping teachers to interpret thesubstance of student reasoning and to improvise next steps in response to various facets of that thinking(conceptual, epistemic, etc.). In this paradigm, expert responsive teaching consists largely of “hearing” andimprovisationally nurturing the seeds of productive conceptual understandings and scientific practices in thesubstance of students’ reasoning—though of course teachers should draw on research and their own experiencesto recognize and plan for common patterns of reasoning.To be clear, we do not think either of these two models of PD is “better” than the other, nor do wemake claims about the validity of the assumptions underlying either model. Additionally, our short summariesof these models likely overemphasizes the differences between them, differences we view more as points on acontinuum than as a dichotomy. Our purposes in doing so are to demonstrate and explicate how:1.2.Differences in conceptualizations of good responsive teaching, and corresponding differences in PDregimens and assessment tools, stem in part from researchers’ different assumptions about (a) howwell-mapped student reasoning is in the targeted domain (b) the degree to which student learning canbe characterized as progress through progressively more sophisticated stages of thinking.In mathematics and science education, some of the seemingly intra- and inter-disciplinary differencesin conceptualizations of responsive teaching stem from point (1) instead of from actual differences in(sub)disciplinary epistemologies.Potential Significance of the ContributionsHistorically, work in the learning sciences has focused more on student cognition and on learning environmentsthan it has on teacher cognition and teacher interactions with students. This is starting to change, with a growingnumber of learning scientists doing research on teacher thinking and practices. A focal point for much of thisresearch has been the construct—or really, a cluster of related constructs—of teacherICLS 2014 Proceedings1411© ISLSnoticing/attention/responsiveness, with work done by the contributors to this symposium and by others. Whathas been missing is sustained cross-talk between work on science teacher responsiveness and work onmathematics teacher responsiveness. In our view, the major contribution of this symposium is bringing togetherLS-oriented researchers of teacher responsiveness, including both participants and attendees, to begindiscussions and (we hope) collaborations that will continue for years.Of course, simply bringing people together isn’t enough. In section B above, while describing theindividual posters and also the broader themes cutting across the posters, we made the case that this symposiumpushes the field forward by helping to frame and initiate discussions about cutting-edge, contested central issuesin conceptualizing, operationally defining, and assessing teacher noticing/attention/responsiveness. In doing so,we hope to refine and accelerate the contributions of LS-oriented researchers to understanding teacher cognitionand practice. A deeper understanding of teacher cognition and practice in general, and teachernoticing/attention/responsiveness in particular, can contribute not only to theory-building about cognition andinteraction, but also to teacher education and professional development efforts aimed at helping teachers fosterdeeper conceptual learning and productive disciplinary engagement (Engle & Conant, 2002) in their students.How the presentations fit togetherAs just discussed, the point of this session is to bring together—and we hope, enlarge—the LS subcommunityfocused on teacher responsiveness, in order to frame and initiate discussion and collaboration among researchersfocused on mathematics teachers and those focused on science teachers.The posters form a coherent whole. As discussed at the beginning of Section B, the posters individuallyand collectively address the following cluster of tightly related issues:•••What does responsive teaching look like in light of contextual factors such as those leading the teacherto frame of the classroom activity in particular ways, the teacher’s views about and experiences withthe subject being taught, and competing foci of attention associated with particular (sub)disciplines(e.g., students’ rote symbolic manipulation in algebra)?What does progress toward responsiveness look like in light of (sub)discipline-specific foci of attentionassociated with productive disciplinary engagement and the researcher’s assumptions about the natureof “good teaching” based on their reading of the research on student learning?Should conceptualizations of responsive teaching be (sub)discipline-dependent, and if so, in whatways? The answer, of course, is bound up with the first and second issue.In brief, the posters all address the contested issue of how best to conceptualize “teacherresponsiveness,” and the Session Chair’s introduction will focus on highlighting that coherence.Relevance to conference themeWe end with a brief speculation about how research that builds on this session might relate to the conferencetheme. Conversations among the contributors to this symposium have revealed a shared experience in workingwith teachers who became significantly more responsive: Becoming “more responsive” in various technicalsenses was bound up with the teachers’ changing visions of themselves as teachers, and with their “professionalvision” (Sherin, 2001). Yet, this notion of becoming a certain kind of teacher has received minimal attention inthe teacher noticing/attention/responsiveness literature. We acknowledge that our own work has generallybackgrounded issues of identity and becoming. Interestingly, however, work in progress by some of theparticipants has begun to foreground these issues.ReferencesAinley, J., & Luntley, M. (2007). The role of attention in expert classroom practice. Journal of MathematicsTeacher Education, 10, 3–22.Ball, D. L. (1993). With an eye on the mathematical horizon: Dilemmas of teaching elementary schoolmathematics. Elementary School Journal, 93(4), 373–397.Ball, D. L. & Bass, H. (2003). Toward a practice-based theory of mathematical knowledge for teaching. In B.Davis and E. Simmt (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2002 annual meeting of the Canadian MathematicsEducation Study Group (pp. 3-14). Edmonton, AB: CMESG/GDEDM.Ball, D., Thames, M.H., Phelps, G. (2008). Content Knowledge for Teaching: What Makes It Special?, Journalof Teacher Education, 59(5), 389-407.Brodie, K. (2011). Working with learners’ mathematical thinking: Towards a language of description forchanging pedagogy. Teaching and Teacher Education, 27, 174–186.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1412© ISLSCarpenter, T. P., Fennema, E., Peterson, P. L., Chiang, C.-P., & Loef, M. (1989). Using knowledge of children’smathematics thinking in classroom teaching: An experimental study. American Educational ResearchJournal, 26(4), 499–531.Carpenter, T. P., Fennema, E., Franke, M. L., Levi, L., & Empson, S. B. (2000). Cognitively Guided Instruction:A research-based teacher professional development program for elementary school mathematics.Madison, WI: NCISLA, Wisconsin Center for Education Research, University of Wisconsin.Chazan, D. (1996). Algebra for all students? Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 15, 455–477.Chazan, D. (2000). Beyond formulas in mathematics and teaching: Dynamics of the high schoolCoffey, J.E, & Edwards, A.R. (in revision): Dynamics of disciplinary understandings and practices of attendingto student thinking in elementary teacher education.Coffey, J. E., Hammer, D., Levin, D. M., & Grant, T. (2011). The missing disciplinary substance of formativeassessment. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48(10), 1109-1136.Crespo, S. (2000). Seeing more than right and wrong answers: Prospective teachers’ interpretations of students’mathematical work. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 3, 155–181.Davis, B. (1997). Listening for differences: An evolving conception of mathematics teaching. Journal forResearch in Mathematics Education, 28(3), 355–376.Empson, S. B., & Jacobs, V. R. (2008). Learning to listen to children’s mathematics. In D. Tirosh & T. Wood(Eds.), Tools and processes in mathematics teacher education (pp. 257–281). Rotterdam, NL: SensePublishers.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20(4), 399–483.Fennema, E., Carpenter, T. P., Franke, M. L., Levi, L., Jacobs, V. R., & Empson, S. B. (1996). A longitudinalstudy of learning to use children’s thinking in mathematics instruction. Journal for Research inMathematics Education, 27(4), 403–434.Franke, M. L., Carpenter, T., Fennema, E., Ansell, E., & Behrend, J. (1998). Understanding teachers’ selfsustaining, generative change in the context of professional development. Teaching and TeacherEducation, 14(1), 67–80.Franke, M. L., Carpenter, T. P., Levi, L., & Fennema, E. (2001). Capturing teachers’ generative change: Afollow-up study of professional development in mathematics. American Educational Research Journal,38(3), 653–689.Franke, M.L. & Chan, A. (2006). High Leverage Practices. Retrieved July 2011 fromhttp://gallery.carnegiefoundation.org/insideteaching/quest/megan_loef_franke_and_angela_grace_chan_high.htmlGallas, K. (1995). Talking Their Way Into Science: Hearing Children’s Questions and Theories, Respondingwith Curricula. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.Garet, M., Porter, A., Desimone, L. (2001). What makes professional development effective? Results from anational sample of teachers. American Educational Research Journal, 38(4), 915-945.Hammer, D. (1996). Misconceptions or P-Prims: How may alternative perspectives of cognitive structureinfluence instructional perceptions and intentions? Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(2), 97-127.Hammer, D. (1997). Discovery Learning and Discovery Teaching. Cognition and Instruction, 15(4), 485-529.Hammer, D., Goldberg, F., & Fargason, S. (2012). Responsive teaching and the beginnings of energy in a thirdgrade classroom. Review of Science, Mathematics and ICT Education, 6(1), 51-72.Hamme, D., Scherr, R. E., & Robertson, A. (forthcoming). To-be-titled edited volume on responsive teachingin science.Hammer, D., & Schifter, D. (2001). Practices of Inquiry in Teaching and Research. Cognition and Instruction,19(4), 441-478.Hammer, D., & van Zee, E. (2006). Seeing the science in children’s thinking: Case studies of student inquiry inphysical science. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.Jacobs, V. R., Lamb, L. L. C., & Philipp, R. A. (2010). Professional noticing of children’s mathematicalthinking. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 41(2), 169–202.Kazemi, E., & Franke, M. L. (2004). Teacher learning in mathematics: Using student work to promote collectiveinquiry. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 7, 203–235.Kazemi, E., Franke, M., & Lampert, M. (2009). Developing Pedagogies in Teacher Education to SupportNovice Teachers' Ability to Enact Ambitious Instruction. In R. Hunter B. Bicknell & T.Burgess (Eds.), Crossing Divides, Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of The MathematicsEducation Research Group of Australasia Vol 1 (pp. 11–29). Palmerston North, New Zealand:Mathematics Education Research Group of Australasia.Kennedy, M.M. (1998). Form and substance in in-service teacher education (Research monograph no. 1).Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1413© ISLSKieran, C. (1992). The learning and teaching of school algebra. In D.A. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of research onmathematics teaching and learning (pp. 390-419). New York: Macmillan.Lampert, M., Franke, M. L., Kazemi, E., Ghousseini, H., Turrou, A. C., Beasley, H., … Crowe, K. (2013).Keeping it complex: Using rehearsals to support novice teacher learning of ambitious teaching. Journalof Teacher Education, 64(3), 226–243.Lau, M. (2010). Understanding the dynamics of teacher attention: Examples of how high school physics andphysical science teachers attend to student ideas (Doctoral dissertation). University of Maryland atCollege Park.Levin, D. M. (2008). What secondary science teachers pay attention to in the classroom: Situating teaching ininstitutional and social systems (Doctoral dissertation). University of Maryland at College Park.Levin, D., Hammer, D., & Coffey, J. (2009). Novice teachers’ attention to student thinking. Journal of TeacherEducation, 60, 142-154.Levin, D. M., & Richards, J. (2011). Learning to attend to the substance of students’ thinking in science. ScienceEducator, 20(2), 1–11.Lineback, J. E. (2012). Mrs. Miller’s evolution in teaching science as inquiry: A case study of a teacher’schange in responsiveness (Doctoral dissertation). University of California, San Diego/San Diego StateUniversity.Luna, M. J. (2013). Investigating elementary teachers’ thinking about and learning to notice students’ scienceideas (Doctoral dissertation). Northwestern University.Maskiewicz, A. C., & Winters, V. A. (2012). Understanding the co-construction of inquiry practices: A casestudy of a responsive teaching environment. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 49(4), 429–464.National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.NCTM (National Council of Teachers of Mathematics). (2000). Principles and standards for schoolmathematics. Reston, VA.NRC (National Research Council). (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching science in gradesK-8. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.NRC (National Research Council). (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.O’Connor, M. C., & Michaels, S. (1993). Aligning academic task and participation status through revoicing:Analysis of a classroom discourse strategy. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 24(4), 318–335.Pierson, J. L. (2008). The relationship between patterns of classroom discourse and mathematics learning(Doctoral dissertation). University of Texas at Austin.Putnam, R., & Borko, H. (2000). What do new views of knowledge and thinking have to say about research onteacher learning? Educational Researcher, 29(1), 4-15.Richards, J. (2013). Exploring what stabilizes teachers’ attention and responsiveness to the substance ofstudents’ scientific thinking in the classroom (Doctoral dissertation). University of Maryland at CollegePark.Rosebery, A. S., & Puttick, G. M. (1998). Teacher professional development as situated sense-making: A casestudy in science education. Science Education, 82, 649–677.Rosebery, A. S., & Warren, B. (1998). Boats, Balloons, and Classroom Video. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.Russ, R. S., & Luna, M. J. (2013). Inferring teacher epistemological framing from local patterns in teachernoticing. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 50(3), 284–314.Schegloff, E. A., & Sacks, H. (1999). Opening up closings. In A. Jaworski & N. Coupland (Eds.), The discoursereader (pp. 263–274). London, England: Routledge.Schifter, D. (2011). Examining the Behavior of Operations: Noticing Early Algebraic Ideas. In M. G. Sherin, V.R. Jacobs, & R. A. Philipp (Eds.), Mathematics teacher noticing: Seeing through teachers’ eyes (pp.204–220). New York, NY: Routledge.Schoenfeld, A. (1988). When good teaching leads to bad results: Disasters of well taught mathematics classes.In T. P. Carpenter & P. L. Peterson (Eds.), Learning mathematics from instruction (Vol. 23, pp. 145).Schoenfeld, A. (1998). Toward a theory of teaching-in-context. Issues in Education, 4(1), 1-94.Sherin, M. G. (2001). Developing a professional vision of classroom events. Beyond classical pedagogy:Teaching elementary school mathematics, 75-93.Sherin, B., & Star, J. R. (2011). Reflections on the study of teacher noticing. In M. G. Sherin, V. R. Jacobs, & R.A. Philipp (Eds.), Mathematics teacher noticing: Seeing through teachers’ eyes (pp. 66–78). NewYork, NY: Routledge.Sherin, M. G., & Han, S. Y. (2004). Teacher learning in the context of a video club. Teaching and TeacherEducation, 20, 163–183.Sherin, M. G., Jacobs, V. R., & Philipp, R. A. (2011). Mathematics teacher noticing: Seeing through teachers'eyes. Taylor & Francis US.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1414© ISLSSherin, M. G., & van Es, E. A. (2009). Effects of video club participation on teachers’ professional vision.Journal of Teacher Education, 60(1), 20–37.Star, J. R., & Strickland, S. K. (2008). Learning to observe: using video to improve preservice mathematicsteachers’ ability to notice. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 11, 107–125.Stephens, A. (2008). What “counts” as algebra in the eyes of preservice elementary teachers? Journal ofMathematical Behavior, 27, 33-47.van Es, E. A. (2011). A framework for learning to notice student thinking. In M. G. Sherin, V. R. Jacobs, & R.A. Philipp (Eds.), Mathematics teacher noticing: Seeing through teachers’ eyes (pp. 134–151). NewYork, NY: Routledge.van Es, E. A., & Sherin, M. G. (2008). Mathematics teachers’ “learning to notice” in the context of a video club.Teaching and Teacher Education, 24, 244–276.van Es, E. A., & Sherin, M. G. (2010). The influence of video clubs on teachers’ thinking and practice. Journalof Mathematics Teacher Education, 13, 155–176.van Zee, E. H., & Minstrell, J. (1997). Reflective discourse: developing shared understandings in a physicsclassroom. International Journal of Science Education, 19(2), 209–228.Walkoe, J. (2010). Seeing algebraic thinking in the classroom: A study of teachers’ conceptualizations ofalgebra. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences, 1, 1055-1062.Walkoe, J. D. K. (2013). Investigating teacher noticing of student algebraic thinking (Doctoral dissertation).Northwestern University.Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., Braaten, M., & Stroupe, D. (2012). Proposing a core set of instructional practicesand tools for teachers of science. Science Education, 96, 878–903.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1415© ISLS