Science Teacher Pedagogical Design Capacity with Technologyin an Integrated Teacher Preparation ProgramAaron M. Kessler and Jennifer Cartier, University of Pittsburgh, 5500 Wesley W. Posvar HallEmail: aaronmkessler@gmail.com, jcartier@pitt.eduAbstract: This study unpacks a set of practices that impact preservice science teachers (PST)ability to incorporate technological resources into their planning in ways that supportinstructional episodes aligned with the goals and demands of an integrated teacher preparationprogram. Early results suggest that PSTs are able to develop the ability to plan high demandtasks using technology, pedagogical design capacity for technology, after instructionalinterventions in their teaching methods course.Major Issues and Potential SignificanceWith more and more teachers turning to non-traditional curriculum materials, such as online simulations, blogs,electronic readings, math games, …etc., it is important for school administrators and teacher educators tounderstand how the technological resources teachers find and utilize are impacting the instructional episodesthat teachers craft. This is especially true of new or beginning teachers. As others have detailed beginning orinexperienced teachers have a tendency to offload instruction from curriculum materials (Brown & Edelson,2003; Forbes & Davis, 2010). However, if the materials they do offload to do not align with the instructionalpractices promoted by district administrators, the possibility for drift from the intended type of instruction arehighly likely (Brown, 2009). This project first asks is it possible to train preservice science teachers (PST) toidentify the affordances and constraints of technologies for instructional purposes? Second, if this is possible,what impact does this knowledge have on PST’ instructional design choices? In other words, are PST’ designchoices resulting in instructional episodes that fit the mold of instruction being presented by their teacherpreparation program?Further, this work contributes to our knowledge of how we prepare PST to utilize technology in threeways. First, by developing an understanding of students' ability to evaluate teaching technologies’ instructionalconstraints and affordances we can better develop opportunities for them to practice working with technology.Second, by developing an understanding of how PST design instructional episodes around technology and howthose decisions relate to the constraints and affordances of the technology, we hope to lean how to better supportthis design process. Finally, this work allows for the development of a way for researchers to code and identifystudents pedagogical design capacity (Brown, 2009) related to technology, further illuminating how teachers’instructional planning unfolds.Theory and MethodTraditionally, curriculum materials have been considered “instructional resources such as textbooks, lessonplans, and student artifact templates” developed by experts with the specific intent for how these materialsshould be used (Forbes & Davis, 2010, pg. 820). Sherin and Drake suggest that as teachers use curriculummaterials they develop what is called “curriculum vision” (2009). This is the teachers’ ability to evaluate andutilize curriculum materials to enact certain types of instruction, which meet the specific instructional goals theydesire. Brown suggests that this ability to have teachers “perceiving affordances, making decisions, andfollowing through on plans” is their Pedagogical Design Capacity (Brown, 2009, pg. 29). It is believed thatteachers’ Pedagogical Design Capacity (PDC) is developed over time with continuing enactment of curriculum,aka more practical experience, and through better-designed curriculum materials (Brown 2009). This study takesthe framework of PDC and applies it to non-traditional curriculum materials, specifically, classroom technologyin K-12 science classrooms.Utilizing an exploratory qualitative based study, the context for this project is a Science TeachingMethods course at a large Midwestern University. The purpose of the course was ultimately to supportpreservice science teachers (PST) ability to plan and implement instructional episodes that incorporated highcognitive demand tasks in ways that encourage K-12 students to engage with difficult science content inproductive ways. Others have shown that implementing high demand tasks in mathematics settings results inpositive learning gains for students and incorporating this framework in science education has shown early signsof success (Stein, Grover, & Henningsen, 1996; Cartier, et al., 2013). In order to prepare PST to design suchinstructional episodes, the course utilized a framework that included cycles of representation, decomposition,and approximations of these technology practices (Grossman et al., 2009).For this study, we first asked PST to design a lesson using a technology of their choosing (Pre LessonPlan). This planning came before any instruction around the technology practices and was meant to establish abaseline of PST initial ability to plan with technology. PST then participated in an inquiry activity aroundICLS 2014 Proceedings1621© ISLSclassroom technology, specifically simulators. The course instructor modeled appropriate inquire-basedquestioning and facilitating practices around the use of the simulator. In the second part of the same class PSTparticipated in a discussion about technological affordances and constraints, planning highly demanding lessonswith technology, and issues with carrying out instruction with educational technology, most of which wasrelated back to the simulator activity. This entire lesson was video recorded and transcribed. At the completionof the lesson we asked the PST to revise the lesson plans they had previously turned in as they saw fit based onthe discussions in class (Middle Lesson Plan). Finally, two weeks after the class period on technology practices,we then asked PST to implement a lesson with their K-12 students that involved “Students engaging withtechnology in a way that promotes learning that would not otherwise be possible without the use of thetechnology.” After, we asked the PST to select technology that supported student engagement in a highcognitive demand task, and consider the constraints of their selected technology and setting during theirplanning. Finally, the PST created artifact packets (Borko et al., 2005), which included lesson plans, supportingdocuments, supervisor feedback, and reflection for this lesson (Post Lesson Materials).We are currently coding data using emergent coding for PDC from the video transcripts and writtenlesson plans. The codes are based on the ideas from Brown and Forbes & Davis and have been based onexamples of how PST demonstrate the different abilities to design instruction around the simulators ortechnology in their posted lesson. The coding indicates that 8 of 15 PST showed marginal development, 2 of 15showed large growth, and 5 of 15-showed limited development of PDC for technology. Although most (13 of15) of the PST were able to cite limitations of the technology they chose related to their classroom context, only4 were able to identify affordances that would justify using the selected technology. The underlying reasons forthis gap is still be explored in the second phase of codingEarly Results and RelevanceEarly data analysis suggests that PST are able to make connections between the affordances and constraints oftechnology in relation to the instructional planning they complete after participating in structured courseexperiences. Early results also suggest that almost many of the students still struggle with integrating technologyin ways that maintain the desired instructional practices forwarded by the teacher preparation program,specifically maintain high demand tasks that front scientific thinking. These results inform the design practicesused in teacher preparation programs around technology and have the potential to shape the technologyimplementation practices of K-12 Preservice teachers. Unpacking the steps and processes that allow PST tocarry out these practices is critical for producing well-started teachers who use technology in ways that alignwith the instructional goals of districts and teacher preparation programs.ReferencesBorko, H., Stecher, B., M., Alonzo, A. C., Moncure, S., and McClam, S. (2005). Artifact packages forcharacterizing classroom practice: A pilot study. Educational Assessment 10 (2), 73-104.Brown, M. (2009).The Teacher-Tool Relationship: Theorizing the Design and Use of Curriculum Materials. InRemillard, J., Herbel-Eisenmann, B., & Lloyd, G. (Ed.), Mathematics Teachers at Work: ConnectingCurriculum Materials and Classroom Instruction (pp. 17- 35). New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor andFrancis.Brown, M., & Edelson, D. (2003). Teaching as design: Can we better understand the ways in which teachers usematerials so we can better design materials to support their changes in practice? Evanston, IL: TheCenter for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools.Cartier, J. L., Smith, M. S., Stein, M. K., & Ross, D. K. (2013). 5 Practices for Orchestrating ProductiveScience Discussions. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics and Corwin Press.Forbes, C. T., & Davis, E. A. (2010). Curriculum design for inquiry: Preservice elementary teachers'mobilization and adaptation of science curriculum materials. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,47(7), 820-839.Grossman, P., Compton, C., Igra, D., Ronfeldt, M., Shahan, E., & Williamson, P. W. (2009). Teaching practice:A cross-professional perspective. Teachers College Record, 111(9), 2055-2100.Sherin, M.G. & Drake, C. (2009). Curriculum strategy framework: investigating patterns in teachers’ use of areform-based elementary mathematics curriculum. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 41(4), 467-500.Stein, M. K., Grover, B. W., and Henningsen, M. (1996). Building student capacity for mathematical thinkingand reasoning: An analysis of mathematical tasks used in reform classrooms. American EducationalResearch Journal, 33, 455–488.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1622© ISLS