Becoming Agents of Change through Participation in aTeacher-Driven Professional Research CommunityMichael Ross, Ben Van Dusen and Valerie Otero, University of Colorado Boulder, 249 UCB, Boulder, COEmail: michael.j.ross@colorado.edu, benjamin.vandusen@colorado.edu, valerie.otero@colorado.eduAbstract: This study involves a theory-based teacher professional development model thatwas created to address two problems. First, dominant modes of science teacher professionaldevelopment have been inadequate in helping teachers create learning environments thatengage students in the practices of science, as called for most recently by the NGSS. Second,there is a lack of teacher presence and voice in the national dialogue on education reform andassessment. In this study, teachers led and participated in a professional community focusingon STEM education research. In this community, teachers became increasingly responsible fordesigning and enacting learning experiences for themselves and their colleagues. Weinvestigated the characteristics of the science teachers’ learning process. Findings suggest thatteachers who participated in this model generated knowledge and practices about teaching andlearning while simultaneously developing identities and practices as education reformadvocates and agents of educational change.IntroductionThe goal of the NSF-funded, Streamline to Mastery project was to develop and investigate a model of scienceteacher professional development (PD) that is, by design, customized to participating teachers’ needs andexperiences. Customization is made possible by organizing activity so that teachers increasingly take control of,and responsibility for, their own professional development. Through the task of creating learning experiencesfor themselves, such as engaging in lesson-sharing and developing their own education research agendas, thenine participating Streamline teachers generated knowledge about teaching and learning. This knowledge tookthe form of principles of science teaching and learning and propagated in various forms, locally and nationally,to other researchers and practitioners. Workshops for teachers, conference presentations, peer-reviewedpublications, and leadership roles in local schools and on national committees have become common means forthe Streamline teachers to participate in productive dialogue on science education reform.Streamline to Mastery was created in response to two problems. The first is the widespread perceptionthat dominant, top-down modes of science teacher PD are largely ineffective (e.g., Borko, 2004). Two of thethree authors are former high school physics teachers and come from communities of practitioners that regardtop-down PD as costly, disconnected from the needs of teachers, and largely ineffective at instigatingmeaningful change. Though researchers have theorized about innovative PD experiences (e.g., Grossman,Wineburg, & Woolworth, 2001) and examined factors that appear to make some teacher PD more effective thanothers (e.g., Borko, 2004; Garet, Porter, Desimone, Birman, & Yoon, 2001), this study seeks to explore a modelof teacher learning that deviates significantly from conventional thinking about how changes in practices andbroader agency can be realized by science teachers. The second problem that Streamline was designed toaddress is the conspicuous absence of teachers from the national dialogue on education reform. This dialogue isheavily influenced by groups with little or no connections to actual K-12 classrooms, including policy thinktanks, corporate interests, and philanthropic organizations. University researchers make up a large and vocalgroup of education reformers as well, many of whom are former teachers who conduct research in or about K-12schools. We argue that even the most well-intentioned of the university researchers are not grounded in the dayto-day reality of being a teacher in the current climate. It is difficult to imagine a conference on best surgicalpractices being virtually devoid of practicing surgeons, yet that is the unfortunate and unacceptable state ofmany prestigious conferences in K-12 education research.In this piece, we present data showing shifts in the roles and practices of the Streamline participantsfrom those typical of practitioners to those associated with teacher leaders and agents of broad educationalchange. We bring a particular focus to the development and abstraction of general principles of teaching andlearning by the Streamline teachers and discuss these practices as they relate to scientific practices and sciencelearning. Finally, we discuss the implications of these findings for the development of future science teacher PDefforts, particularly with regard to the Next Generation Science Standards (NRC, 2013).Theoretical FrameworkHolland, et al. (Holland, D., Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., Cain, 1998) define identity as a relational phenomenonas much bound to others and all manner of cultural forms as to the person to whom it is attributed. Socioculturalconceptions of identity have been shaped by the work of Vygotsky (1986), which brought the broader socialactivity into accounts of individual learning. Contemporary researchers have explored relationships between theICLS 2014 Proceedings567© ISLSconstructs of identity, agency, and goals (e.g., Barton & Tan, 2010; Nasir & Hand, 2006; Nasir, 2002) as ameans to understand how perceived opportunities and constraints are a medium through which identity andculture mutually and continuously construct one another.Our work is grounded in the view that identity and cultural practices are mutually constituted. As itrelates, we view cultural practices as the aggregate of ever evolving expressions of shared expectations, norms,and values—as expressed through agreed-upon practices—among individuals that are identified by, and identifywith, these practices. In this view, each individual navigates and negotiates her own identity development in theworld of what is perceived to be possible (or not); meanwhile, this continual negotiation shapes the broadercontext and thus what is perceived to be possible. Changes in an individual’s practices, and in how she positionsherself in and through those practices, constitute learning.In this study, we investigate the hypotheses that social contexts in which participation requiresauthoring of activity (Bahktin, 1993) lead to changes in participation and agency within that social context. Forscience students, these forms of agency involve capacity and empowerment to engage in scientific practices(Belleau & Otero, 2012; Ross & Otero, 2011; Van Dusen & Otero, 2012). For K-12 science teachers, forms ofagency involve capacity and empowerment to instigate change in local science education contexts, such as theteachers’ classrooms, as well as the instigation of broader change (Ross & Otero, 2011; Ross, Van Dusen,Sherman, and Otero, 2012). In both settings, we have investigated the hypothesis that learning contexts can bedesigned to enable learners to become authors of disciplinary knowledge on the basis of collaborative reflectionon their experiences. We argue that this agency is associated with identities as scientists (with K-12 students)and instigators of change (with science teachers).We propose a heuristic of two extremes of K-12 teacher professional development to frame ourresearch: (1) a model in which principles of teaching and learning are provided by experts who administer thePD and are intended to be acquired in some way by the teacher-learner; and (2) a model in which the teacherparticipants extract principles of teaching and learning collaboratively through evidence-based activities, such asconducting (and reflecting on) their own educational research. For both models, the goal is teacher learning thatleads to more effective practice. The design of the Streamline to Mastery PD program is based on the lattermodel, with the additional goal of the teacher-learners becoming agents of broader educational change.One intended outcome of learning in the Streamline to Mastery model is that the teachers increasinglyengage in the practice of extracting from their experiences generally applicable principles of teaching andlearning that may lead to more effective teaching and broad scale educational change. The process of abstractinggeneral principles from reflection on experiences (including systematic observation and social consensus) isknown as the process of induction (Bacon, 1878). Induction is a complex and iterative form of reasoninginvolving moving inferentially from specific instances (concrete experience and observations) of a phenomenontoward generally applicable (typically predictive or mechanistic) rules that govern the behavior of thatphenomenon. The inductive process in Streamline to Mastery is analogous to the work of communities ofscientists that move inferentially from the observation of specific instances of natural phenomenon to thedevelopment of general rules about it. The usefulness of these general rules about our interactions with nature,scientific principles and theories, resides in the predictive and explanatory power they provide. Likewise,communities of teachers may become both practiced in, and come to identify with, the social practice of usingevidence to develop and abstract generally applicable principles of teaching and learning. Just as our empiricalwork investigates the premise that science learners can author scientific principles and models from evidence(Belleau & Otero, 2012; Ross & Otero, 2011) as they increasingly establish identities associated with science,we investigate here the role of authorship in the development of agency and identities as teacher-leaders.Streamline to MasteryThe Streamline to Mastery program began with four science teachers in 2009, grew to nine teachers in 2010,and ten more are to be recruited in the 2014. Requirements to be in the program included teaching in a highneeds school district, completion of a master’s degree, and a willingness to share aspects of teaching practicesthrough group collaboration. Additionally, teachers are required to conduct research into their own practices,present at least once per year at a national education conference, and take one graduate level college course (oftheir choice) per year. The research team, all who participated directly in the program, consisted of the NSFproject PI, two doctoral students in physics education research (both of whom were formerly high schoolphysics teachers), and one future physics teacher (who was, at the time, an undergraduate Noyce Fellow).Teachers and researchers met every two weeks to share lessons, plan classroom research, and discuss topics ofinterest to the teachers. Activities included lesson-sharing, in which teachers and researchers each shared alesson that they deemed to be effective and “inquiry-oriented,” designing and executing education research, andpreparing to present at national conferences.Since its inception, the participants of Streamline have struggled with the apparent lack of structure ofthe program. From the researchers’ perspective, it was difficult to balance the need for structure at the outset inorder to establish norms for supporting learning with the undergirding philosophy that the teachers know bestICLS 2014 Proceedings568© ISLSwhat their own needs are and are capable of learning to design experiences to meet those needs. Thus, thestructures, leadership, and mentoring provided by the principle investigator and two graduate students wasdeliberately tapered over time. As hypothesized, and as the data below show, the teachers increasingly tookcontrol of and responsibility for the design and completion of tasks and for the direction, vision, and mission ofthe group.Extracting Principles of Teaching and LearningOne example of the inductive process that occurred within the Streamline to Mastery community involved thefirst cohort of four teachers negotiating the meaning of the term “inquiry.” In the first weeks of Streamline toMastery, the teachers agreed that their prior science teacher preparation and professional development had notadequately prepared them to enact effective science instruction. They were all familiar with the word “inquiry,”and knew it was somehow important in science learning, yet, just as a great deal of research has shown (Kang,Orgill, & Crippen, 2008; Wallace & Kang, 2004; Windschitl, 2004), all agreed that their understanding of it wasinadequate. The term scientific inquiry, which is another term for the scientific inductive process describedearlier, is a practice that is critical for the authoring of science ideas in the classroom. Though the researcherswere quite aware that the term “inquiry” had become so ambiguous and problematic that it would be abandonedin the Next Generation Science Standards (NRC, 2013), we understood that these teachers felt strongly that theyneeded to understand how to engage their students in doing science in the classroom, regardless of what policydocument authors decide to call it. Lesson-sharing was one of the structures used by the teachers to explore thenotion of inquiry as it relates to science learning in the classroom. Each teacher was asked to bring in their best“inquiry lesson” and share it with the group. The group then discussed the ways in which each lesson wasconsistent with their current ideas of “inquiry.” The researchers studied how the teachers’ notions of inquirychanged over time throughout this process. Data collected involved periodic reflections, a scenario-basedscientific inquiry survey (Kang et al., 2008), and videos of all of the lesson-sharing and other group discussions(for detailed methods, see (Ross, et al, 2011)). These data were coded using both an a-priori coding methodbased upon the elements of classroom scientific inquiry outlined in Inquiry and the NSES (National ResearchCouncil, 2000) and an open coding method (Strauss, 1987) that allowed for the emergence of codes and trendsin the data.Through a longitudinal analysis of teacher talk, the researchers constructed a time series representationof teachers’ collective negotiation of meaning of the term “inquiry” as inferred from the data. The analysisyielded four phases of meaning negotiation. The four phases are shown in Figure 1, along with a representativesample of the transcript excerpts. In the first phase, the teachers used the term “inquiry” in different andambiguous ways (I), including “hands on,” “real-world,” “constructivism,” and “best practice.” In the secondphase, the teachers realized and externalized that they did not have a complete understanding of the term (II).Figure 1. Phases of meaning negotiation of the term “inquiry” among Streamline teachers.Upon this realization, the teachers decided that they needed to explicitly negotiate better understanding of themeaning and associated practices of inquiry (III). Through concerted effort and communal participation, thegroup negotiated a shared definition of inquiry as: “socially constructing evidence-based meaning ofphenomena through intentionally sequenced events.” Finally, the teachers used their definition as the foundationfor later local and national workshops that they led for other teachers on classroom scientific inquiry (IV). Notethat though phase V would be the next logical step in this research, it was not systematically observed orinvestigated in this study.The study of the teachers’ negotiation of meaning of the term inquiry is an empirical example of theinduction of a principle of science teaching and learning. This process was initiated by the teachers and resultedin the extraction of a general principle of teaching and learning. The Streamline teachers moved inferentiallyfrom concrete experiences (activity in their own classrooms) and structured observations (lesson-sharing) to aICLS 2014 Proceedings569© ISLSconsensus definition of a central topic of interest in science learning. This example of becoming practiced ininduction is just one change that suggests the evolution of the Streamline teachers’ identities as expert learnerswho extract general principles from experience and systematic observation.Changing Roles, Practices, and IdentitiesThe extraction of principles is one aspect of the learning that was observed among the Streamline to Masterygroup. In tandem with the collection of data on the teachers’ pursuit of an understanding of “inquiry,” groupemails and meeting videos were systematically examined for indications of changes in the nature of theteachers’ participation as they took on new roles and responsibilities associated with the program. Thesechanges in practice were taken as indicators of increasing agency among the teacher participants. The groupemails were analyzed to determine from whom they were sent (teacher or researcher), the date of theirorigination, what their primary topic was, and if they represented a new line of discussion or were a reply toanother email. Transcripts of the meeting videos were coded for the introduction of new agenda items and whointroduced them (for detailed methods, see (Van Dusen & Otero, 2012)).As is shown in Figure 2, the researchers sent the majority of the emails in 2009, but over time theteachers began to send a larger share of the total number of emails. The total number of emails in a given monthranged from eight to fifty four. During period (a) in Figure 2, the majority of the emails were from researchersand focused on scheduling meetings with the occasional email about meeting agenda items. During period (b),the teachers’ email volume exceeded those of the researchers. During period, (c), teachers sent an increasedpercentage of the emails in April. In May, researchers’ emails exceeded those of the teachers, largely becausethe researchers were providing guidance and feedback to teachers as they prepared for their first nationalconference.The same set of emails was analyzed to determine whether the teachers or researchers were initiatingthe conversation threads. In this analysis a slightly different pattern emerges. Figure 3 shows the percentage ofnew email conversation threads by month, again broken down into three time periods. During period (a),researchers initiated nearly all of the new conversations. During period (b), threads initiated by teachers andresearchers were evenly balanced with the exception of the March. In March, the teachers were preparingpresentations for a regional conference, which required significant communication among the teachers. Duringthis time the researchers primarily acted as resources in answering teacher questions. During period (c), emailconversations begun by teachers and researchers were nearly balanced. Figure 2 suggests that teacherparticipation increased over time, and Figure 3 suggests that the teachers increased their involvement andinitiative for leadership.Figure 2. Percentage of total emails sent each month.ICLS 2014 Proceedings570© ISLSFigure 3. Percent of new email discussion threads.Videos of group meetings were also analyzed to explore possible changes in who, teachers orresearchers, set agendas. We averaged data within each time period (early, middle, and late). As shown inFigure 4(a), researchers provided all of the meeting agenda items during the early time period. The middle timeperiod shows substantial growth in the percentage of agenda items provided by teachers. During the late section(c), the teachers provided the majority of the agenda items. The change that takes place between (a) and (b)came largely from the teachers beginning to take charge of the meetings, ultimately taking on a majority of theagenda setting responsibility.Figure 4. Agenda items from teachers and researchers.More recently, we examined the type and frequency of the participating teachers’ practices ofpropagating knowledge generated by the Streamline community to other researchers and practitioners. Theteachers are responsible for updating a communal spreadsheet with any formal presentations of researchfindings and teaching practices that they give. This spreadsheet serves as a way for the teachers to keepinformed of the work that their peers have done and gives the researchers an easy way to track the community’sactivities.As is shown in Figure 5, the instances of sharing knowledge generated within the Streamlinecommunity has increased over the four-year period since the group was formally created. Prior to the formationof Streamline, the teachers did not have any role in formally sharing their knowledge of teaching and learning.As a result of being members of the Streamline community, each teachers’ formal sharing of knowledge aboutteaching and learning increased from zero presentations in 2010 to 27 presentations this year (2013), withseveral more presentations planned before the year ends. As the teachers have taken on stronger teacherICLS 2014 Proceedings571© ISLSresearcher identities, they have also taken up the practice of prioritizing the generation of new knowledge andsharing their learning with others. Not only is the propagation of research findings a practice associated withteacher-leaders and agents of educational change, but the teachers’ activity of executing research projectsconstitute both learning and becoming. Through this research, the teachers generated new knowledge about thetopics of study and took up identities of those who are competent at learning through rigorous research.Figure 5. Propagation of Streamline learning to others.The propagation of knowledge generated through research is tangible evidence of the teacherparticipants’ engagement in the process of induction. This research resulted in the extraction of principles ofteaching and learning science. Just as the first cohort of Streamline teachers negotiated meaning of the term“inquiry” in the early stages of the program, all nine participants have engaged in an analogous, and ostensiblymore rigorous and systematic, processes of extracting principles of teaching and learning science. Furthermore,many of these findings were recognized as legitimate contributions to the body of education research throughpeer-review. Moreover, it is the authors’ view that the learning and becoming through the disciplinary practicesexhibited here may support continued agency in the realms of local and national education policy. The processesof extracting and sharing principles of teaching and learning and of supporting claims about effective policiesfor education reform with peer-reviewed, evidence-based research has afforded some Streamline to Masteryparticipants unanticipated levels of agency in national reform efforts. One exemplar of this agency is theparticipation of a Streamline teacher in the American Chemical Society’s (ACS) efforts to launch a chemistryteacher organization comparable to the American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT). This teacher playeda key role in persuading the ACS, through the presentation of her research and experiences with Streamline toMastery and AAPT, to fund and institutionalize the American Association of Chemistry Teachers, anorganization dedicated to the continued development and support of effective chemistry teaching at all levels.Conclusions and ImplicationsIn this paper, we have examined the learning of teachers participating in a teacher-driven professionaldevelopment program. Through a sociocultural perspective of identity development, these data demonstrate thatStreamline teachers became practiced in various ways that suggest the development of identities as evidencebased advocates of educational change. By extracting their own principles of teaching and learning throughlesson-sharing, reflection, and research, the teachers participated in communities that identify with the practicesof using evidence to inform and advocate for science education reform. The abstraction of principles of teachingand learning and the taking on of identities of evidence-based education reformers is indeed an example oflearning and becoming in practice.It is no coincidence that the model of teacher learning that we espouse is modeled after the centralpractice of science, induction. Just as the core practice of science is to infer from evidence and abstract throughconsensus the principles, theories, and models that predict, explain, and fundamentally change the ways thathumans understand and interact with the natural world, we see generality in this practice. This process ofgenerating new knowledge is applicable to teachers’ generation of knowledge as well as formal and informal K-ICLS 2014 Proceedings572© ISLS16 science learning. In our interpretations and discussions of data on learner-driven models of PD and sciencelearning, we must point out what we see as the critical role of the fuller participants (Lave & Wenger, 1991) inthese activities. In our view, the development of principles in science, science learning, and teaching andlearning is guided heavily by the expectations, norms, and pedagogical expertise of the more knowledgeableothers of a community. Just as effective science teachers must be able to engage students in the practice ofscientific induction, administrators of PD must strike some productive balance between providing structure andguidance to the learners and providing space and opportunities for the expressions of agency and the identitydevelopment valued by the designers and participants in these contexts.The body of research we are generating suggests that authority-based models of learning science and oflearning the practices of effective science teaching may never realize the agency and identity development thatis associated with learning in which the making of inferences from evidence and the abstraction throughconsensus and subsequent reification of these inferences are the domain of the learners. We must continue toexplore the premise that for meaningful learning to occur, the very development of abstract, general principlesmust be performed by the learners, as opposed to delivered to them by some authority, whether it be text,teacher, or some digital medium. Of course, these broad claims warrant further study, but we assert that thelearning demonstrated by the data presented about Streamline to Mastery supports the assertion that learnerdriven models of induction can be associated with marked changes in agency in valued practices. As the NextGeneration Science Standards (NRC, 2013) impose a new set of demands on current and future science teachers,we can be reasonably sure that the dominant, top-down models of teacher (and student) learning will beinadequate to the task of supporting teachers in enacting these standards. Learning through a general model oflearner-driven, evidence-based induction has the potential to clarify the central goals of science education,science teacher education, and to more accurately represent science in our classrooms.ReferencesBacon, F. (1878). Novum Organum. Oxford: Clarendon Press.Bahktin, M. (1993). Toward a Philosophy of the Act. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.Barton, A., & Tan, E. (2010). We be burnin’! Agency, identity, and science learning. The Journal of theLearning Sciences, 19(2), 187–229.Belleau, S., Otero, V. (2012). Critical Classroom Structures for Empowering Students to Participate in Science.In S. Rabelo, C. Singh, & P. Engelhardt (Eds.) 2012 Physics Education Research Conference Proceedings.Melville, NY: AIP Press.Borko, H. (2004). Professional Development and Teacher Learning: Mapping the Terrain. EducationalResearcher, 33(8), 3–15. doi:10.3102/0013189X033008003Desimone, L. M. (2009). Improving Impact Studies of Teachers’ Professional Development: Toward BetterConceptualizationsandMeasures.EducationalResearcher,38(3),181–199.doi:10.3102/0013189X08331140Garet, M. S., Porter, a. C., Desimone, L., Birman, B. F., & Yoon, K. S. (2001). What Makes ProfessionalDevelopment Effective? Results From a National Sample of Teachers. American Educational ResearchJournal, 38(4), 915–945. doi:10.3102/00028312038004915Grossman, P., Wineburg, S., & Woolworth, S. (2001). Toward a Theory of Teacher Community. TeachersCollege Record, 942–1012.Holland, D., Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., Cain, C. (1998). Identity and Agency in Cultural Worlds. Cambridge,MA: Harvard University Press.Kang, N.-H., Orgill, M., & Crippen, K. J. (2008). Understanding Teachers’ Conceptions of Classroom InquiryWith a Teaching Scenario Survey Instrument. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 19(4), 337–354.doi:10.1007/s10972-008-9097-4Lave, J., Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Nasir, N. S., & Hand, V. M. (2006). Exploring Sociocultural Perspectives on Race, Culture, and Learning.Review of Educational Research, 76(4), 449–475. doi:10.3102/00346543076004449Nasir, Na’ilah Suad. (2002). Identity, Goals, and Learning: Mathematics in Cultural Practice. MathematicalThinking and Learning, 4(2-3), 213–247. doi:10.1207/S15327833MTL04023_6National Research Council. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. WashingtonDC: The National Academies Press.National Research Council. (2000). Inquiry and the National Science Education Standards: A Guide forTeaching and Learning. Science Education. Washington D.C.: National Academies Press.Ross, M. & Otero, V. (2012). Challenging Traditional Assumptions of High School Science through the PETCurriculum, in S. Rabelo, C. Singh, & P. Engelhardt (Eds.) 2012 Physics Education ResearchConference Proceedings. Melville, NY: AIP Press.Ross, M., Van Dusen, B., Sherman, S., & Otero, V. (2011). Teacher-driven professional development and theICLS 2014 Proceedings573© ISLSpursuit of a sophisticated understanding of inquiry. In Rebello, N. S., Engelhardt, P. V., & Singh, C. (Ed.),Physics Education Research Conference (pp. 327–330). doi:10.1063/1.3680061Strauss, A. L. (1987). Qualitative analysis for social scientists. Cambridge Univ PressVan Dusen, B., Otero, V. (2012). Influencing Student Relationships With Physics Through Culturally RelevantTools. In P. E. S. Rabello, C. Singh (Ed.), Physics Education Research Conference Proceedings.Melville, NY: AIP Press. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1209.1365Wallace, C., & Kang, N. (2004). An investigation of experienced secondary science teachers’ beliefs aboutinquiry: An examination of competing belief sets. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(9),936–960. doi:10.1002/tea.20032Windschitl, M. (2004). Folk theories of inquiry: How preservice teachers reproduce the discourse and practicesof an atheoretical scientific method. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(5), 481–512.doi:10.1002/tea.20010ICLS 2014 Proceedings574© ISLS