Interrogating the Divide: A Case Study of Student Technology Usein a One-to-One Laptop SchoolNicholas WilsonUniversity of Massachusetts, AmherstFurcolo HallCollege of EducationAmherst, MA 01003nwilson@educ.umass.eduAbstract. This study examines the learning experiences of a cohort of students fromhistorically marginalized backgrounds (ethnically- and socioeconomically non-dominant, aswell as academically-underachieving) at a one-to-one laptop school to uncover institutionalstructures and teaching practices that contribute to the reproduction of digital educationinequity. Using a sociocultural framework that incorporates activity systems theory(Engeström, 1987) this research reports on how tensions and contradictions betweeninstitutional, instructional, and student perspectives on learning in a one-to-one environmentforeclose opportunities for agency and technology literacy development, in spite of access to21st century learning technologies.PurposeThe purpose of this study is to examine institutional structures and teaching practices that impact how studentsfrom non-dominant ethnic, socioeconomic, and academically underachieving backgrounds learn withtechnology in a one-to-one laptop environment. Specifically, the study investigates the types of activitiesstudents are asked to perform with technology, how such activities support the development of technologyliteracy skills and student empowerment, and finally, how students “come to terms with” (i.e., respond to, copewith, resist, or embrace) emergent tensions between their personal learning goals, and “what counts” as learningin the classroom.An increasing number of studies on digital education inequity have linked a mixture of complexsociocultural influences to students’ information communications technology (ICT) literacy development andthe reproduction of the “digital divide” (Harris, 2010; Sims, 2013; Subramony, 2007; Warschauer et al., 2004;Warschauer & Matuchniak, 2010; Windschitl & Sahl, 2002), suggesting a growing need for research toqualitatively examine the nature of technology integration and teaching practices in our nation’s schools –especially those in historically underserved communities. Whereas the most fundamental area of digital inequityremains access to computing technology and high speed Internet (Hohlfeld, Ritzhaupt, Barron, and Kemker,2008), further divisions persist along the lines of frequency of technology use, the purposes for which studentsuse technology, and students’ capacity to utilize technology in personally empowering ways (Hohlfeld et al.).This study provides a microanalysis of students’ practices with technology to examine the nature ofcontradictions that inhibit 1) the frequency of opportunities for students to learn with technology, 2) the use oftechnology for higher-order learning activities, and 3) how students are empowered to use technology forpersonal and academic growth.Potential Significance of the WorkThis study will contribute to existing literature on digital education inequity and technology integration. Thecentral focus of technology’s role in this study is imperative for understanding the nature of barriers to effective,technology-mediated learning. While socioeconomic factors hold an obvious implication for the disparity oftechnology skills observed across rich, poor, urban, and rural communities alike, recent studies suggest thatother social factors play an important role in the development of technology literacy and 21st century skills.This study addresses the role of social practices and embedded institutional structures in the development ofthose skills, highlighting the tensions that students and teachers must navigate, bridge, or challenge to maketechnology integration successful and effective.As Hohlfeld et al. (2008) and others have suggested, the wide disparity of technology use observedacross our classrooms is a primary symptom of digital education inequity today. Indeed, the very existence ofsuch inequity, especially in the face of reported increases in access, implies a disconnection between commonconceptions about teaching, technology, and how integration translates into opportunities for learning. A studyon tensions between structures and practices can contribute to our knowledge of these problems by examiningthe nature of social, technical, and relational processes that afford such learning opportunities. Instead ofICLS 2014 Proceedings448© ISLSsimplified, ambiguous interventions like more professional development hours or the installation of moreexpensive equipment, research should seek to understand how technology can be used to construct knowledge,how that use is impeded or enhanced by social and structural practices.Theoretical and Methodological ApproachesConceptual FrameworkOver the past two decades, researchers have observed persistent gaps in the development of technology literacyskills between students from underserved ethnic and socioeconomic backgrounds, and their more affluent, wellserved counterparts. Criticizing oversimplified notions of the “digital divide” that attribute such gaps to adeficiency of access to personal computers and high-speed Internet, recent studies suggest, rather, that theproblem is tied to longstanding social and educational inequities. Approaches to investigating studenttechnology use in light of these suggestions has required a considerably more complex understanding of studenttechnology use than those that have deterministically proposed that merely providing access to technologies willnarrow the divide.Borrowing from theories of social practice (Bourdieu, 1977) and “structuration” (Giddens, 1985), somescholars have begun to consider these “digital inequities” to be the result of myriad institutional and socialinfluences that impact not only how students use technology for learning, but what skills, literacies, and culturalcapital are even valued in the context of schooling (Ito et al., 2010; Ito et al., 2013; Mouza, 2008; Sims, 2013;Warschauer, 2004; Zhang, 2010). Indeed, these studies situate technology literacy as the product of the“systems of relations” (Lave & Wenger, 1991, p.53) between a dynamic constellation of individuals, membersof the learning context, and the human- as well as material- resources that are available in the environment. Thisperspective effectively destabilizes the notion that technology literacy and learning are somehow fixed ornatural outcomes of participation in technology-integrated, school-based exercises. Rather, they suggest,technology literacy development entails a continuously negotiated range of dispositions, between the individualstudent, and the sociohistorical context of the learning activity. As the constituent parts of these “activitysystems” (Engeström, 1987), change from context to context, so do the identities and social positions of thoseparticipating in the activity. When considered through such a lens, technology literacy development, and thefactors that enable or inhibit it, appears more closely tied to relationships of power, privileged social practices,and the “structuring structures” (Bourdieu) of institutions than mere access to 21st century learning tools. Thisstudy adopts a sociocultural approach to examine the technology-related classroom activities students partake in,and how their participation relates to institutional values of 21st century learning, in an effort to understand themechanisms that reproduce digital education inequities.Fundamental to this study is a conceptualization of digital education inequity as the result of thereproduction of social structures and practices that perpetuate and institutionalize the marginalization of nondominant forms of knowledge, culture, and values (Ito et al., 2013). The valued elements of culture, some argue,are derived from traditions and practices that are based in certain ontological and epistemological assumptions,which have become ingrained into our ways of manipulating and seeing the world, through repetition androutinization over many generations (Bourdieu, 1977; Giddens, 1985). This “naturalization” of culture is theheart of the meaning of social practice and reproduction. Hence, social customs, such as teaching practices and“schooling” (Aronowitz & Giroux, 1993) are institutionalized ways of knowing and doing that reflect certainprivileged values.Arguably, the mechanisms of social reproduction at work today have evolved alongside the somewhatrecent emergence of personal technologies, such as computers and cell phones. Increased access to thesetechnologies has shifted our cultural topography to the extent that historically marginalized populations haveincreasing access to channels of cultural participation, as well as to means for constructing entirely new modesof participation. Yet within the education system, traditional notions of literacy and the “transcendent script”(Gutierrez, Rymes, and Larson, 1995) of schooling still dominate the current paradigm of classroom instruction.Indeed, some argue that the tools of reproduction used to separate the culturally-rich from the culturallydeficient (Bourdieu, 1977) (methods such as tracking, standardized testing, and other methods of quantifying“intelligence” and “ability” [McDermott, 1993; McDermott & Varenne, 1995; McDermott & Varenne, 1996]) inthe classroom have become even more entrenched (Aronowitz & Giroux, 1993; Darling-Hammond, 2007).While cultural participation continues to evolve in its form and in its content, many of the technologiesappropriated by communities and individuals to communicate, interact with, and produce knowledge are oftensuppressed or constrained in the classroom (Lemke, 2010). This begs the question of what educational practicesand structures serve to alienate culturally active youth from their academic environment, and marginalize thequality and content of their cultural participation (Wang & Ching, 2003).The current research follows a small cohort of high school students from non-dominant ethnic andsocioeconomic backgrounds in a mixed-level introductory Biology class, and examines their experienceslearning with technology as participants in the school’s one-to-one laptop program. In this ethnographicICLS 2014 Proceedings449© ISLSaccount, I investigate how the conditions of activity – institutional structures, the teacher’s technology skills,attitudes, and beliefs about technology and instruction, the tools students use to accomplish various learningtasks, etc. – influence why and how students use technology in the classroom, and to what ends.MethodsData CollectionThis study took place at a mid-sized high school in a working class town in eastern Massachusetts, dubbed“Bayside” (pseudonym). At the time of this study, the school was in the second full year of its one-to-one laptopprogram – an implementation that had already spanned seven years of research, planning, and development.Data collection for this study encompassed a number of strategies aimed at understanding the social andhistorical context of the research setting, the practices of individuals within that setting, and the tensions thatemerged with regards to the role of technology use and students’ dispositions towards technology and learning.Field notes of each class meeting were documented as I moved in between silent-observer and participantobserver roles throughout the year, occasionally helping students navigate unanticipated technical disruptions.Semi-structured interviews with the focal teacher and student participants took place throughout the year,centering on emergent themes related to the use of technology and teaching practices.During the latter half of the year, in addition to documenting field notes, each class meeting was videorecorded to provide a closer examination of the classroom environment, and a finer-grained analysis of the skillsstudents employed for engaging in various technology activities. Finally, learning artifacts, including an entirearchive of the course’s online site, and official documentation related to the school’s one-to-one laptop programrounded off this large corpus of data.Data AnalysisAnalysis of the data involved a constant comparative analysis (Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Strauss, 1987; Corbin &Strauss, 2008). Constant comparative methodologies stem from the foundations of grounded theory (Glaser &Strauss), which focuses on the identification of “categories, properties, and hypotheses that state relationshipsbetween categories and properties” (p.8), for the purpose of proposing theories that are interpretive in nature (asopposed to prescriptive). Data was scrutinized throughout the collection process for recurring themes andrelationships, employing a phasic process, which included rounds of open coding, axial coding, and selectivecoding, concurrent with frequent cross-checks to establish validity between codes (Demetriadis & Kamberelis,2006).Anthony and Clark (2011) used a constant comparative analysis to situate the context of technologyrelated activities, identify barriers to students’ technology use, and then categorize students’ mechanisms forcoping with those barriers. To do so, they borrowed from Engeström’s (1987) theory of activity systems toinvestigate the nature of teachers’ dilemmas of practice when integrating technology in a one-to-one laptopenvironment. In addition to interviews and surveys with key laptop program stakeholders, the researchersconducted an analysis of official documents that were a part of the laptop program, including the districttechnology plan, technology use policies, the school’s technology vision statement, professional developmentplans, curriculum materials, student assignments, and other documents related to the program. The currentstudy utilized similar methods to explore tensions and contradictions that affected students’ use of technology.First, field notes, interviews, video recordings, learning artifacts, and school documents were codedalong a schematic of activity systems analysis to identify the objectives, mediating artifacts, rules, divisions oflabor, and the “classroom microculture” (Barab, Barnett, Yamagata-Lynch, Squire, & Keating, 2002) thatembodied the Introduction to Biology class’s use of technology. From these codes, a more focused, micro-levelanalysis took place, identifying areas of tension or contradiction that appeared to affect 1) the frequency andpurpose with which technology was integrated into instruction, 2) the role of technology within varioustechnology-integrated activities, and 3) the creation of opportunities for students to learn about- and withtechnology. Finally, these tensions and contradictions were examined to identify the systemic issues thatimpacted the focal students’ learning experiences in the context of a one-to-one laptop program.Findings and DiscussionAfter the end of the school year, the focal teacher and I conducted our final interview to discuss the participantstudents’ achievement in the class, the range of technology integration strategies he adopted over the year, andhis perceptions of students’ dispositions towards technology and learning. After the final exam, only three of thefocal students received a passing grade for the year, one of which the teacher described as a “Gentleman’s Dminus” – effectively a merciful act bestowed upon a senior whose final grade teetered on the edge of failure, andwhich put his graduation and enrollment in a local community college the following year at risk. One studentfrom this group who did pass experienced a massive slump in grades during the second semester, “banking”good enough scores early on to still pass the course within minimal effort over the final months of the schoolICLS 2014 Proceedings450© ISLSyear. As we discussed these disappointing, but somehow all-too-common outcomes, we circled back to thepurpose of the Bayside High School one-to-one laptop program, the role of technology in the Introduction toBiology course, and the tensions that impacted how, when, and why the students used technology in the class.While the teacher spoke of the difficulties integrating technology in a class of some thirty students, and the needfor instructional resources to support the diverse range of learning backgrounds and differences in such anenvironment, what struck me the most was the account of his students’ dispositions towards schooling, and theway these dispositions transcended their use of technology throughout the class. “Just get it done,” was theirmantra – a theme that pervaded these students’ orientations towards technology and learning throughout the year.As I combed through my field notes, interview transcripts, and video recordings for evidence todisprove the lamentably low bar that the students seemed to set for themselves, what began to emerge was theimage of a systemic tension that is reminiscent of deterministic technology policies: the institutionalization ofthe very tools we as educators hope will empower students to achieve in school. The focal participants in thestudy represented not only students from historically marginalized segments of the population (immigrant,minority, and low-income), but students who had had chronic records of academic underperformance. In two ofthe four cases, these students were repeating the Introduction to Biology course because of a previous failinggrade in the course, or failed to pass the state-issued standardized science exam (a requirement of graduation inthe Commonwealth of Massachusetts). As such, these students arguably experienced schooling frommarginalized dispositions, where classroom technology use represented an extension of the sameinstitutionalizing forces that relegated them to the lower rungs of academia. Data from this study suggests thatstudents predominantly used technology for multiple-choice assessments, or in ways that mimicked andsupported the hegemony of testing activities, such as practice tests, note-taking exercises, and formativeassessments that focused on the recitation of facts. Indeed, the there were many similarities between theobjectives, mediating artifacts, rules of behavior, and division of labor of these activities and the high-stakestesting environments students typically experienced as a part of schooling. These activities made up the largemajority of students’ time using technology, and provided arguably few roles for the students to occupy thatmight have empowered them to transcend the marginalized positions ascribed to them as a result of their pooracademic performance, anti-normal social behaviors, and underprivileged cultural values.A second tension that emerged from the data centered on the way students seemingly undermined thepurpose of activities (a form of resistance to schooling), and the use of technology to fulfill course requirements.Over the course of the year, but more so during the first semester, the teacher did in fact assign technologyactivities that were intended to incorporate elements of student-centered learning and constructivist pedagogy.These activities by and large included creating multimedia presentations, conducting virtual lab experiments,and researching information online. Within these activities, the roles provided for students to become legitimateparticipants in the knowledge creation of the classroom community extended beyond their traditional academicroles, leaving room for autonomous activity, agency in demonstrating one’s knowledge of the subject matter,and the exploration of various digital media that students found of personal interest. Yet, despite a persistentlevel of encouragement from the teacher, and a far greater freedom to “show what they know” through the useof technology, many of these opportunities were not taken up by the students, who rather, more often than not,undermined the instructor’s intent in providing them with autonomy and logistic authority, and further, failed tocomplete assignments. When such assignments were completed, they often demonstrated a lack ofresourcefulness in incorporating multiple funds of knowledge, and adhered to the bare minimum ofrequirements. In other cases, computer technology was eschewed altogether, and students turned in hand written,or hand crafted artifacts that, in some cases, exhibited a greater level of effort and care in their creation thanartifacts that were created using technology.In spite of these findings, the seeming lack of creativity or agency in students’ technology-mediatedartifacts, or even the lack of self-regulated learning the students took advantage of technology to engage in (e.g.,not taking practice tests that included the exact same questions used on actual assessments), did not appear toindicate that students did not possess the fundamental level of technology literacy skills needed to achievegreater academic possibilities. Rather, the focal students exhibited adept use of technologies, especially their cellphones, to achieve both their temporary personal goals (often related to “hanging out” [Ito et al., 2010]), as wellas their illegitimate academic ones (e.g., cheating, sharing answers, or using unsanctioned resources to findinformation). These observed activities resemble “hidden literacies” (Ives, 2011) that are often un-valued, andhence go unseen, in the context of schooling.Examples of these literacies included using online discussion boards to find information related to theMinecraft video game, using social media (especially Twitter) to create peer networks and participate in peerculture, and “hacking” together disparate (but compatible) technologies to send text messages over the school’snetwork. What was most remarkable about these examples, was that each required the participating student(s) toconsciously circumvent school rules, and in some cases, its technology infrastructure. To accomplish this,students had to improvise new ways of achieving their temporary goals that avoided detection from authorities,ICLS 2014 Proceedings451© ISLSincluding using unsanctioned features of their laptops, such as the “spaces” feature, and the AirDrop file sharingapplication.The privileging of certain technology uses in the classroom (taking lecture notes and electronicassessments, podcasting, and digital poster making) arguably contributed to students’ sense of “what counts” aslearning, and what counted as legitimate course work. Students dismissed opportunities to hold epistemicauthority over the content they studied (even during creative media projects), and demonstrated an approach tolearning that suggested accomplishing teacher-centered goals, or getting the “right” answer, were the mostimportant outcomes of academic participation.Students used their occasional logistic authority to avoid engaging with course content (chiefly by“Googling” answers and copying each other’s work) and to socialize, rather than planning out effective ways oftackling group assignments or distributing labor amongst themselves to accomplish assignment goals morequickly. These behaviors contributed strongly to the teacher’s sense that he needed to reclaim control over hisstudents’ learning. He therefore implemented measures that enabled him to manage their engagement withcontent and on-task behavior more closely. These measures came in the form of increased lecturing, theimplementation of more worksheet-guided online activities, and the revocation of both epistemic and logisticauthority over their classroom time.When I asked the teacher for his thoughts on what the class was able to accomplish as a group at theend of the year, he raised the issue of authority and control, lamenting that he did not feel he could sustain these“open-ended” assignments without greater instructional support to both keep students on task, and attend to therange of students’ individual learning needs.I believe these findings speak loudly to issues surrounding not only relationships of power and thehegemony of privileged “ways of knowing” in traditional schooling environments, but of chronic epistemictensions between institutions’, teachers’, and disenfranchised students’ objectives for school-based learningactivities. Regarding the frequency and purpose of technology use, these tensions have the potential to yieldoutcomes that overlook students’ technology backgrounds, and institutionalize the very tools educators hopewill empower students for engagement in productive academic and work lives.Conclusions and ImplicationsOne-to-one computing has gained an astonishing amount of popularity in education in recent years, coincidingwith the advent of tablet-based devices and data-driven applications that claim the ability to “personalizelearning” at any level. While many have criticized deterministic, “panacea” approaches to educationaltechnology, the wave of one-to-one computing continues to swell. Though often well meaning in focus and inscope, efforts to technologize education over the past two decades have paradoxically contributed to educationalinequities that have left historically marginalized populations of students “stuck in the shallow end” (Margolis,2008). The preliminary findings of this study suggest that without careful consideration, schools riskinstitutionalizing the very technologies they purport to empower today’s youth.While access to computing and Internet tools, and time to rehearse the various skills needed to utilizethose tools, are fundamental aspects to the development of technology literacy, the types of activities studentsperform with technology, from drill and practice, to research and information analysis, to multimedia production,have an undeniable effect on the technology skills they develop in the context of schooling, and arguably, on thecontent material that they learn. As such, some have argued that digital education inequity points to tensions thatmight inhibit the frequency of student technology use, including ineffective (or absent) teacher training andprofessional development or the lack of instructional support (Belland, 2009). However, many studies leaveunaccounted the complexities of resistance in schools and symbolic capital that permeate many communitieswhere educational inequities persist (Anyon, 1980). This study reports on the teaching practices and learningexperiences of a learning community where technology integration strategies and access to rich technologylearning tools are in long supply. That students would continue to resist schooling in the face of opportunitiesfor enhanced creative expression, access to information, and even to helpful assessment resources, implies a“divide” not in the types of technology literacy skills students acquire, but possibly in the ways schoolinglegitimizes certain types of learning, and the roles students are allowed to occupy in their learning experiences.This further suggests that schools may need to reconsider how they scaffold students into roles of autonomy,and how they can connect curriculum and pedagogy to students’ non-academic technology practices.ReferencesAnthony, A.B., & Clark, L.M., (2011). Examining dilemmas of practice associated with the integration oftechnology into mathematics classrooms serving urban students. Urban Education, 46, 1300-1331.Anyon, J. (1980). Social class and the hidden curriculum of work. Journal of Education, 162. 67-92.Aronowitz, S. and Giroux, H. (1993). Reproduction and resistance in radical theories of schooling. In S.Aronowitz and H. Giroux (Eds.), Education still under siege (pp. 65-109). London: Routledge.ICLS 2014 Proceedings452© ISLSBarab, S., Barnett, M., Yamagata-Lynch, L., Squire, K., & Keating, T. (2002). Using activity theory tounderstand the systemic tensions characterizing a technology-rich introductory astronomy course. Mind,Culture, and Activity, 9(2).Belland, B. (2009). Using the theory of habitus to move beyond the study of barriers to technologyintegration. Computers&Education, 52(2),353-364.Retrievedfromhttp://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360131508001401Bourdieu, P. (1977), Outline of a theory of practice. London: Cambridge University Press.Corbin, J. M., Strauss, A. L., & Strauss, A. L. (2008).Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and proceduresfor developing grounded theory. Los Angeles, Calif: Sage Publications.Darling-Hammond, L. (2007). The flat earth and education: How America’s commitment to equity willdetermine our future. Educational Researcher, 36, 318-334.Dimitriadis, G., & Kamberelis, G. (2006). Theory for education. New York: Routledge.Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research.Retrieved from http://lchc.ucsd.edu/MCA/Paper/Engestrom/expanding/toc.htmGiddens, A. (1985). The constitution of society: Outline of the theory of structuration. Cambridge: Polity Press.Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research.Chicago: Aldine Pub. Co.Gutierrez, K., Rymes B., and Larson, J. (1995). Script, counterscript, and underlife in the classroom: JamesBrown versus “Brown v. Board of Education.” Harvard Educational Review, 65, 3, 445-71.Harris, M.J. (2010). Impactful student learning outcomes on one-to-one student laptop programs in lowsocioeconomic schools. Doctoral dissertation, San Francisco State University, December, 2010.Hohlfeld, T. N., Ritzhaupt, A. D., Barron, A. E., & Kemker, K. (2008). Examining the digital divide in k-12public schools: Four-year trends for supporting ICT literacy in Florida. Computers & Education, 51(4),1648-1663.Ito, M. (2010). Hanging out, messing around, and geeking out: Kids living and learning with new media.Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Top of FormIto, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Watkins, S. C. (2013). Connectedlearning: an agenda for research and design. Digital Media and Learning Research Hub.Ives, D. (2011). Spotting foolbirds: literacies hiding in plain sight in an urban English language artsclassroom. Journal of Literacy Research, 43(3), 250-274.Bottom of FormLave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Lemke, C. (2010). Innovation through technology. In J.A. Bellanca and R.S. Brandt (Eds.) 21st Century Skills:Rethinking How Students Learn (243-72). Bloomington, IN: Solution Tree.Margolis, J. (2008). Stuck in the shallow end: Education, race, and computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.McDermott, R. (1993). The acquisition of a child by a learning disability. In S. Chaiklin and J. Lave (Eds.),Understanding practice. (pp. 269-305). New York: Cambridge University Press.McDermott, R., & Varenne, H. (1995). Culture as disability. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 26, 324.McDermott, R. and Varenne, H. (1996). Culture, development, disability. In R. Jessor, A. Colby, and R.Shweder (Eds.), Ethnography and human development: Context and meaning in social inquiry(pp.101-126). Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.Mouza, C. (2004). Learning with laptops: Implementation and outcomes in an urban under-privilegedschool. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 40(4), 447-472. International Society ForTechnologyInEduction.Retrievedfromhttp://www.mrgibbs.com/tu/research/articles/mouza_laptops.pdfSims, C. (2013). From differentiated use to differentiating practices: negotiating legitimate participation and theproduction of privileged identities. Information, Communication & Society, (September), 1-13.Retrieved from http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1369118X.2013.808363Strauss, A. L. (1987). Qualitative analysis for social scientists. Cambridge, Cambridgeshire: CambridgeUniversity Press.Subramony, D.P. (2007). Understanding the complex dimensions of the digital divide: Lessons learned in theAlaskan arctic. The Journal of Negro Education, 76(1), 57-67.Wang, X. & Ching, C. (2003). Social construction of computer experience in a first-grade classroom: socialprocesses and mediating artifacts. Early Education & Development, 14(3), 335-362.Warschauer, M., Grant, D., Del Real, G., & Rousseau, M. (2004). Promoting academic literacy with technology:successful laptop programs in K-12 schools. System, 32(4), 525-537Warschauer, M., & Matuchniak, T. (2010). New technology and digital worlds: Analyzing evidence of equity inaccess, use, and outcomes. Review of Research in Education, 34(1), 179-225. SAGE Publications.Retrieved from http://rre.sagepub.com/cgi/doi/10.3102/0091732X09349791ICLS 2014 Proceedings453© ISLSWindschitl, M., & Sahl, K. (2002). Tracing teachers’ use of technology in a laptop computer school: Theinterplay of teacher beliefs, social dynamics, and institutional culture. American Educational ResearchJournal, 39(1), 165-205.Zhang, W. (2010). Technical capital and participatory inequality in edeliberation. Information, Communication& Society, 13(7), 1019–1039.ICLS 2014 Proceedings454© ISLS