Identifying Affordances of 3D Printed Tangible Models forUnderstanding Core Biological ConceptsJodi L. Davenport, Matt Silberglitt, and Jonathan Boxerman, WestEd, Oakland, CA, USAArthur J. Olson, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA,jdavenp@wested.org, msilber@wested.org, boxerman@wested.org, olson@scripps.eduAbstract: 3D models derived from actual molecular structures have the potential to transformstudent learning in biology. We share findings related to our research questions: 1) what typesof interactions with a protein folding kit promote specific learning objectives?, and 2) whatfeatures of the instructional environment (e.g., peer interactions, teacher involvement) affectlearning? We provide a framework for categorizing ways of using the models that can be usedas evidence for whether and how physical models promote molecular understanding.IntroductionMany studies have reported that core ideas in molecular biology are difficult for students to understand (e.g.,Hildebrand 1991; Longdon, 1982). Molecular biology requires students to understand processes at multiplelevels from the sub-microscopic (e.g., atoms) to microscopic (e.g., proteins, genes, chromosomes) to largerstructures (e.g., organelles, cells, and organs). Because students have no direct experience with molecularcomponents or processes, the coordination of these levels is particularly challenging (Kindfield, 1994). Studentshave difficulties mapping structure, function, and emergent processes, fail to make important connections, anddevelop misunderstandings of the mechanisms involved in biological processes (e.g., Duncan et al., 2009; Lewis& Wood-Robinson, 2000; Marbach-Ad & Stavy, 2000).Tangible models that allow researchers to “think with their hands” play an essential role in manysignificant scientific findings. In molecular biology, Pauling used models to predict the basic folding units ofprotein structure, and Watson and Crick used models to identify the structure of DNA and reconcile decades ofgenetic data. In the current project we investigate whether and how an innovative protein folding modeldeveloped at the Scripps Research Institute promotes understanding of core concepts in molecular biology,including handedness and how structure determines the function of a protein.The protein folding kit has numerous advantages over traditional “ball and stick” models (see Figure1). Typical models are limited to simple chemical structures, making them unsuitable for modeling complexbiological molecules, and cannot be easily used to represent dynamic processes such as protein folding. Incontrast, the protein folding kit realistically models features of biological molecules such as their shape andflexibility for function and interaction. Typical “ball and stick” models have no affordances for assembling“correct” molecules as they have generic slots for fitting together atoms or molecules. Students can createerroneous models as easily as accurate models. Finally, typical models require students to follow complexdirections to assemble structures. The protein folding kit has affordances that allow the models to assist in theirown assembly, guiding students to create models based on natural interactions. Forces between embeddedmagnets represent molecular attraction and repulsion. The magnets allow students to use these forces to engagein the process of folding a protein from the primary structure, a long chain of amino acids. Students are able toobserve the model’s emergent properties as they discover the nature of the folding process.Figure 1. The protein folding kit. Top left and bottom right show primary structures of chains of amino acids.Top right shows secondary structure of helices. Bottom left shows tertiary structure of complete folded protein.In the current study we explore the affordances of the innovative protein-folding model and focus ourinvestigation on two research questions: 1) what types of interactions with the model promote learning?, and 2)what features of the instructional environment (e.g., peer interactions, teacher involvement) affect learning?ICLS 2014 Proceedings1583© ISLSData Sources and AnalysesTo explore the affordances of the protein-folding model, we carried out observations in a graduate course instructural biology at The Scripps Research Institute. Researchers videotaped two sections of the course, inwhich 14 students participated in a lab practical to explore and build a model of a folded protein. Studentsworked in groups of 3-6 students while instructors circulated to ask and answer questions and ensure studentswere on task. Students started with the primary structure, the backbone of a strand of amino acids, then builtsecondary structures (helices and beta sheets), and finally built the tertiary structure, the folded TIM barrelprotein (see Figure 1). The learning objectives were: 1) to understand how the handedness of the primarystructure influenced the handedness at the other levels of structure, and 2) to understand how hydrogen bondsallow for stability in common secondary structures (beta sheets and helices).All video recordings were transcribed. Preliminary coding identified which features of the tangiblesstudents attended to (e.g., the magnets, the peptide chains), what concepts were mentioned (e.g., molecularstructure and self-assembly), what processes were carried out (e.g., how students attempt to fold the protein,what strategies they use to complete the task), and what explanations were generated (e.g., “those proteins don’tfit together because they have different shapes”).Preliminary FindingsAll student groups were successful in ultimately building the completed protein model. Preliminary codingidentified three main types of interactions with the model that appeared to help students make connectionsbetween the model building exercise and fundamental concepts in molecular biology. The interaction typesidentified were labeling, building, and testing. This first activity, labeling, is the process by which students mapthe parts or structures of the model to scientific terminology. E.g., the force between magnets represents ahydrogen bond. Labeling allowed students to make connections between the model and course content. Buildingis the process of students using the model to learn about the interactions between pieces and the resulting spatialstructures. For instance, students made bonds to form three types of helices. The activity of building provided adeeper encoding of the structures of molecules as students learn using multiple modes of processing (auditory,visual, and touch). Finally, testing refers to using the tangible model for conducting scientific inquiry andgenerating explanations. E.g., students tested how folding secondary structures impacted the overall stability ofthe protein. We postulate that the activity of testing helps students develop a schematic understanding of thescience system as they generate causal inferences from their interactions with the models.Preliminary findings of classroom features suggest engagement with instructors who providedprompting questions significantly contributed to learning, as interactions with instructors generated a greaternumber of relevant questions than students working alone. We anticipate our continued analyses will revealadditional features of the instructional environment that affected learning. Though our results are in the contextof this particular model, we anticipate that the findings will generalize to other domains and provide importantinsights into when and how tangible models can be used to promote conceptual understanding in science.ReferencesBransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.). (2000). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience,and School. Expanded Edition. Washington DC: National Academies Press.Duncan, R., Rogat, A., & Yarden, A. (2009). A learning progression for deepening students' understandings ofmodern genetics across the 5th-10th grades. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 655-674.Hildebrand, A. (1991). Confusing chromosome number and structure: A common student error. Journal ofBiological Education, 25(3), 193-200.Kindfeld, A.C.H. (1994). Understanding a basic biological process: Expert and novice models of meiosis.Science Education, 78, 255-283.Lewis, J., & Wood-Robinson, C. (2000). Genes, chromosomes, cell division and inheritance-do students see anyrelationship? International Journal of Science Education, 22(2), 177-195.Longden, B. (1982). Genetics—Are there inherent learning difficulties? Journal of Biological Education, 16(2),135-140.Marbach-Ad, G. & Stavy, R. (2000). Student’s cellular and molecular explanations of genetic phenomena.Journal of Biological Education, 34, 200-205.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant DRL-1108896, PIDavenport, and the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through GrantR305A120047 to WestEd. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in thismaterial are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation, theInstitute of Education Sciences, or the U.S. Department of Education.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1584© ISLS