Computer-Enhanced Dialogic-Reflective DiscourseShiri Mor-Hagani and Dani Ben-Zvi The University of Haifa, IsraelLearning In a NetworKed Society, Israeli-Center of Research Excellence (LINKS I-CORE)Email: shihag@gmail.com, dbenzvi@univ.haifa.ac.ilAbstract: Various studies on computer-supported collaborative learning have shown thatattempts to implement collaborative learning in learning communities frequently encounterserious challenges. The current paper, following the philosophical approaches of Martin Buberand Nel Noddings, suggests a way to enhance students’ positive appreciation of collaborativelearning as well as the extent and quality of their engagement in it. To this end, we propose apreliminary conceptual framework, called Computer-Enhanced Dialogic-Reflective Discourse,which explains the dimensions of discourse in which students co-explore the challengesarising from their collaborative learning experiences. We illustrate and discuss the supposedpotential of our proposed framework.Key Words: Computer-Enhanced Dialogic-Reflective Discourse (CEDRD),Collaborative Learning (CSCL), dialogue, learning community, reflection.Computer-Supported“The learning community gave me a lot. From being an individual learner, I learned toappreciate the importance of the community members who shared the learning process, toappreciate my ability to learn enormously from community members, and to grow with theirsupport.” (Gali, member of the CATELT learning community)IntroductionPrevious studies of computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) environments have shown that efforts toimplement collaborative learning in educational settings frequently encounter difficulties, such as lack ofstudents’ motivation to actively participate in online interactions, superficial or spurious collaboration (Salmon,2000; Wegerif, 2007) and unequal contributions by students throughout the learning processes (Kerr & Bruun,1983). Research suggests that collaborative learning should be designed more carefully and be mediated to agreater extent by teachers (Brown & Campione, 1994; Dillenbourg, 2002; Guzdial et al., 1997). In recent years,research has included a focus on socio-emotional aspects of CSCL (Bielaczyc, 2006), for example thesignificance of the relationships among students, emotions that accompany and affect collaborative learning andlearning communities (Baker et al., 2013; Dillenbourg et al., 2009; Hod & Ben-zvi, 2013), interpersonalconflicts (Baker et al., 2013; Ben Zvi, 2007), and students experiencing a sense of alienation in online courses(Shner, 2012).This proposal is situated within the discussion on socio-emotional aspects of CSCL. More concretely, itseeks to demonstrate how a conceptual framework, based on principles adapted from Buber’s Dialogicphilosophy (Buber, 2007) and from the Ethic of Care perspective (Noddings, 1995; 2012) can contribute to thisdiscussion. In this paper we therefore introduce CEDRD, a preliminary conceptual framework of ComputerEnhanced Dialogic-Reflective Discourse. The CEDRD framework is based on a study of four rounds of asemester-long graduate course entitled Challenges and Approaches to Technology-Enhanced Teaching andLearning (CATELT, Hod & Ben-zvi, 2013) that was designed as a blended, computer-supported learningcommunity.We first introduce the theoretical background of the CEDRD’s two core dimensions: the dialogic andthe reflective. Then, we elaborate on the way they are manifest in the framework’s third dimension: the designof the learning environment. Through examples, we illustrate and discuss the significance of the CEDRDframework.Dialogue and LearningResearchers have proposed various links between the concept of dialogue and CSCL, suggesting differentunderstandings of relevance and applications (e.g., Burbules, 1993; Koschman, 1999; Wegerif, 2007). Webelieve that several principles of Buber’s dialogic philosophy and Noddings’ concept of moral education, mayhold special importance to CSCL’s research and practice in allowing us to not only discuss the significance ofdialogic social relations in these settings, but also to discuss their necessary composition and nature. After abrief introduction of these perspectives, we will discuss their relevance.Buber (2007) argues that human self-realization as an “I” emerges and develops through and within thedialogic encounter with the other (Bergman, 2007; Buber, 2007). Dialogue happens between equal participants,who perceive each other as an end in itself, mutually engaged in an open and direct relationship, which BuberICLS 2014 Proceedings394© ISLScalls the “I–Thou” relationship (in contrast to “I–it” relationships, in which the other is seen as an object to bemanipulated or a means to obtain other goals). The I–Thou relationship is characterized by its participants’attentiveness and responsibility toward one another, as well as their mutual confirmation of their acceptance,affirmation and support of the other in its otherness (Buber, 2007; Kramer, 2013). Central to the possibility for atrue dialogue to occur is what Buber called inclusion – meaning, making present (Kramer, 2013), or“experiencing the other side to feel an event from the side of the person one meets as well as from one’s ownside” (Friedman, 1956, p. 96). It is through inclusion that one can perceive and recognize the others in their fullhumanness, as they really are. Furthermore, it is through inclusion that one can grasp, not only the other’scharacter and talents, but a view of the situation and of the other. This may happen only through opening uponeself to the other’s otherness without forgetting or relinquishing what he himself is (Buber, 2007; Friedman,2002).The educational dialogue differs from other I–Thou relationships in that the teacher and the student areengaged in one-sided inclusion (Friedman, 1956). Based on the notion that this asymmetry is central to theteacher-student relationship, the student does not and cannot experience the side of the teacher. Yet it is throughinclusion that the teacher knows whether she acts in a manner that is appropriate for and serves to benefit herstudent.Noddings, one of the most influential scholars of the ethic of care perspective (Alpert, 2008),emphasizes the importance of creating caring relations within the classroom. Noddings distinguishes betweenthe teacher’s role as carer, and students’ role as the cared-fors. This occurs when the teacher directs a receptiveattentiveness (which Noddings described as containing and tolerance attention) to the needs expressed bystudents (Alpert, 2008; Noddings, 2007) and to the students’ worlds. Then, the teacher has to respond to theseneeds, either by addressing them or, in cases of conflict between a student’s needs and the needs of theeducation system in which both exist, by ensuring that caring relations between them will continue and not beharmed by the teacher’s inability to address these needs (Noddings, 2012).Noddings connects Buber’s dialogic philosophy and the ethic of care perspective (Noddings, 1995;2010; 2012). It is through and within dialogue that students can get engaged in discussion about the meaning ofcare, and reflect and critically analyze what may or may not be considered as caring behavior for themselves andtowards others. In addition, dialogue contributes to the development of the cared-fors since it is throughdialogue that the teacher may invite her students to “examine their own lives and explore the great questionshuman beings have always asked” (Noddings, 1995, p. 191). Furthermore, it is through dialogue that the teachermay learn about her students, their worlds and their needs, to better direct her efforts as carer, as well as gettingfrom them the necessary feedback regarding her efforts (Alpert, 2008).The relevance and special significance of these two perspectives stem from their emphasis on therelationships among learning community members as the heart of the educational process and its impetus, and asthe key factor affecting students’ engagement in this process. In the context of the proposed CEDRDframework, the importance of these perspectives comprises more concretely of: a) an acknowledgement of thecentral role of the dialogic communication, characterized by care, attentiveness and confirmation; b) anemphasis on participants’ deep, comprehensive, and frequently reworked knowing of each other; c) anunderstanding of the students’ position as equal in value yet different in essence from the position of the teacher;and d) an emphasis on the students’ expressed appreciation of the caring relationships and their trust in theteacher.Reflective Interactions in CSCL CommunitiesReflective interaction, considered as an interaction in which partners not only propose solutions to a problem,but offer explanations, justifications, and/or assessments of these solutions, has been found to be one of the threeinteraction patterns that most effectively promote learning (Baker & Lund, 1997). Salmon (2002) describedreflective interaction as a process of suggesting ideas, receiving feedback, and reforming initial ideas inresponse to the feedback. While these understandings of reflective interactions relate to theoretical knowledge,in the CEDRD framework the focus of reflection includes also the students themselves and the learningprocesses in which they are engaged. By this, we integrate the above definition with the understanding ofreflection as individuals’ directed critical examination of their own past conduct (including beliefs, thoughts,and emotions) for the purpose of drawing conclusions that may be implemented in the future (Bengtsson, 1995;Hatton & Smith, 1995).The integration of the dialogic and reflective dimensions in the context of CSCL, was previouslyproposed by Wegerif (2007). Wegerif proposed a model comprising three partially overlapping types ofdialogue, each encompassing the others to some extent: critical dialogue (solving problems and makingjudgments), caring dialogue (understanding the other), and creative dialogue (exploring solutions, raisingarguments). In addition, this model emphasizes the opening, deepening and broadening of reflective anddialogic spaces between students that enhance creative learning and learning how to learn. Therefore, dialogueis viewed not just as a means for constructing knowledge but as an end unto itself.ICLS 2014 Proceedings395© ISLSWhile there are several similarities between this model and the CEDRD framework, we place primaryemphasis on the significance of interpersonal relations and personal acquaintance and their leading role in thelearning process. Another difference is the context in which the concept of reflectivity is used. For Wegerif,reflectivity entails an exploration of theoretical knowledge, perspectives, etc., while in the CEDRD framework,reflectivity first and foremost entails an exploration of the students themselves in different contexts.The Conceptual Framework of CEDRDHaving presented the theoretical foundations of the CEDRD framework, we discuss its dialogic and reflectivedimensions and their manifestation in a computer-enhanced learning environment. After elaborating on theessence of each separately, we illustrate the meaning of the integration of these dimensions into the framework.The Dialogic Dimension: Engaging in an Attentive, Caring Learning CommunityThe dialogic dimension includes both the teacher’s as well as the students’ context (Table 1).Table 1: The teacher and students’ contexts of the dialogic dimensionThe teacher’s contextThe students’ context1. A caring, attentive, and accepting attitude.1. Tolerance, mutual trust, and caring for each other.2. An educational approach that promotes ongoing2. Sharing experiences, feelings, insights, and ideasacquaintance, attentiveness and care amongwith each other, orally and in writing.learning community members.3. Responding (orally and in writing) to other’s3. Integrating social activities to deepen students’reflections and comments.acquaintance and caring for each other.4. A growing acquaintance with each other.4. Treating the conflicts that arise from collaborative5. Engagement in an on-going discourse about theinteractions not as obstacles but as opportunities todilemmas and conflicts that emerge in the learningdeepen relationships and enhance involvement.process.The Reflective Dimension: ‘Reflecting on’ and ‘Reflecting within’ CollaborativeLearningThe reflective dimension first of all implies the integration of reflective observation on how learning content isconnected to students’ lives, and on the individual, team, and collaborative community learning processes, as anintegral part of learning. Moreover, the reflective dimension also implies the presence of several elements in thediscourse (Table 2).Table 2: Reflective elements in the community discourse.The students’ contextThe community’s context1. Students’ oral and written1. Community reflectivereflective expressionsconversations regardingthroughout the course.individual dilemmas,2. Students’ mutual exposure tointerpersonal conflicts andothers' reflections.community challenges arisingfrom collaboration.2. Community exploration of thesignificance of experiencingcollaborative learning in acommunity of learners.The teachers’ context1. Raising questions that aredesigned to clarify or refinestudents’ reflections.2. Modeling how and in whatways one’s questions may assistanother’s reflective exploration.The Design Dimension: Creating Spaces and Devoting Time for Ongoing DiscourseThe blended learning environment combines in-class community reflective conversation (CRC) sessions with anonline learning platform with the following vital design features (Table 3).Table 3: Design features of the blended learning environment.In-class community reflective conversationsOnline learning platform1. A space designed for community conversation1. A space to conduct discussions about the(such as sitting face to face in a circle), thatcollaborative knowledge emerging in thesupports open, informal talk.collaborative learning process.2. Time devoted for community conversation (Takes2. A space devoted to students’ written reflectivea substantial part of the in-class sessions’ totalexpressions.time, and is repeated weekly).3. The visibility of the students written reflections toall learning community members.ICLS 2014 Proceedings396© ISLSIn-class community reflective conversationsOnline learning platform4. Students’ ability to comment on each other’sreflections, as well as on each other’s comments.Engaging in Computer-Enhanced Dialogic-reflective DiscourseOver the four annual iterations of research in CATELT, we repeatedly observed the emergence anddevelopment of discourse among the learning community members about the socio-emotional aspects ofcollaborative learning. This discourse was mostly feasible in the students’ diaries, located at the Wiki coursewebsite, used by students to record their experiences and reflective insights on the learning process, and theweekly CRC, which takes place in-class’ face to face meetings. From the second iteration on, we used severalprinciples of Buber’s dialogic thought and Noddings’ ethic of care perspective, both to analyze and to furtherenhance the learning community discourse. To make our description of the CEDRD somewhat less theoretical,we provide several examples that illustrate its nature and some key features. In addition, they provide anopportunity to highlight potential significance of CEDRD.Adopting a New Perspective upon Oneself and about Learning CollaborativelyThree students are the participants of the first example: Ariel, Dalit and Michal (All the students’ names havebeen changed to preserve anonymity). The three worked on a collaborative editing task that required them tojointly write a summative critique of a paper. They began during the face-to-face meeting, and continued in theWiki course website. In the CRC that took place the following week, one student described that she had feltpushed aside in the course of the collaborative work. The dominant student in this group made no commentduring the CRC, but later wrote the following passage in his personal diary:Ariel:After a brief exchange with Dalit and Michal, I accessed the editing window and, atmy typical pace, started to delete, modify, and rephrase, effectively pushing asideeverything that had appeared in the original article. Only after I returned home andlooked at it again, did I start to feel a strong sense of discomfort – What right did Ihave? Who says that my interpretation of the article’s meaning is better or morecorrect than what they had written? I looked at how I had been working in class andit seemed to be very disrespectful of the others’ work, very aggressive andoverbearing, maybe even violent… This did not match the image that I had of myselfin my mind, which did not include being insensitive and overbearing!Several days later, the following comment was posted on the joining Wiki conversation page:Michal: The easiest thing is to blame you for being overbearing and causing paralysis in thosearound you through the speed of your thinking and your work, but what about [myown] personal responsibility? I was not very happy with the answers that I wasforced to give to myself.The next day, another comment was posted, this time from the third student in the group:Dalit:For the most part I felt that you prompted me to keep going forward. I did not get thefeeling that you were taking control of the computer. In general, I think that our jointlearning process was too short. You have to get to know the team you are workingwith, and everyone has to get to feel comfortable, get to know the strengths andweaknesses of each other, among other things.This example illustrates one of the main elements of the CEDRD framework: a collaborative dialogicreflection. By this, we refer to the manner in which the encounter with the observations and contemplations ofothers leads students to think about themselves and to adopt a new perspective on themselves. In this respect,the students’ exchanges can be seen as a process of negotiation of the meaning of the events—whose goal is notnecessarily to arrive at an agreed interpretation, but rather to reach an understanding of the personal implicationsthat apply to each student separately, to their relations, and to their fundamental view of the nature ofcollaborative learning. This example demonstrates the potential of the CEDRD framework to enable andpromote this kind of written communication. Moreover, throughout each of the course’s iterations, collaborativedialogic reflection was manifested in two main forms: reflections expressed in the CRC were commented onlater in the Wiki’s personal diaries, and written reflections were mentioned and discussed in the following CRC.In some cases, we also observed how a discussion over one theme continued from CRC to the Wiki, back to theICLS 2014 Proceedings397© ISLSCRC, and so on. This dynamic flow sometimes involved a growing number of participants, branching out ofideas and insights and leading to a creation of new links between ideas.The dialogic significance of this joint reflective process also concerns how the starting point of thestatements of all three students is attentiveness and caring, and their acknowledgement that coping with thechallenges of their collaborative learning is a significant issue that is worthy of their time and efforts.Furthermore, the way the three students express their self-criticism may testify to their appreciation of thislearning community as a safe, protected space. However, as these exchanges are visible to comments from allcommunity members, the meaning of the dialogic reflection is not limited to what is said by the three students. Italso encompasses a view of this discursive event as part of the continuum of small discursive events in theoverall context of the discourse taking place in the learning community, as they learn from and develop the ideasof one another.Community Reflective Conversation as a Space for Coping with InterpersonalConflictsAlthough contrasting perspectives were often expressed during the CRC or in students’ personal diaries, in mostcases, it did not take the form of an argument, in the sense of an attempt to get to a single conclusion or toconvince each other. Rather, in a tolerant and supportive atmosphere, disagreements were used to reveal newmeanings and understandings. Many students considered such events as insightful and significant which isclearly evident in their personal diary reports. As an example of this, following an unsuccessful collaborativelearning experience, one of the leading students used the next CRC to share her overall disappointment with theway the group handled that task. While criticizing her own part in that process as well, she raised doubts aboutthe usefulness and the advantages of collaborative editing in general. This sharing evoked an emotionaldiscussion about the social norms of the community in general and about the different roles students took duringthis specific event. Later on, the other leading student of that specific learning assignment wrote the following:Raida: I thought that Ronit and I have talked this issue thoroughly, and solved alldisagreements between us. However, only today in the [community] reflectionsession, I have understood that I didn’t really listen to her carefully enough before,not giving her the opportunity to tell me: Raida, you too didn’t show any interest inothers and provide them freedom in their work… After this experience I think weshould add more norms, such as roles definition and schedule…The CRC gave Raida and Ronit an opportunity to say things and to listen to each other in a way thatapparently wasn’t possible before. In choosing to open this issue up in front of all the community members,Ronit expressed her trust and confidence in them and in that forum. By doing this, she involved and engaged allthe members in a discussion about taking responsibility over the learning processes. Raida too, did somethingsimilar. While based her comments on herself and Ronit, she moved to the community level, referring to “we”and suggesting that all group members take a step forward in taking more responsibility over learning. Raidawas fully aware at that time that what she wrote was public.Building on and Developing Each Other's IdeasThe following excerpt is a different example of how ideas may pass along the students:Rina: What is nice about Wiki—and this is an idea that I am developing a bit after hearing itfrom Ariel (who heard it from Shlomit)—is that the Wiki world is effectively a worldwith no borders…this sparked many questions in me: Does being dominant meancausing a kind of paralysis in someone else? Or is our goal as students in acollaborative community engaged in collaborative writing to find our place, to makeour way, aspire to grow and develop as far as our abilities allow us, and at the sametime be collaborative and attentive to others?This excerpt illustrates a process of collaborative development of a theoretical idea. Moreover, Rinasynthesizes an idea that she read in other student’s personal diaries with a significant concept that appeared inthe community reflective conversation in the context of a specific event. From this starting point, she continuesto pose more general questions, and suggests answers that relate to the theoretical content learned in the course.This example shows the creative potential lies not only in the reflective writing in itself, but in the possibility ofone student to connect with other’s ideas.ICLS 2014 Proceedings398© ISLSA Growing Appreciation of the Community Dialogic-Reflective DiscourseThe following excerpt illustrates a general approach to the learning experience and its significance:Michal: Some of the things I wrote or said attracted responses of community members, and Iam very grateful to them for that. I think that the most significant learning that I didin this course was to recognize my ability to learn from others and grow from thedialogue taking place with community members following the ideas and thoughtsthat I expressed. This discovery was new, surprising, and addictive. I find that thisdialogue allows me to reach places that I never even thought about, it can help breakthrough dead-ends, it is enriching, and especially very interesting and fascinating.This quotation is brought also to point to one of the most interesting developments we were witnessing:the gradual opening of many students to the possibilities of communicating and sharing with others within thecommunity discourse. The importance of these quotations is that they show that the students themselvesappreciate the dialogic aspects of the course, and recognize them as beneficial for themselves. On the one hand,reading other students’ reflections can enrich the perspective of other students, trigger new thoughts andunderstandings and make them aware of issues and people in a new way. On the other hand, when other peoplerespond to a student’s reflections, that student is “being noticed” and “counted,” which creates the feeling thatshe can make a difference to somebody else. Furthermore, being part of a dialogue that is considered significantand meaningful is to acknowledge learning as a social process that benefits its participants.Discussion and ConclusionsIn the following section, we discuss the dialogic and reflective dimensions of the CEDRD framework in relationto the design of the learning environment. We focus on the mutual exposure to the students’ reflections, and thepossibility for communication through varied and rich channels, as central features of the learning environmentthat enable dialogic-reflective discourse to emerge.Students’ mutual exposure to different reflections regarding the socio-emotional challenges of theircollaborative interactions, provide them with a diverse picture of collaborative experience. This may enhancetheir awareness of the potential fragmentary nature of any single personal perspective. In this respect, thediverse picture is not necessarily a single, uniform understanding of an event, but rather the understanding thatthe event may have different interpretations that may be in tension with each other. Synthesizing individualperspectives is not a harmonious process that is free of challenges. Creating the big picture entails coping withdilemmas, conflicts, and criticisms that arise as part of the learning process. Therefore, we argue that it isspecifically this coping process that represents the greatest potential of the dialogic-reflective discourse. Itinvites a constructive, critical, and collaborative negotiation of meaning of the emerging, diverse picture. Thisnegotiation deepens students’ understanding that each can contribute to and learn from the others, and promotestheir appreciation of the learning community as a social framework that enhances and supports them.The mutual exposure to reflections about theoretical knowledge studied in the course and theirrelevance to students’ own lives, allows for a similar yet different process. In this case, it enables students toreconsider their original understandings or perceptions regarding this knowledge, and be enriched by andcontribute to the insights of others. This also includes the view of the community as a space in which ideas andinsights evolve and each student can and may develop or build upon insights of others. The exposure tostudents’ reflections about their personal lives allows students to learn more about each other, in addition totheir performances as students in the classroom. The emphasis here on mutual respect, care and responsibilitythat grows out of students’ appreciation for each other. Closeness among learning community members doestake place, eventually, as they grow to learn more about each other and engage together in the dialogic-reflectivediscourse.Our discussion up until this point has concentrated on the significance of the mutual exposure tostudents’ reflections in deepening and widening their acquaintance. Furthermore, we suggested that by thisexposure they gain a richer perception of themselves as members in a collaborative learning community and ofcollaborative learning in general. This exposure has an additional importance which may be viewed as a door toa unique kind of dialogic communication among the learning community members: unique in terms of thethemes of discussion as well as the manner in which the discussion is carried on. This communication may startwith one student approaching the other with questions about a reflection. In other cases, this involves trying toget a clearer or deeper understanding of the other’s point of view, and sometimes as a combination of both.Moreover, communication may start with the students questioning their own conduct, doubting if the way theyacted was the only possible way to act. By doing that, instead of closing in while justifying one’s own opinionor conduct, the discussants are opening up spaces within themselves and towards the other dialogically.The open-to-all reflective and communicative nature of the CRC and the online personal diariessupports the acquaintance between students. It is a cyclic process: As students’ acquaintance deepens, studentsICLS 2014 Proceedings399© ISLSgive deeper expressions to their emotions and insights, and their interest in and desire to respond to others’expressions also grow stronger. This acquaintance entails more than the knowledge of who a person is but theattempt to understand what they are going through (Noddings, 2012). This comes out of a sense of caring andattentiveness to the singularity of each student, and on the basis of the reflective expressions of each. The seedsof this potential are grounded in the teacher’s dialogic approach and attitude, and this becomes a part of thestudents’ own experience. An important element in this experience is the growing understanding and feeling thatthere is enough space for everyone, there is a place for everyone, and everyone counts. While that alone maycarry a great significance, getting comments from others becomes so important because it shows that you havebeen noticed, and that your voice has been heard. Comments may also indicate that what you have said ismeaningful to somebody, and at the same time it shows that somebody else cares about you.Overall, the CEDRD framework allows us to identify the conditions under which collaborative learningdevelops into a meaningful process. Likewise, the framework demonstrated how a general appreciation of thecontribution of collaborative learning to the students themselves emerges.Limitations and ChallengesEmphasizing the potential significance and contribution of the CEDRD framework, we do not imply for thepossibility of integrating this model in its fullness in each and every class or discipline. Rather, we want tosuggest that it can be integrated in different levels or forms in accordance with the different conditions available.In pioneering research, Gofer (2013) showed how a more modest model may be successfully implemented witheighth graders. In her model, while students wrote their reflections in Wiki-based public diaries, conflictingincidents were not discussed in the whole class forum, but within sub-groups, under the guidance of theresearcher and the teacher. In our case we are also fully aware of the fact that not all conflicts were discussedamong students and not all personal dilemmas and difficulties were raised and shared while engaging in thecommunity discourse. Moreover, there were always some differences between students, regarding their leveland depth of sharing and their actual participation in the collaborative effort to face conflicts or to share anddiscuss theoretical insights. Bearing this in mind, preliminary results indicate that most students did engage inthe community discourse, as well as the learning communities were stable enough to contain the ones thatstayed less involved.SummaryThis paper presents the potential of dialogic-reflective perspective to contribute to our understanding of thesocio-emotional aspects in collaborative learning communities. Furthermore, we suggested that the CEDRDframework may allow us to propose possible conditions under which students are engaged deeply in thecollaborative learning processes and acquire a general positive perspective of collaborative learning as learningthat enhances and empowers them. If we want students to deeply understand the meaning of collaborativelearning and adopt it as an approach to life, they need to experience and examine it. We stress that this learningmay be enhanced by students’ engagement in a discourse that allows them to jointly confront and cope with theconflicts and dilemmas that arise from collaborative learning, discuss the significance of their collaborativelearning, and discuss the contribution of the learning community’s discourse itself for them. Furthermore, aproductive and empowering discourse requires close relationships that are based on acquaintance, attentivenessand care among the learning community.ReferencesAlpert, B. (2008). Nodding’s dialogue: Relationships and dialogue as the essence and path in education for care(Hebrew). In N. Aloni (Ed.), Empowering dialogues in humanistic education (pp. 236–258). Tel-Aviv:Hakibbutz Hameuchad.Baker, M., Andriessen, J., & Järvelä, S. (2013). Introduction: visions of learning together. In M. Baker, J.Andriessen & S. Järvelä (Eds.), Affective learning together: The socio-emotional turn in collaborativelearning (pp. 1-30). Routledge.Baker, M. J., & Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a computer-supported collaborativelearning environment. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 13(3), 175-193.Ben-Zvi, D. (2007). Using wiki to promote collaborative learning in statistics education. TechnologyInnovations in Statistics Education, 1(1). Retrieved from: http://escholarship.org/uc/item/6jv107c7.Bengtsson, J. (1995). What is Reflection? On reflection in the teaching profession and teacher education.Teachersand Teaching, 1(1), 23-32.Bergman, S. H. (2007). Introduction (Hebrew). In M. M. Buber, The dialogue on man and being (pp. 11-48).Jerusalem, Israel: Bialik Institute.Bielaczyc, K. (2006). Designing social infrastructure: The challenge of building computer-supported learningcommunities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(3), 301-329.ICLS 2014 Proceedings400© ISLSBrown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.),Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229-272). Cambridge,UK: The MIT Press.Buber, M. (2007). The dialogue on man and being (Hebrew). Jerusalem: Bialik Institute.Burbules, N. C. (1993). Dialogue in teaching: Theory and practice. New York, NY: Teachers College.Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructionaldesign. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support CSCL? (pp. 61-91). Heerlen:Open Universiteit Nederland.Dillenbourg, P., Järvelä, S., & Fischer, F. (2009). The evolution of research in computer-supported collaborativelearning: From design to orchestration. In N. Balacheff, S. Ludvigsen, T. de Jong, A. Lazonder, & S.Barnes (Eds.), Technology-enhanced learning: Principles and products (pp. 3-19). Netherlands:Springer.Friedman, M. S. (1956). Martin Buber’s philosophy of education. Educational Theory, 6(2), 95-104.Friedman, M. S. (2002). Martin Buber: The Life of Dialogue. New York: Routledge.Gofer, R., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2014). Metacognitive aspects of writing personal-reflective diaries in a wikienhanced collaborative learning environment. In Y. Eshet-Alkalai, A. Caspi, N. Geri, Y. Kalman, V.Silber-Varod & Y. Yair (Eds.), Proceedings of the 9th Chais Conference (pp. 48-55). Raanana: TheOpen University.Guzdial, M., Hmelo, C., Hubscher, R., Newstetter, W., Puntambekar, S., Shabo, A., Turns, J., & Kolodner, J.(1997). Integrating and guiding collaboration: Lessons learned in computer-supported collaborationlearning research at Georgia Tech. Proceedings of Computer-Support for Collaborative Learning(CSCL) (pp. 91-100). Toronto, Canada: University of Toronto.Hatton N., & Smith D. (1995). Reflection in teacher education: Towards definition and implementation.Teaching and Teacher Education, 11(1), 33-49.Hod, Y., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2013). An adapted group psychotherapy framework for teaching and learning aboutCSCL. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Proceedings of the TenthComputer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference (CSCL10) (Vol. I, pp. 240-247). Madison,WI: University of Wisconsin.Kerr, N., & Bruun, S. (1983). Dispensability of member effort and group motivation losses: Free-rider effects.Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44(1), 78.Koschmann, T. (1999). Toward a dialogic theory of learning: Bakhtin’s contribution to learning in settings ofcollaboration. Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL)(pp. 308-313). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Kramer, K. P. (2013). Learning through dialogue: The relevance of Martin Buber’s classroom. Plymouth, UK:Rowman & Littlefield.Noddings, N. (1995). Philosophy of education. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.Noddings, N. (2007). Caring as relation and virtue in teaching. In P. S. Ivanhoe & R. Walker (Eds.), Workingvirtue: Virtue ethics and contemporary moral problems (pp. 41-60). Oxford, UK: Oxford UniversityPress.Noddings, N. (2012). The caring relation in teaching. Oxford Review of Education, 38(6), 771-781.Salomon, G. (2000). Technology and education in the age of information (Hebrew).‫ ‏‬Haifa and Tel Aviv, Israel:University of Haifa and Zmora-Bitan publishers.Salmon, G. (2002). Mirror, mirror, on my screen…; Exploring online reflections. British Journal of EducationalTechnology, 33(4), 379-391.Shner, M. (2012). Born virtual: The free spirit of man in a borderless world (Hebrew). Tel Aviv: MofetInstitute.Wegerif, R. A. (2007). Dialogic, education and technology: Expanding the space of learning. New York, NY:Kluwer-Springer.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the Learning In a NetworKed Society Research Center (LINKS I-CORE) for funding this study. Wealso wish to thank Mosheh Shner, Arieh Kizel and Tsafrir Goldberg for their important remarks. Special thanksto Yotam Hod and the members of the COOL-CONNECTIONS research group for their careful review of thispaper.ICLS 2014 Proceedings401© ISLS