When Friends Argue: Investigating Argumentative LearningProcesses in FacebookDimitra Tsovaltzi, Raluca Judele, Thomas Puhl, Armin Weinberger, Saarland University,d.tsovaltzi, r.judele, t.puhl,a.weinberger@edutech.uni-saarland.deChrista S. C. Asterhan, Rakheli Hever, Baruch B. Schwarz, Hebrew University of Jerusalem,asterhan@huji.ac.il, mt.scopus@gmail.com, baruch.schwarz@huji.ac.ilChristine Greenhow, Michigan State University, Greenhow@msu.eduMelissa Menzer and Thor Gibbons, University of Maryland, mmenzer@umd.edu, thorsmailbox@gmail.comDiscussant: Douglas Clark, Vanderbilt University, doug.clark@vanderbilt.eduAbstract: This symposium addresses how argumentation can be leveraged for learning insocial media like Facebook (FB) exemplifying social learning. It catalyzes an internationaldiscussion forum (Germany, Israel, United States) that seeks to understand argumentativeprocesses beyond isolated technology-based learning environments, what influences them, ifand how they can be repurposed for learning. We aim to contribute to the longstanding interestin argumentative learning in the learning sciences and extend knowledge about analyzing andsupporting argumentation processes in FB. We examine the conditions under which FB can beharnessed for argumentative learning. We measure declarative knowledge outcomes andexplore the development of attitude and civic behavior. Synthesizing across the papers, wewill pinpoint the affordances of FB for argumentative learning, comparing processes tostandard learning science approaches and exploring new socially embedded learningoutcomes. We will frame promising directions for further research work.IntroductionOnline social network sites (SNSs) like Facebook (FB), are the dominant technology-mediated leisure activityamong teenagers in different countries (Rideout, Foehr, Roberts, 2010; Geocartography Group, 2011) and canbe seen as exemplifying social learning (Bingham, & Conner, 2010). Online SNSs are defined by the followingsocio-technical features: 1) uniquely identifiable profiles that consist of user-supplied content and/or systemprovided data; 2) (semi-) public display of connections that can be traversed by others; and 3) features that allowusers to consume, produce, and/or interact with user-generated content provided by their connections on the site(Ellison & Boyd, 2013, p. 7). As FB is an integral part of high school and college students’ routines, learningapplications that exploit these routines may help students bridge formal and informal learning by situating sociallearning opportunities within their everyday social contexts and appropriating peer interactions on bothcurricular and extra-curricular topics. As such, FB is attracting interest from educators and learning scientists asa potential platform for online learning (Greenhow & Li, 2013; Greenhow, Menzer & Gibbins, 2012).However, conceptualizing FB as a learning platform, and designing FB applications for learning posechallenges. Researchers have warned against exploiting FB for learning based on postulations about students’multitasking ability (e.g., Junco & Cotton, 2013). Similarly, Kirschner & Karpinski (2010) found a negativeinfluence of time spent on FB and college grades. On the other hand, recent research suggests that how FB isused makes a difference in whether academic outcomes are positive or negative (e.g., Junco, 2012). Forexample, posting status updates and chatting on FB were negatively predictive of GPA, while checking statusupdates and sharing links were positively predictive (Junco, 2012). Interacting with fellow students aroundcurricular content or other learning-related topics may be expected to be positively associated with achievement,but also with conceptions of learning as becoming part of a practice- or interest-driven community.In this symposium, we focus on a particular type of learning in FB: learning from peer argumentation(Andriessen, 2006) that has been of longstanding interest to learning scientists. Learning from argumentationhas been extensively studied in face-to-face settings (e.g., Herrenkohl & Cornelius, 2013) and in onlinediscussion platforms specifically designed for educational purposes (e.g., Digalo, Belvedere, LASAD,ARGUNAUT, LARGO; Scheuer, Loll, Pinkwart, & McLaren, 2010). However, it has proven difficult to exploitits theoretical potential in already time-strapped classrooms (Sadler, Barab & Scott, 2012) or in formal, courserelated e-discussions. As we consider the rich contexts of activity within which people today can create learningopportunities (Barron, 2006), peer groups embedded in social network sites like FB reside outside or aresatellites of formal education, and therefore hold promise for facilitating argumentative learning processes —when Friends argue. However, to our best understanding this aspect of argumentation and of SNSs has not beenstudied yet. The goal of this symposium is, then, to present and synthesize recent research on argumentation andlearning from argumentation in Facebook. It synthesizes a set of papers that offer a methodological balancebetween external and internal validity and either isolate and scrutinize specific characteristics of FB that areICLS 2014 Proceedings1342© ISLStheoretically relevant to argumentative learning in controlled studies, or investigate argumentation in long-termquasi experimental studies, or explore the potential of real FB situations for argumentative learning.The papers in this symposium focus on various aspects of typical FB interactions like passive vs activeargumentative processes, spontaneous vs. solicited participation, private (observing) vs. public communicationformats. They study how such interactions affect argumentation processes, learning through argumentation, andhow they contribute to learning as personality development. They define instructional support that leverages‘native’ social and dialogic FB processes, inspired by existing learning science models, e.g. vicarious learning,group awareness support, and scripting argumentative knowledge construction (Contributions 1, 2 and 4). Theyinvestigate how vicarious observing as a common form of passive participation in FB discussions may lead toindividual learning and how this learning is, in turn, influenced by rhetoric. They investigate the effects of groupawareness support (e.g. the awareness that peers read and critically assess posts) as a main affordance of FB,how this affordance interacts with argumentation scripts, and if FB affordances are compatible with such support(Contributions 2 and 4). They explore how knowledge co-construction and epistemic communication may occuramong FB-using youth and form civic behavior (Contribution 3). They investigate how argumentation and socialaspects of communication influence declarative and argumentative learning outcomes (Contributions 1-4), butalso how they relate to civic engagement and communication competence (Contributions 3 and 4).Together, the four papers suggest that FB with its social character and broad use offers a unique arenafor learning sciences research. Insights on leveraging FB for learning show great potential, but also possiblepitfalls. The papers suggest that to describe a framework for using FB as a learning platform, unproductiveaspects of FB need to be identified and counterbalanced, and new structures, designed educational features orsocial supports need to be introduced. For example, disputative argumentative discussions may increase initialinterest and draw readers into argumentation processes, but they reduce learning effects in comparison todeliberative argumentative discussions. Group awareness support may engage learners and make them aware oftheir social context (e.g., that others will interact with their work), but it may induce over-cautious argumentativebehavior that hinders learning. Individual preparation may reduce process losses related to the extra overload ofsimultaneously deliberating on individual arguments and arguing collaborative, but may also reduce knowledgeco-construction. Adolescent FB users may perceive FB as more conducive to enacting civic behaviors than theydo other online forums, but neither conflict-oriented nor quick consensus building in argumentation around keyissues correlates with increases in civic participation. FB discussions may foster learning especially if additionalgroup awareness is supported, in which case communication attitude change correlates with learning.The contributions in this symposium identify the affordances and tensions mentioned above, helpingthe field to advance toward understanding argumentative learning processes in a range of contexts. The richcontext of FB may host and even accelerate socio-cognitive processes, allowing researchers to log, trace andexamine them for the first time, thus offering a breakthrough in scrutinizing influential social learning theories,such as social constructivism (Vygotsky, 1978) and communities of learning (Wenger, Richard McDermott &Snyder, 2002). For example, what are the social aspects that influence learning (e.g. rhetoric style, groupawareness, communication competence and attitude)? How do cognitive and social forms of learning interact(e.g. declarative learning gains and communication attitude, argumentative knowledge and civic behavior)?What instructional design can promote this interaction (e.g. deliberative discussions, argumentation support)?As such, the research featured lies at the heart of learning and becoming in practice. Furthermore, given the roleof FB and other social media in recent political developments worldwide, understanding such processes mightfacilitate our own learning to deliberate in these spaces and becoming more engaged learning scientist-citizens.Symposium FormatAn introduction like the first part of the proposal will present the importance of the topic. Then individual paperswill raise their central points and controversies, while findings will be used to ground the discussion in empiricalresults. One aim will be to critically consider and synthesize the different perspectives of the papers, includingthe generalization of the results and the methods. The discussant, Douglas Clark, will moderate the discussion.Douglas Clark is a leading researcher in the field of collaborative argumentative learning and a developer of newanalysis methods of argumentation suitable for online asynchronous discussions. He is, therefore, aptly suited tohelp us critically assess the value, implications of the work presented to the field, enrich the methods used, andsketch a framework for pursuing the research questions further. The results of the symposium will set aprecedent for interested researchers and will help them situate their own research into the proposed framework.Learning from Reading SNS Group Discussions: Rhetoric Style MattersChrista S. C. Asterhan, Rakheli Hever and Baruch B. Schwarz, Hebrew University of JerusalemWhile browsing and clicking through the activities of one's FB contacts, FB users are exposed to various typesof discussions on a variety of topics, as well as external materials linked from those discussions (e.g., articles,images, multimedia), often including heated discussions on issues of the hour. It would seem that FB as a socialICLS 2014 Proceedings1343© ISLSarena is a hotbed of discussion, usually between FB "friends" but also with relative strangers who happen tosubscribe to the same group or page, or to read the same article using the FB social plug-in. There is much to belearned from such discussions, even by people who are not themselves contributing posts to the discussion.However, this potential is currently not exploited in educational settings, and, compared to normativemodels of productive argumentation for learning (e.g., Asterhan, 2013; Keefer et al., 2000), the quality of thesediscussions may often prove to be sub-optimal. We then focus on whether and how individuals may learn fromvicariously observing (that is: reading) online group discussions on a hot topic. Recent research by Wise, Speer,Marbouti and Hsiao (2013) shows that this online ‘listening’ is indeed a substantial component of students’participation in online course discussions, averaging about 75% of their time across students. The question iswhether this also results in learning? Previous studies have reported positive correlations between the numberof discussion posts students access and their course achievement (e.g., Morris et al, 2005). However, individualdifferences (e.g., in prior knowledge, interest and motivation) may account for the covariance between the twovariables and a more experimental approach is then called for.In this presentation, we report on a study investigating the effect of reading a FB discussion with linksto external information resources, by comparing it to a control condition in which students only received theonline resources. In addition, we investigate the effect of different rhetoric styles in argumentative discourse.Recent experimental research on active participation in computer-mediated argumentative discourse (e.g.,Asterhan & Babichenko, 2013) has demonstrated that deliberative argumentation (a focus on critically exploringdifferent viewpoints) leads to superior individual learning gains, compared to disputative argumentation (a focuson undermining the opponents’ claims and winning the debate). Taking this a step further, it is expected thatrhetoric style would affect learning from reading an online discussion. However, expectations regarding effectsof reading a disputative vs. a deliberative discussion on learning are less straightforward: On the one hand,reading a disputative discussion could lead to higher arousal and increase motivation, without (unlike in activeparticipation) inducing anxiety. On the other hand, the disputative tone may vicariously induce anxiety or causethe reader to invest less cognitively, by which it may have an adverse effect on learning. We then sought toexplore how different argumentation styles would affect learning from reading online FB discussions.MethodA FB discussion was created revolving around a hot topic in Israeli society: Whether legal work permits shouldbe issued for African refugees/asylum seekers/work immigrants (AAs). Twelve existing online articles onrelated topics were selected to reflect a variety of opinions and aspects. Each discussion contribution contained aclaim, argument and/or a question by one of 4 (fake) discussants, as well as a link to one of the abovementionedonline resources as support. Based on earlier work (Asterhan, 2013; Asterhan & Babichenko, 2013), twoversions were created, with identical content, but differing in argumentative discourse style (see Table 1 forexamples).Sixty undergraduates from a large Israeli university (mean age = 25.10, 13 male) participated in a 1×3randomized experiment. The experimental session (60-80 min) included the following activities: (1) ademographic and an attitudes survey; (2) writing an argumentative essay on AA employment and an attitudessurvey; (3) the experimental session (see below); (4) a declarative knowledge test containing closed and openquestions on facts from the online resources; and (5) writing another argumentative essay. During phase 3,subjects in the two discussion conditions were told that they were about to read an educational discussionbetween students as part of their requirements for a Social Studies class, who were instructed to support theirarguments using links to online resources. In the control condition, the subjects only received the article titlesand links to the articles, along with the source and date of each. The data collected in this study then consisted of3 online questionnaires, 2 essays (pre and post) and screen-recordings of the subjects' screen actions. In thispaper, we report on the effect of the conditions on students’ performance on the declarative knowledge test.Table1: Excerpt of the FB group discussion content according to two different argumentative discourse stylesRonit:Limor:Disputative styleIt's obvious that we have to let the refugees work,so that they can make an honest living and contributeto our society. Otherwise they'll be lying in thestreets and will depend on charity or crime in orderto have something to eat, and we can see that crimeamongst them is really on the rise. [LINK]You're talking nonsense! Do you mean to tell methat they commit crimes because they don't haveanything to eat? And what about all the rapes wehear about? [LINK]ICLS 2014 Proceedings1344Deliberative styleI think we should let the refugees work, so that theycan make an honest living and contribute to oursociety. Otherwise I fear they'll be lying in the streetsand will depend on charity or crime in order to havesomething to eat. Unfortunately for us it seems thatcrime amongst them is indeed on the rise. [LINK]But perhaps we should think about another solutionto crime, because there are all these rape cases we'veheard about recently that I'm not sure are relatedto not having anything to eat. [LINK]© ISLSResults and DiscussionNo differences were found between the three conditions in students’ attitudes towards AIs prior to theintervention, F < 1. A 1×3 ANOVA on students’ performance scores on the content knowledge test showed asignificant effect of condition, F (2,57) = 6.55, p = .003, η 2 = .187. Post-hoc tests (with Tukey-Krameradjustments) revealed that students in the disputative discourse style condition showed less content knowledge(M = 56.67, SD = 12.64) than both the deliberative discourse style condition (M = 67.62, SD = 8.96, p = .016)and the control condition (M = 69.52, SD = 14.19, p=.004). Performance scores of students in the control andthe deliberative discourse style conditions were similar (p = .873). Previous studies have shown thatparticipation in disputative (as opposed to deliberative) argumentative discourse is associated with lowerindividual knowledge gains from verbal interaction (Asterhan & Babichenko, 2013). The findings reported herethen further extend these findings to a setting in which students read (as opposed to participate in) disputativediscussions. The fact that no differences were found between the deliberative and the control condition seems toindicate that the effect of rhetoric style in argumentation may not be a positive outcome of deliberativeargumentation, but a negative outcome of disputative argumentation. It is possible that the disputative discoursestyle caused learners to adopt more superficial strategies while reading the discussions and the accompanyingonline resources (Bliuc et al, 2010; Wise et al, 2013). Analyses of the screen-recording data and theargumentative essays are expected to provide further insights into the processes that led to the differences inknowledge gains results, and will be presented at the symposium. In any case, the findings reported here showthat vicarious participation in argumentative SNS discussions can have similar effects to reading informationsources only, but that particular attention should be dedicated to the rhetoric style of such discussions.Differential Effects of Scripts for Learning in Facebook: Individual Preparationand Argumentation ScriptsRaluca Judele, Dimitra Tsovaltzi, Thomas Puhl, and Armin Weinberger, Saarland UniversityAs SNS are a natural platform for dialogic exchange, they can be used for learning through argumentativeknowledge construction (AKC; Weinberger, Stegmann, Fischer & Mandl, 2007). Scripts are commonly used toenhance knowledge co-construction (Weinberger, Stegman & Fischer., 2007; Fischer, Kollar, Stegmann &Wecker, 2013; Andriessen, 2006) by structuring argumentation in order to help discussants clarify their ownideas and consider new ideas by others. Should scripts also be used to promote argumentative learning in FB,which is associated with informal self-directed learning? To answer this question, the benefits and risks of usingscripts in SNS and their potential interactions with SNS affordances have to be clarified. Here we explore twokinds of scripts, individual preparation (where students are granted extra time to prepare their arguments beforecollaboration) and argumentation scripts, and their effects on knowledge co-construction and outcomes in threestudies set up in FB. We look into two implementations of argumentation scripts: In Study 1, an argumentationontology was implemented in LASAD (Loll & Pinkwart, 2013) to script argumentation prior to discussing in FB(Tsovaltzi, Weinberger, Scheuer, Dragon, & McLaren, 2012). For Study 2 and 3, we built a FB App with typicalFB-functions - “like” and “comment” - which implemented the ontology directly inside FB (see Figure 1).Figure 1. The FB-app with argumentation scriptStudy 1This pilot study (N=40) analyzed the influence of individual preparation with an argumentation script (LASAD)on subsequent knowledge co-construction discussions in dyads inside FB with a 1×2 design (Tsovaltzi et al,2012). The results showed that both conditions changed their opinions and general attitude towards behaviorismICLS 2014 Proceedings1345© ISLSas a teaching strategy, t(39)=8.84, p<.001, d=1.40, but there were no differences between groups, F(1,38)=.09,p=.77. Moreover, both conditions shared more knowledge post intervention, F(1,18)=19.61, p<.001, partialη2=.52, which is a strong indicator of transactivity (Weinberger et al, 2007). Although both conditions learnedsignificantly from pretest to posttest, F(1,38)=87.55, p<.001, ηp2=.70, opinion change, as an additional measureof transactivity (Wood, Kallgren, & Priesler, 1985), correlates with knowledge gains only in the conditionwithout argument support. This might be an indication that individual preparation with an argumentation scriptbefore collaborative discussion may hinder knowledge co-construction; learners gain knowledge, but not jointly.Is the individual preparation per se or the argumentation script responsible for the missing correlation betweenknowledge gains and opinion change? Does individual preparation lead to lack of knowledge co-construction?Study 2In a 2×2 individual design we examined argumentation scripts and group awareness support in a universitycourse (N=81) (Tsovaltzi, Puhl, & Weinberger, 2013). A FB App implemented the argumentation script. Groupawareness was supported in the awareness conditions by informing participants that selected arguments wouldbe published in the course forum where they could be assessed, amended or refuted. Such group awareness is astandard FB affordance; when asynchronously creating posts users are aware that their arguments will beassessed, amended or refuted, common practices in FB, but also explicitly “liked” or implicitly “not liked” by anaudience with access to personal information about them. Results indicate that all groups learned betweenpretest and posttest, F(1,77)=221.73; p=.000, ηp²=.74. Helmert contrasts showed that the control was better thanthe condition with group awareness support only, t(77)=2.52, p=.014, d=.86, indicating negative effects of groupawareness support. There were no similar effects for argumentation script. It is possible that group awarenesssupport in individual preparation declines the quality of argument preparation and hinders learning, butargumentation scripts may counteract this effect. How do argumentation scripts influence learning when usersare scripted to individually prepare before discussing in FB, where group awareness described above is granted?Study 3We tested this question in a 2×2 study with university students (N=128), with factors argumentation script(operationalized as in study 2) and individual preparation (Judele, Tsovaltzi, Puhl & Weinberger, 2014). Allparticipants were given instructions to exchange arguments during collaboration and reach a commonconclusion, as in standard argumentative collaborative scenarios. Time on task was held constant but discussiondiffered depending on the condition. Therefore, we relativized our results for time. There was a large maineffect on learning gains, F(1,124)=124,27; p=.000, ηp²=.50, but a negative main effect of individual preparationon learning outcomes, F(1,124)=5.121; p=.025; ηp²=.04. There was no main effect of argumentation script,F(1,124)=0.04; p=.847; ηp²=.00. To decipher the effects of argumentation script on learning gains, we comparedargumentation script only to individual preparation with argumentation script, which was significant forargumentation script only, t(124)=2,9, p=.005, d=0.69. Moreover, there was a main negative effect of individualpreparation for knowledge equivalence (Weinberger, Stegmann & Fischer, 2007), F(1,60)=4.32; p=.042;ηp²=.07. Taken together, these results support the interpretation that individually preparing arguments beforecollaboration leads to worse learning outcomes independent of argumentation script and that there is lessknowledge co-construction for learners with individual preparation.InterpretationThe negative effects of individual preparation (studies 1 and 3) contradict previous results in computersupported collaborative learning (CSCL). Together with the negative effect of group awareness support (Study2) they may signify that social aspects (self-presentation and caution) are magnified in the context of FB (evenin a closed FB App) with detrimental effects for learning. However, the argumentation script during individualpreparation did not counteract these negative effects (Study 3), although it significantly increased learning whenprovided during collaboration. This difference to standard CSCL findings could also be explained if we considerthe socially loaded context of FB. It is plausible that users used the script to prepare well during individualpreparation in order not to lose face in the FB discussion. This may have led to undue knowledge solidificationrather than preparation for knowledge co-construction. Although further research is on call, these collectiveresults implicate that to leverage FB as a learning platform we need to offer guidance (e.g. argumentation script)but at the same time respect FB affordances like asynchronous dialogic communication.Argumentation and Civic Engagement in a Facebook AppChristine Greenhow, Melissa Menzer, and Thor Gibbons, Michigan State UniversityIncreasingly, learning scientists are exploring the nature of adolescent collaborative learning in a variety ofsettings such as schools, museums and out-of-school media practices in virtual environments. Socio-culturallearning theory and theories of computer-supported collaborative learning have suggested that such contextsICLS 2014 Proceedings1346© ISLSmight be particularly supportive of learning because a considerable amount of learning occurs through informalinteractions with others (Brown, Collins & Duguid, 1989). Our work was also framed by the larger discussionssurrounding the development of scientific literacy (Polman et al., 2010) and communication competence(McLeod et al., 2010) as a dimension of civic competence and actual civic engagement. These discussionsemphasize learners’ integration and validation of information from multiple sources; formulation of arguments;multiple perspective-taking; expression of opinion; making connections between issues that yield more complexissue understanding; actively engaging others in collective action, and multiple routes to civic participation.Thus, the focus of the current study was to examine the links between socio-scientific argumentation, civiccommunication competence, and civic engagement in a Facebook application.MethodsParticipants in this study were not part of any formal educational program or course but interested inenvironmental science, as indicated on an initial registration survey. Participants were accessed throughsubstantial marketing efforts and partnership with campus- and school-based environmental groups. Hot Dish(HD) was an open-source FB application designed to facilitate information-sharing, commentary, and problemsolving ‘challenges’ about environmental science topics. In Hot Dish, users could post original articles orcirculate online articles; as well as read, share, vote on, and comment on posted articles. The overall HDcommunity comprised 346 consented participants (ages 16-24) who contributed 3,000+ postings of comments,blog entries, and challenge documentation. This paper focuses on a subsample drawn from the larger HDcommunity based on their participation in commenting on posted stories (n = 31). These participants posted over950 unique comment strings in response to posted articles across 256 of articles.The focus of this study was on the comments that users posted in response to articles. We coded forargumentation along six process-oriented argumentation dimensions: (1) Counterarguments, (2) Arguments, (3)Integrated Replies, (4) Epistemic skills, (5) Conflict-oriented Consensus Building (COB), and (6) QuickConsensus Building (QCB) (Greenhow, Menzer & Gibbins, 2012; Sadler et al, 2006; Weinberger & Fischer,2006). Each comment string (unit of analysis) was coded for argumentation, and means were calculated foreach skillset at the comment string level. We also coded comment strings for the presence of five indicators ofcivic communication competence (McLeod, et al., 2010): (1) information from multiple sources (INFO), (2)expression of opinion (EMO), (3) learning from peers (LRN), (4) making connections between issues (thatpresumably yield more complex issue understanding) (CP), and soliciting others’ civic participation (SC).Lastly, users completed problem-solving ‘Challenges’ (i.e., civic engagement opportunities) designedto address environmental issues in users’ communities through online or offline activities, such as recycling orsigning up for an online newsletter about environmental issues (Heimlich & Ardoin, 2008). There were 56challenges that each user was invited to complete. Civic Engagement was coded across challenges for fourdifferent levels: Platform (online, offline, hybrid); Activity Type (volunteer, activism, individual); ParticipationType (expressive statements, civic community participation, campaign political participation, politicalconsumerism), and Citizenship Style (dutiful, actualizing) (Bennett, Freelon & Wells, 2010). Codes outlinedabove will be described with examples from the data in the final paper and presentation.ResultsMeans, standard deviations, and correlations of argumentation and communication competence are presented inTable 2. In terms of argumentation skills, users on average, produced Epistemic skills, followed by Argumentsand Integrated Replies; and the relations between argumentation skills varied (e.g., Greenhow et al., 2012). Interms of civic communication competence, most users, on average, produced expressive statements andsolicitations for civic engagement.Table 2: Means, Standard Deviations, and Bivariate Correlations11.Counterargument2. Argument3. IntegratedReply4. Epistemic5. COB6. QCB7. INFO8. EMO9. LRN10. SC11. CP--ICLS 2014 Proceedings2.062--3-.1034***.2145***.4046***-.1177***.1468***-.1369***1011-.021-.121***.092**-.131***.304***.044-.272***.084**-.055-.069*-.367***.305***--.030-.200***-.027.008-.104***.024-.092**.101**--.164***---.375***.018--.182***.085**-.042---.049-.083**.051-.075*---.019-.046.040.015-.036---.469*** .212***-.086**-.060.348*** -.200***-.096**-.009.094**.000-.069*-.024--.343***--1347© ISLSMeanSD0.090.240.260.290.220.420.380.25-0.050.710.110.310.060.230.390.490.060.240.240.430.360.48Note: N = 971 comment strings. * p > .05. ** p > .01. *** p > .001.Of most interest were the links between argumentation and civic communication competence.Correlational analyses revealed that using multiple sources of information, an indicator of civic communicationcompetence, was positively related to most argumentation skills. Posted comments demonstrated evidence ofargument construction (Greenhow, Menzer & Gibbins, 2012) and multiple sources of information. Anotherindicator of civic communication competence: solicitations of civic participation found in comment strings, wasalso positively related to most argumentation skills. Expressing emotions was negatively related to mostargument skills, suggesting that ‘heated debate’ was less representative of argumentation skills in thiscommunity than in other youth-initiated social network sites (Greenhow & Robelia, 2009).Across all users, Hot Dish users completed 1173 problem-solving challenges during the 8-week periodacross 56 unique challenges. Codes regarding the number of challenges comprising each of the four differentlevels of civic engagement (platform, activity type, participation, and citizenship style) and the number ofchallenges completed for each type are presented in Table 3.Table 3: Civic Participation ChallengesCivic Participation ChallengesPlatform1. Online2. Offline3. HybridActivity Type4. Volunteer Activity5. Activism6. IndividualParticipation7. Expressive Participation8. Civic Community Participation9. Campaign Political Participation10. Political ConsumerismCitizenship11. Dutiful Citizenship12. Actualizing CitizenshipNumber of Unique ChallengesNumber of Completed Challenges2428146668861725113875861872886105492221631401141346700Discussion and ImplicationsBased on prior research, we speculated that argumentation would be related to civic communication competencein various ways. Results reveal the complexity in which argumentation skills are associated with civiccommunication competence skills. We also speculated that young people’s enacted civic engagement wouldalign less with traditional theories of dutiful citizenship (voting, party or organization activity) and more withnew theories of actualizing citizenship (individual activism, issue-oriented activity online) that seem particularlysynergistic with the affordances of social media. This proved to be true: Twice the number of civic opportunitiescoded as actualizing were completed (n=700), compared to those coded as dutiful (n=346). The finalpresentation will further discuss our results along these dimensions: socio-scientific argumentation, civiccommunication competence, and civic engagement in a Facebook application; the links between them, andimplications for future work.Group Awareness and Reflection Scripts: Learning Effects of Facebook-BasedSeminar InteractionsT. Puhl, D. Tsovaltzi, and A. Weinberger, Saarland UniversityLearning in FB may be particularly suited to facilitate online learners’ group awareness, i.e. help them considerthe audience and the group processes, like sympathizing with or criticizing. Group awareness seems to bepositively related to performance and to process satisfaction of computer-supported learning groups (Phielix etal, 2010). Awareness tools are used to share information about learners, such as individual knowledge (cognitiveawareness), group processes or attitudes (group awareness). Awareness can foster positive the collaborationprocess, especially though controversial computer-supported discussions (Buder & Bodemer, 2008). Scriptshave been successful in helping students structure, reflect and discuss their opinions (Weinberger et al., 2007)and promote knowledge co-construction, argumentative and declarative knowledge (Weinberger & Fischer2006). We tested the effects of group awareness and reflection scripts in FB on learning gains and attitudechange in three seminars on communication theory over eight weeks. Learning gains is the standard measure forICLS 2014 Proceedings1348© ISLScognitive change. Learning as development of personality in terms of attitude change is less commonlyconnected to formal education, but its importance is recognized in vocational training which includes training onprofessional attitude and communication, e.g. of medical doctors, lawyers, teachers. Theory on attitude changesupports that change is the result of dissonance that can be caused by cognitive (attitude) conflict or conflictbetween cognition and behavior. Such conflicts can be raised through cognitive perceptions, or cognitive andaffective (commonly social) perceptions (Erber, Hodges, & Wilson, 1993; Eagly & Chaiken, 1995).MethodsA 1×3 quasi-experimental field-study with German teacher trainees (N=62) investigated the effects of groupawareness with and without a reflection script on learning outcomes and attitude change. During a seminar oncommunication and interaction, students weekly answered a case-based communication questionnaire withcases from every-day school interaction from the perspective of a teacher. Every scenario included four Likertscaled answers, two capturing multiple perspectives and flexible attitudes (emphasizing the perspectives ofdifferent parties in conflicts), and two answers capturing goal-oriented and structured attitudes (opting for cleardirections), rated on a scale from 0 to 12. Every week, before discussing seminar contents in their FB group, theresults of the questionnaire were played back to the participants in an awareness tool, a two dimensional graphicwithin a FB-app, where students could see their own and the group’s position depicting communicationattitudes. Following Dillenbourg and Hong (2008) the tool was aimed at inducing dissonance between thetheories students studied in the seminar and their personal attitude as shown in the tool. To enhance thisdissonance, the second experimental group also received a weekly macro script to structure their reflection (e.g.how does my position change?) and the behavioral outcome (e.g. discuss with the person most different fromyou) of the awareness tool. We hypothesized that more change should occur in the experimental conditions andthe direction of change would be more varied in relation to the seminar contents than in the control. In terms ofthe learning outcome, we hypothesized a main effect of group awareness on declarative knowledge (facts anddefinitions) and argumentative knowledge (theory-based interpretations and argumentation).Results965.55AwarenessAwarenessAwareness + Script4.5ControlAwareness + ScriptMeanMean8.58Control47.53.5123456781Figure 2. Multiple-perspective / flexible attitude2345678Figure 3. Goal-oriented / structured attitudeThere were no significant differences between groups prior to the intervention. Log data confirmed that bothawareness groups spent time looking at the graph as an indication of reflection, and that the script conditionreflected on their graph position. There is a significant effect for the experimental groups on declarativeknowledge, F(2;59)=6.86; p=.002; ηp2=.19, i.e. both awareness conditions learned more about facts anddefinitions, and. There are no significant effects for argumentative knowledge. An explorative factor analysisidentified two factors of communication attitudes. The first factor is a multiple-perspective and flexible way toreflect on and behave in the scenario, the second factor is a goal-oriented and structured way. A repeatedmeasures ANOVA showed a significant effect of the experimental conditions for the factor multiple-perspective/ flexible attitude (see Figure 2), F(2;59)=1.72; p=.049; ηp2=.06 and for the factor goal-oriented and structuredattitude (see Figure 3), F(2;59)=1.98; p=.018; ηp2=.06. The descriptive statistics show that the experimentalconditions score higher in their communication attitude for the first factor. On the contrary, the control, whichstarts on a significantly higher level in the first week, F(2;59)=3.26; p=.046; ηp2=.10, remains relatively stableover the duration of seminar. The awareness groups started on an average level, changing their attitudes towardsmore multiple-perspective over the duration of seminar. However, the control scored gradually lower on thesecond factor until the end of the seminar, whereas the awareness conditions were rather stable in their attitudes.Contrast showed that both awareness conditions changed their attitude from first and to last session significantlyon multiple-perspective, t(59)=2.70; p=.010, which also correlates with learning outcomes on declarativeknowledge, r(61)=.26, p=.046, and the control condition on goal-oriented behavior, t(59)=2.64; p=.011.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1349© ISLSDiscussionAs hypothesized, it seems like the increased awareness of one’s own position in the graphic increased thedissonance between cognitive and affective state at the individual level, which led to reflection on the seminartopic for the individual, who tried to understand their position (communication type) based on communicationtheories. At the same time, the awareness of the one’s relative position with regard to the seminar groupincreased the dissonance between cognitive and affective state at the group level, causing students to turn to theseminar material in order to mutually explain and understand differences and similarities. The awareness toolimplemented in FB induced this behavior without the script that we hypothesized would be necessary based onprevious learning science results. Although an attitude change of the awareness conditions only took place forthe multiple-perspectives factor, this process resulted in increased declarative knowledge. The correlationbetween the change on multiple-perspectives and declarative knowledge supports this interpretation. For thecontrol, the seminar topics constituted a rich source of information that could saturate the curiosity inflicted bythe socio-cognitive dissonance. This richness, in lack of awareness, might have cancelled out the expectedeffects of using the fellow students to exchange arguments in a process of knowledge co-construction that wasexpected to increase declarative knowledge. Another interpretation could be that the high scores in multipleperspectives and the simultaneous support for this behavior by the seminar content prevented any change for thecontrol; however, this is not supported by the significant lower knowledge outcomes for this condition. For thegoal-orientation factor, the control changed their attitude to disfavor this communication strategy, presumablythrough a superficial impression shared by the seminar at first glance that this strategy is not favored. The lowerlearning outcomes would explain this impression. In addition, the awareness conditions demonstrated theattitude that the seminar aimed to cultivate; namely, an understanding that some situations require more goaloriented and structured approaches, although multiple perspectives are in general required.ReferencesAndriessen, J., “Arguing to learn” (2006). In R.K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learningsciences, Cambridge University Press, New York.Asterhan, C. S. C. (2013). Epistemic and interpersonal dimensions of peer argumentation: Conceptualizationand quantitative assessment. In: M. Baker, J. Andriessen & S. Jarvela (Eds), Affective learning together(pp 251-272). New York, NY: Routledge, Advances in Learning & Instruction series.Asterhan, C. S. C. & Babichenko, M. (September, 2013). Learning Complex Scientific Concepts through PeerArgumentation: The Effect of Human Presence and Discourse Style. Paper presented at the BiennialEARLI conference. Munich, Germany.Bennett, L., Freelon, D., & Wells, C. (2010). Changing citizen identity and the rise of participatory mediaculture. In L. R. Sherrod, J. Torney-Purta, & C. A. Flanagan (Eds.), Handbook of research on civicengagement in youth (pp. 393-423). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.Bingham, T., & Conner, M. (2010). The New Social Learning. A Guide to Transforming Organizations ThroughSocial Media. San Francisco, CA:Berret-Koehler Publishers & ASTD Press.Bliuc, A. M., Ellis, R., Goodyear, P., & Piggott, L. (2010). Learning through face-to-face and onlinediscussions: Associations between students' conceptions, approaches and academic performance inpolitical science. British Journal of Educational Technology, 41, 512-524Brown, J.S., Collins, A. & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher 18, 1(32–42).Buder, J., Bodemer, D. (2008). Supporting controversial CSCL discussions with augmented group awarenesstools. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3, pp. 123–139Dillenbourg, P., & Hong, F. (2008). The mechanics of CSCL macro scripts. International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 3(1), 5–23. doi:10.1007/s11412-007-9033-1Eagly, A., & Chaiken, S. (1995). Attitude strength, attitude structure and resistance to change. In R. Petty and J.Kosnik (Eds.), Attitude Strength. (pp. 413–432). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Ellison, N. B. & boyd, d. (2013). Sociality through social network sites. In Dutton, W. H. (Ed.), The OxfordHandbook of Internet Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 151-172.Erber, M. W., Hodges, S. D., & Wilson, T. D. (1995). Attitude Strength, Attitude Stability, and the Effects ofAnalyzing Reasons. In R. Petty and J. Kosnik (Eds.), Attitude Strength. (pp. 433–454). Mahwah, NJ:Erlbaum.Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computersupported collaborative learning. Educational psychologist, 48(1), 56-66.Geocartography Knowledge Group (2011). Facebook activities: Students, teachers and parents (in Hebrew).Retrieved 4/11/2012 from http://data.isoc.org.il/data/151Greenhow, C. & Li, J. (2013). Like, comment, share: Collaboration and civic engagement in social networksites. In Mouza, C. & Lavigne, N. (Eds.). Emerging Technologies for the Classroom: A LearningSciences Perspective (p. 127-241) . New York: Springer.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1350© ISLSGreenhow, C., Menzer, M., & Gibbins, T. (2012). When friends debate science: Socio-scientific argumentationin a Facebook Application. Paper accepted for presentation at the Annual Meeting of the AmericanAssociation of Educational Researchers, San Francisco, CA.Heimlich, J. E., & Ardoin, N.M. (2008). Understanding behavior to understand behavior change: A literaturereview. Environmental Education Research 14(3), 215 – 237.Herrenkohl, L. R., & Cornelius, L. (2013). Investigating elementary students’ scientific and historicalargumentation. Journal of Learning Sciences, 22(3), 413-461.Judele, R., Tsovaltzi, D., Puhl, T. & Weinberger, A. (2014). Collaborative Learning in Facebook: AdverseEffects of Individual Preparation. Presentation at HICSS-47 (in press), Hawaii, USA.Junco, R. (2012). Too much face and not enough books: The relationship between multiple indices of Facebookuse and academic performance. Computers in Human Behavior, 28, 187–198.Junco, R. & Cotton, S. R. (2013). No A 4 U: The relationship between multitasking and academic performance.Computers & Education, 59, 505–514Keefer, M. W., Zeitz, C. M. & Resnick, L. B. (2000). Judging the quality of peer-led student dialogues.Cognition & Instruction, 18, 53-81.Kirschner, A. P. & Karpinski, A. C. (2010). Facebook and Academic Performance. Computers in HumanBehavior, 26, 1237-1245.Loll, F., & Pinkwart, N. (2013). LASAD: Flexible representations for computer-based collaborativeargumentation. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 71(1), 91-109.McLeod, J., Shah, D., Hess, D., & Lee, N.-J. (2010). Communication and Education: Creating competence forsocialization into public life. In L. Sherrod, J. Torney-Purta, & C. Flanagan (Eds.), Handbook ofresearch on Civic Engagement in Youth (pp. 363-390). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.Morris, L. V., Finnegan, C., & Wu, S. (2005). Tracking student behavior, persistence, and achievement in onlinecourses. The Internet and Higher Education, 8, 221-231.Phielix, C., Prins, F. J., Kirschner, P. A., Erkens, G., & Jaspers, J. (2010). Group awareness of social andcognitive performance in a CSCL environment: Effects of a peer feedback and reflection tool.Computers in Human Behavior. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.06.024.Polman, J. L., Saul, W., Newman, A., Farrar, C., Singer, N., Turley, E., Pearce, L., Hope, J., & McCarty, G.(2010). A cognitive apprenticeship for science literacy based on journalism. In K. Gomez, Lyons, L., &Radinsky, J. (Ed.), Learning in the Disciplines: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of theLearning, Vol 2 (pp. 61-68). Chicago, IL: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Rideout, V. J., Foehr, U. G., & Roberts, D. F. (2010, January 20). Generation M2: Media in the lives of 8- to 18year-olds (Report No. 8010). Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser Family Foundation.Sadler, T., Barab, S., & Scott, B. (2006). What do students gain by engaging in socioscientific inquiry. Researchin Science Education, 37, 371–391Scheuer, O., Loll, F., Pinkwart, N., & McLaren, B. M. (2010). Computer-supported argumentation: A review ofthe state of the art. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5(1), 43–102. doi:10.1007/s11412-009-9080-xTsovaltzi, D., Weinberger, A., Scheuer, O., Dragon, T., & McLaren, B. (2012). Argument Diagrams inFacebook: Facilitating the Formation of Scientifically Sound Opinions. In: Ravenscroft, A., Lindstaedt,S., Delgado Kloos, C., Hernandéz-Leo, D. (eds.) EC-TEL 2012: Seventh European Conference onTechnology Enhanced Learning. Saarbrücken, Germany.Tsovaltzi, D., Puhl, T., & Weinberger, A. (2013). Argumentative knowledge construction in Facebook: Raisingexpectations and argument support. Presentation at EARLI 2013, Munich, Germany.Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in Society. London: Harvard University Press.Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2007). Knowledge convergence in collaborative learning:Concepts and assessment. Learning and Instruction, 17(4), 416-426.Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2007). Scripting argumentative knowledgeconstruction in computer-supported learning environments. In Scripting computer-supportedcollaborative learning, 191-211.Weinberger, A. & Fischer, F. (2006). A framework to analyse argumentative knowledge construction incomputer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46, 71-95.Wenger, E., McDermott, R. A., Snyder, W., (2002) Cultivating Communities of Practice: A Guide to ManagingKnowledge. Harvard Business PressWise. A. F., Speer, J., Marbouti, F. & Hsiao, Y. T. (2013). Broadening the notion of participation in onlinediscussions: Examining patterns in learners’ online listening behaviors. Instructional Science, 41(2),323-343Wood, W., Kallgren, C. A., & Reisler, R. M. (1985). Access to attitude-relevant information in memory as adeterminant of persuation: The role of meddage attributes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,21, 73-85.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1351© ISLS