Teacher Facilitation of Whole-Class Discussion in SecondaryHistory ClassroomsAbby Reisman, University of Pennsylvania, reismanabby@gmail.comChava Shane-Sagiv, Mandel Leadership Institute, chavas@mli.org.ilLisa M. Barker, The State University of New York at New Paltz, barker@newpaltz.eduBrad Fogo, Stanford Univerity, bfogo@stanford.eduDiscussant: Joseph Polman, University of Colorado Boulder, Joseph.Polman@Colorado.eduAbstract: The case for classroom discussion as a core method for subject matter learningstands on stable theoretical and empirical ground. However, much of the extant research hasoccurred in math and science classrooms. The four papers in this symposium examine thenature of whole-class discussion in history classrooms, and begin with the premise thatteacher facilitation plays a critical role in the quality and direction of whole-class discussionabout the past. The first two papers explore the nature of historical understanding, and thediscursive and socio-cultural obstacles that often stand in the way of its achievement insecondary history classrooms. The second two papers take a closer look at teacher learning,growth, and reflection in leading whole-class discussion.Contribution and Value to the Learning Sciences CommunityIn her keynote address at ICLS 2010, Pam Grossman noted the virtual absence of the humanities in a conferencededicated to the learning sciences. This symosium seeks to answer Grossman’s call on two levels: first, the fourpapers presented here deal with the subject matter of history and the particular demands of teaching and learningin the history classroom; second, the papers examine the nature of whole-class discussion, a method that, whilenot exclusive to learning in the humanties, certaintly constitutes one of its “signature pedaogies” (Shulman,2005). Perhaps it issurprisingly, then, that much of the extant research on classroom discussion has occurred inmath and science classrooms. By bringing together four papers on teacher facilitation of whole-class discussionin history classrooms, this symposium contributes not only to the LS community, but to our understanding ofclassroom discourse more generally.Overall Focus and Major Issues AddressedOur symposium takes a look at the nature of whole-class discussion in history classrooms. All four papersbegin with the premise that teacher facilitation plays a critical role in the quality and direction of whole-classdiscussion about the past. The first two papers analyze classroom discourse through multiple theoretical lensesthat attempt to parse the myriad—and often conflicting—goals represented and actively or implicitly promotedby teacher, students, the curriculum, and classroom norms. Both papers attempt to answer the question: whatstands in the way of the achievement of historical understanding in whole-class discussion? And to what extentdoes teacher facilitation open or close the door to student historical understanding?The second two papers take a closer look at teacher learning, growth, and reflection in leading wholeclass discussion. One of these papers frames discussion facilitation as an improvisational method and examinestwo history teachers’ development in discussion facilitation over the course of a semester, one of whomparticipates in an improv class that serves as an intervention. The other paper is a self-study of two teachereducators’ facilitation of a summer workshop for history teachers on how to lead whole-class discussion. Theworkshop was designed to encompass the three components of a pedagogy of enactment (cf. Grossman,Compton, Igra, Ronfeldt, Shahan, & Williamson, 2009). The authors reflect on the extent to which their ownpedagogy adequately modeled and reflected the pedagogies they were presenting to their teachers.The following questions underlie all four papers in the symposium: Why is whole-class discussionimportant in the history classroom? What is the nature of historical undersanding in whole-class discussion?What role should teachers play in facilitating discussion? What implications do these findings have for teachereducation and professional development?Potential Significance of the ContributionsThe case for classroom discussion as a core method for subject matter learning stands on stable empirical andtheoretical ground. Theoretical justifications for classroom discussion are rooted in models of participatorydemocracy and reasoned discourse, as well as in sociocultural theory, which maintains that learning is situatedand mediated by language, and that novices learn by observing and participating with experts in culturalactivities. Empirically, a considerable body of literature illuminates how classroom discussion promotes andICLS 2014 Proceedings1446© ISLSsupports student learning and reasoned inquiry. However, much of this research has occurred in mathematics,science, and reading classrooms. To date, none of the research on classroom discussion has examined wholeclass text-based discussion in secondary history classrooms.One big question to emerge from this body of research concerns the teacher’s role in scaffolding andsupporting reasoned discourse. Researchers agree that productive student discourse is unlikely to occur in aclassroom where teacher talk consists exclusively of Initiation-Response-Evaluation (I-R-E) patterns (cf.Cazden, 2001; Nystrand & Gamoran, 1997), yet suggestions for effective teacher facilitation vary. Someresearchers have recast I-R-E sequences as potentially useful under certain circumstances. Wells (1999) foundinstances when the "third move" of the sequence served to follow-up on, rather than evaluate, student thinking,and O'Connor (2001) distinguished between exploratory talk, when the teacher might hesitate to correct astudent's misconception, and summative talk, when the teacher might review a concept in order to reestablishstudents' knowledge. Wolf, Crosson, and Resnick (2004) also found that the quality of student responsesdepended on the types of questions that teachers posed. Clearly, the teacher plays a more critical role asfacilitator in whole-class discussion, as opposed to small-group discussion, where teacher involvement is at bestintermittent.The four papers in this symposium address the role of teacher facilitation of whole-class discussion inhistory class. In the first paper, Reisman defines the goal of text-based historical discussion as entry into thehistorical problem space, where students come face to face with the strangeness of the past. She identifiesinstances of substantive whole-class text-based discussion from classroom video taken over the course of sixmonth intervention in five 11th grade classrooms that implemented a document-based curriculum, andhighlights particular teacher discourse moves that may have opened or closed the door to the historical problemspace. In the second paper, Shane-Sagiv analyzes a spontaneous classroom discussion that occurred in a 10thgrade high school class in Jerusalem when studnents learned about young socialist immigrants to early 20thcentury Palestine. Shane-Sagiv identifies the forces—including teacher practice—that worked to pull thisdiscussion, and ones like it, into the present and away from historical understanding. In the third paper, Barkerobserves, interviews, and studies two history teachers as they teach history with discussion and reflect upontheir discussion-facilitation styles. One of the two teachers participated in a 10-week “Improvisation forProfessional Practice” course that served as an intervention to support the improvisational nature of classroomdiscussion facilitation. Lastly, Barker and Fogo present their findings from a self-study of a professionaldevelopment workshop on classroom discussion that they led with history teachers. The authors discuss apromising pedagogical model for bringing practice-based instruction into professional development, and reflecton their own successes and shortcomings in implementing this model. We are fortunate that Joseph Polman hasagreed to be the discussant on this panel.We believe that, together, these papers contribute not only to our understanding of whole-classdiscussion in history class, but also an appreciation for the challenging role that the teacher must play infacilitating and curating educative discursive experiences for students. Our four presenters represent a range ofinstitutions and roles. From public and private institutions of higher education in California, New York, andIsrael, we are researchers, teacher educators, professional-development providers, curriculum designers, andformer public-school teachers. We hope that by sharing what we have learned about about discussions in highschool history classrooms, we will launch a community-wide conversation about how we might best supportand prepare teachers to facilitate meaningful, reasoned, and provocative deliberations about the past.Entering the Historical Problem Space: Whole-Class Text-Based Discussion inHistory ClassAbby ReismanOverviewThe present study examined whole-class text-based discussions in 5 classrooms that participated in a six-monthcurriculum intervention in 11th grade history classrooms. This study asks: (1) To what extent did the presence ofinquiry-based curricular materials foster whole-class disciplinary discussion? And (2) What was the nature ofteacher facilitation of classroom discussion about historical texts? Analyses explored whether relationshipsexisted between particular teacher moves and higher levels of student historical understanding.Historical Problem SpaceThe framework for this study draws from the research on student historical thinking, as well as from thephilosophy of history. In attempting to reconstruct the past, the historian enters into what I am calling thehistorical problem space, where the strangeness of the past butts up against the human desire to render itfamiliar. The strangeness of the past becomes a sticking point for students who struggle to explain unusualhistorical customs or behaviors (cf. Ashby & Lee, 1987; Dickenson & Lee, 1984; Lee, Dickenson, & Ashby,1997). Ultimately, entrance into the historical problem space requires careful and deliberative reading ofICLS 2014 Proceedings1447© ISLShistorical texts, and the formulation of claims that reflect the tentative nature of historical knowledge. This studyexamined whether and how teachers were able to foster disciplinary deliberation and textual analysis amongadolescents studying the past.MethodOver the course of the six-month intervention, five treatment classrooms were observed twice per week andvideotaped once per week, for a total of 20 videotaped lessons per teacher, 100 videotaped lessons total. All fiveteachers participated in four-day summer training, and three follow-up workshops. The teachers ranged in age,years of experience, and background in history. Videotaped classroom lessons were analyzed and instances ofwhole-class discussion were identified using four criteria: 1) the teacher had to pose the lesson’s centralhistorical question explicitly at the start of the discussion; 2) students must have read at least two documentsprior to the discussion; 3) the discussion had to include at least three distinct student turns that responded to thecentral question; 4) the discussion needed to have lasted at least four minutes. These criteria maximized theprobability that the discussions would contain instances of substantive text-based discussion about the past.Transcripts were parsed into teacher and student turns. Teacher turns were divided into two moves:“generic” and “historical”. Classified as generic were any moves that are not particular to historical discussion,for example, when a teacher encouraged student participation or basic elaboration on a point. Historical movesexplicitly prompted text-based historical argumentation. An intentional effort was made to use existinglanguage, in light of the call to develop a “common technical vocabulary” of instruction (cf. Grossman &McDonald, 2008, p. 186), and several codes below include citations to prior work where the term was applied orcoined. Here, however, the terms specify history-specific disciplinary moves: (1) Modeling (text-baseddiscussion): Teachers model how to use text to support a historical claim or how to agree or disagree with aclassmate’s interpretation of evidence; (2) Revoicing (a text-based historical claim): Teacherreformulates/refines student text-based claim in order to highlight/clarify the relationship between the claim andwarrant (cf. O’Connor & Michaels, 1996).; (3) Uptake (of text-based historical claim): Teacher follows-upstudent textual reference with a question or requests or provides a counter-argument (cf. Nystran & Gamoran,1997; Applebee, Langer, Nystrand, & Gamoran, 2003); (4) Marking Text (for historical interpretation): Teacherdirects student attention to a particular document and asked an interpretive question about it (cf. Beck &McKeown, 2006); (5) Textual Press: Teacher asks student to substantiate claim with textual evidence (cf.McElhone, 2012); (6) Stabilize content: Teacher authoritatively (most often through an I-R-E sequence) reviewscontent knowledge relevant to the discussion at hand. A final code, ‘Presentist Question,’ was developed toaccount for instances when the teacher posed a question that was ahistorical or prompted students to turn fromthe documents and to bring contemporary worldviews to bear on the topic. Consequently, presence of this codewas considered evidence of ahistorical discussion.Findings and ImplicationsNine discussions fulfilled the criteria established above for substantive text-based historical discussion and thesetotalled 132 minutes of disciplinary whole-class discussion from over 7000 minutes of footage.. Furthermore,only three of five teachers who used the intervention materials led substantive text-based discussion. Although Icannot engage in causal or even comparative analyses, I argue that certain moves may have opened or closed thedoor to deeper historical understanding. By examining each teacher in turn, I suggest that presence and absenceof certain moves may shed light on each teacher’s beliefs about the goal of whole-class text-based historicaldiscussion.Due to space limitations, I will provide a single example. Ms. Addams’s facilitation style wascharacterized by high textual press and uptake. In the following exchange she led discussion around a centralquestion: Was Abraham Lincoln racist? As she asked each small group to report their conclusions, she insistedthat students support their claims with evidence from the documents:T: John, what did your group say?S1: That he was racist.T: That he was racist? Why?S1: Because the way he talks about them.T: Okay. What?S1: Because the way he talks like bad about them like they’re not equal.T: Okay, do you have a certain document or quote that you’re referring to?S1: (Shakes head).T: Okay I need that evidence. Where does he specifically say they’re not equal? Document B? Canyou quote it?S2: Where he says, um, “I agree that the Negro is not my equal in many respects.”ICLS 2014 Proceedings1448© ISLST: “I agree that the Negro is not my equal in many respects.” Okay. I know some people actually usedthis quote for the other side—it just depends where you end your quote. Historians can do that,right? You decide where you’re going to end your quote? Because what does the rest of thissentence say?S2: Perhaps.T: Perhaps. Definitely in color we’re not the same, which is true, right, that has nothing to do withinferior/superior, it means just saying we definitely don’t look the same, and perhaps we’re not thesame intellectually. Maybe. He doesn’t say for sure. So it’s just, just to show you, that historians,anyone, can just decide—what do you choose to present? . . . So you can end your quote earlier.Addams’s response to S2 sheds light on her instructional goals. Addams noted that S2 quoted onlypart of Lincoln’s sentence, and she suggests to the student that either segment of the sentence could be used tobolster a claim, depending on the position one wished to argue. The full quote reads: “I agree that the Negro isnot my equal in many respects, certainly not in color, perhaps not in moral or intellectual endowment.”Although Lincoln’s words ring as unambiguously racist to our ears, some historians have argued that Lincoln’suse of the qualifier “perhaps,” in the context of a debate over slavery in 1858 before a pro-slavery audience,represented a radical departure from the views held by many of his contemporaries (Fredrickson, 1971, 1975;Wineburg, 1998).Historians would take umbrage at the thought they pull quotes from context to support a particularview. Yet, Addams’s goal here is not to illuminate the context of 1858, but rather to stress the importance ofproviding a textual warrant to back one’s claim. The claim-warrant relationship constitutes the core of anyargument (cf. Toulmin, 1958). Addams’s insistence that students supply warrants to substantiate their claimsreflects her commitment to their academic development and college readiness.Why should an emphasis on argumentative warrant work at cross-purposes with careful textualanalysis and entry into the historical problem space? The answer lies in how one arrives at the argument. Tobetter understand, we must turn to a popular writing scaffold known as the “Quote Sandwich” (cf. Lieberman,2010). In a “Quote Sandwich,” textual evidence represents the lunchmeat, tucked between two slices of claimand analysis bread. While arguably useful as a structural support during the writing process, the “quotesandwich,” when used as a blueprint for student text-based claims during historical discussion, inverts theinductive process of historical reading. Rather than prompting students to derive their claims from careful,collective analysis of text, the “quote sandwich” model of discussion prompts students first to stake a claim, andthen to find a textual warrant to support it, even one that happens to be decontextualized.ImplicationsThis study demonstrates that genuine disciplinary discussion about historical texts runs counter to many of theassumptions and expectations that both teachers and students bring to the classroom. First, popular curricularresources consistently present argumentation in discipline-neutral ways. The classroom exchanges presentedhere suggest that teachers will need a more robust model of historical argumentation if they are to help studentsengage meaningfully with historical texts. The second obstacle lies in contemporary classroom norms thatchampion student-centered learning and pillory authoritative teacher-centered instruction at the expense ofsubstantive learning. Active teacher facilitation and intervention proved essential for meaningful studentparticipation in two of the three classrooms that featured any amount of substantive text-based discussion.Furthermore, the teacher who was able to bring students into the historical problem space kept students’ eyestrained on the documents by marking the text, and modeling and revoicing how to read and how to use quotes aswarrants for historical claims. Furthermore, she was also the only teacher to interrupt discussion with I-R-Esequences that reviewed and stabilized content knowledge. Such a teacher-centered, didactic intervention isoften seen as heavy-handed, squelching the agency of the child. Yet it is precisely these moves that pave theway to substantive historical discussion and entry into the historical problem space.Is Communism Against The Laws Of Nature? Or: What is the Conversation inthe History Classroom About?Chava Shane-SagivIn this paper I analyze a discussion from a history lesson in a tenth grade Israeli high school classroom inJerusalem. The aim of my close reading of both the words and tone of the conversation is to demonstrate thefollowing claims, which are based on a yearlong empirical study: (a) spontaneous student comments in ordinaryhistory classrooms contain very little history, (b) classroom discussions of the past create very particularopportunities for challenging student assumptions and beliefs, and (c) teacher practices have a direct bearing onthe value of historical lessons to both student knowledge and identity.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1449© ISLSData for this paper was drawn from a larger research program that aimed to explore actual student talk,practices and learning in an ordinary history classroom (with typical instruction, curriculum, and state tests).This research was motivated by the gap that exists between, on the one hand, claims as to the importance ofhistory education advanced in both public and scholarly debates and, on the other hand, the paucity of actualempirical data on the topic.Theoretical and Methodological Approaches PursuedDuring the course of one academic school year (eight months of instruction), I observed, took notes on andaudio recorded all 42 history lessons in a tenth grade classroom in Jerusalem. I conducted monthly interviewswith the history teacher and a focus group, distributed questionnaires and collected 'artifacts of practice' (Ball &Cohen, 1999). The focus, when analyzing the class discussion, was on 'student talk'. My primary goal was toascertain what students asked about in these lessons, what they appeared to find interesting, and what they foundfrustrating. All of the students' questions and in-class remarks in all of the 42 lessons were analyzed, with theaim of discovering patterns of responses to content knowledge, specifically: (a) difficulty in understanding, (b)engagement, and (c) personal identification.Preliminary codes were generated while data collection took place and then used to systematicallyanalyze the entire set of lesson protocols. Lessons that touched upon a couple of categories were transcribed.Three areas were defined: (1) lines of reasoning in the history classroom: following students' talk over timeanalyzed in light of theories of the multiple lines of reasoning in the history classroom (Halldén, 1994); (2)judging/misunderstanding the past/history in oral conversations: student remarks reflecting understanding andmisunderstandings of the historical content were analyzed in light of theories on sense-making of the past andhistory (Lee, 2005; Wineburg,1998); (3) blending of academic knowledge and identity/beliefs: exchangesreflecting emotions/values were analyzed in light of discourse theories concerning the role of teacher talk inblending knowledge and belief in other subject matter classrooms (Lemke, 1990; Wortham, 2006) and in lightof theories on this blending with regards to history (Wertsch, 2000).FindingsConsider the following exchanges recorded in a tenth grade history classroom in Jerusalem at the beginning ofthe 21st century. Ms. Stern, the teacher, has been lecturing (for not so many minutes) on the Jews of EasternEurope who, in Ottoman Palestine at the beginning of the 20th century, established kvootzot (literally, 'groups')– collective communes in which young socialist immigrants shared housing and clothing in an attempt to avoidwhat they considered capitalist exploitation. In the 1920s, in British Palestine, some of these small groupsturned into larger ones, which came to be known as kibuttzim. To this day kibbutzim remain scattered acrossIsrael; many, however, have now abandoned strict collectivist practices. Nevertheless, they remain a code wordin Israel for socialist/communist ideas and values.The lesson has settled rapidly into a pretty conventional I-R-E pattern. As an example of the ways theyoung idealists lived in the kvootzot, Ms. Stern has just mentioned in passing that they 'took and returned clothesfrom collective stacks', she is about to distribute a historical letter from the time, when a lively conversationbegins:1. Natan: it's so dumb to live on a kibbutz!2. Dana: it's actually quite fun to share the same clothes.3. Noa: what's so fun about it?4. Tomer: It's terrible! You live off of other people.5. Mrs. Stern: you live according to your values. [very sharp]From the start of this conversation it is not clear if the students are referring to life on the historicalkvootzot of the beginning of the twentieth century, or expressing their opinions about life on kibbutzim today, ortalking about the sharing of goods in general. All student remarks (lines 1-4) are phrased in the present tense asahistorical opinions or questions. Nathan (line 1) dismisses life on the kibbutz while Ms. Stern had not used thatterm. Tomer expresses a harsh judgment against communal life (line 4) – but why is his tone upset if he isreferring to a past way of life? Ms. Stern snaps at Tomer, employing a harsh tone herself and expressing apositive judgment of this same way of life. Student comments continue:6. Dina: I don't like it, it's my clothes.7. Noa: I find it gross to wear clothes that have been worn by somebody else.8. Ido: communism is against all laws of nature.9. Tomer: I think it's a lousy life.10. Ido: communism is against all laws of nature! [very loud]ICLS 2014 Proceedings1450© ISLSOnce again, all student comments are directed against collective notions of life. The most extreme is Ido's claim(line 8), repeated with greater emphasis (line 10), that communism – a term that Ms. Stern had not used in thislesson – is against the laws of nature. It is at this point that – for the first time – a more hesitant and lessgeneralizing approach is introduced into the conversation:11. Shira: but the people who came then had very little, and they didn't need a lot.12. Noa: but it's not an appropriate life style anymore.13. Tamar: but back then they came for ideological reasons.14. Shimi: but it's against human nature! [very loud]15. Mrs. Stern: why is trying to create an equal society and fighting against social classes againsthuman nature?16. Ido: but what does one aspire to?17. Ms. Stern: They aspired to create a world without social classes.18. Dov: wow. [cynical]In this last exchange, Shira and Tamar introduce historic claims (lines 11, 13) into the conversation forthe first time. They speak about the people of the past, distinguishing between them and those in class and usingthe term "they.” For the different behaviors and values of these people these two students give an explanation interms of needs and ideology, which had both been addressed by Ms. Stern in a prior lesson. However, instead ofbuilding upon these remarks, and taking the conversation back to the beginning of the 20th century, Sternchooses to respond to the repeated general statement about communism and human nature. Stern responds toShimi (line 15) by asking a rhetorical moral question that is less about the kvootzot and more about not lettingShimi's response hang in the air. In response to her rhetorical question Ido (line 16) introduces a further abstractand ahistorical question. Stern tried again to promote her approach, which Dov didn’t find convincing (line 18).Discussion and Implications1) Talking about the past is never only talking about the past. Throughout the conversation presentedabove, as in most conversations across the year, the topic of the conversation shifted rapidly from pastto present without this being explicitly mentioned. It wasn’t easy to distinguish – during class or inretrospect when analyzing the data – who, when or what the discussion was about.2) Teacher practice influences the present-past pull. In the lesson above, as in many lessons across theyear, the teacher contributed to the shift of focus away from the past. She contributed both by what shedid do – her responses, and by what she didn’t do – e.g., not discussing the historical document that shehad brought to class.3) Becoming often trumps teaching and learning. In the conversation reported above, as in mostconversations in this history classroom, signs of student engagement (raised voices, repetition of claimsand questions, etc.) are indications that students are working through their beliefs, or desire to do so.The data suggests two surprising correlates, at least in this classroom: firstly, the same is also the casewith the teacher, and secondly, (though the exchange provided above might be a partial exception)such discussions are hardly ever directly connected to the content knowledge being discussed.Historical inquiry directs our minds and emotions to humans and human behavior – that of our own aswell as that of earlier times. The nuanced addition of 'earlier times' is what distinguishes a history class from a'civics class', a 'sociology class', and so on. The above data demonstrates how difficult it is, in an ordinaryclassroom, to 'stick' to the past. For history education, this finding has implications for teacher training, textbookwriting and testing. Furthermore, this research has implications for teaching and learning in other subject areas,where one might find analogous scenarious of student engagement leading discussion beyond or past thesubject-matter that needs to be covered.Hundreds of people chose to live communal lives in early 20th century Palestine, a time when socialistand communist ideas were attractive to millions of people around the world. We can dismiss them all as 'dumb'and move on to the next topic, or we can pause and discuss a 'text' that sheds light on the phenomenon (usingthe methods my colleagues in this session are suggesting or other ones). A conversation focused on the pastneed not only serve as a stage from which we pronounce what we already know about who we are; it can alsoadd to both our knowledge and ourselves.Improvisation and Teacher Learning: Re-imagining Habituated Forms ofInteraction in the History ClassroomLisa M. BarkerICLS 2014 Proceedings1451© ISLSLeading whole-class discussion requires teachers to both carefully prepare and improvise based on students’contributions. How do teachers learn to do the difficult work of orchestrating a rich and, by nature, improvisedclassroom discussion? How might training in improvisational theatre affect teachers’ facilitation of classroomdiscussion? This presentation addresses these questions through case studies of two high-school historyteachers, Zach and Samuel, who attended a summer professional-development workshop on leading whole-classdiscussion. The author examined the discussions these teachers facilitated during the semester following thisworkshop.Research DesignZach and Samuel taught history in different northern California public high schools. Each teacher selected oneof their sections of students to focus on for classroom observations and post-observation reflective interviewscollected during the fall semester of the 2011-2012 school year. Zach focused on his honors US History class ofapproximately 30 juniors, and Samuel chose a section of approximately 20 juniors in Advanced Placement USHistory. The author observed each classroom four times – twice toward the beginning of the semester and twicetoward the end – and conducted post-observation interviews to learn how Zach and Samuel reflected on thediscussions they led.After the first two observations, Samuel took a course called “Improvisation for Professional Practice:Inspiring Innovation in the Workplace.” Taught by Rob Carrol, this course met once a week for ten weeks andserved as the improv theatre intervention. Within the course, Samuel participated in a variety of individual andcollaborative exercises that invited him to try out and reflect on principles of improvisation alongsideapproximately 15 other professionals from a variety of relational practices (e.g., psychologists, parents,corporate leaders).Data sources for each teacher include four videotaped observations of classroom talk, classroomartifacts used during observed talk (e.g., handouts, texts), and five audiotaped interviews. Improv interventiondata sources included field notes, artifacts, and audio recordings of small-group reflection. The primary datasources used in analyses were the interviews and classroom observations. These data were used to documentchanges in the nature of Zach and Samuel’s verbal moves during facilitation of classroom discussion, and totriangulate observed changes with reflective commentary provided during interviews. Interview transcripts werecoded for evidence of how teachers understand and define classroom discussion, such as what they saw as thepurpose of discussion and how they viewed the role of content, classroom climate, the teacher, and studentsduring classroom talk.Episodes of extended (i.e., lasting at least two minutes) whole-class talk were transcribed from thevideotaped classroom observations. The author defined ‘whole-class talk’ as any talk format that included –through listening or speaking – the entire class (e.g., teacher-led whole-group recitation or discussion; studentled half-class ‘fishbowl’ discussions that all students can see and hear). Transcripts of whole-class talk weredivided into communication units, one or more words that function as an independent clause; thus, a singleperson’s turn can have multiple units. Each unit was coded for whether the teacher or a student was the speaker,and then by linguistic function(s), or if the unit served to direct, inform, question, respond, or offer a shortresponse (e.g., “Yeah,” “Okay”). Units coded as ‘respond’ were subcoded for kinds of uptake, or the purposefulpicking up on student responses in order to frame new questions (Nystrand & Gamoran, 1997). The authorcreated a typology of uptake for the purposes of this study.FindingsOver the course of the semester, Zach seemed to change how he defined discussion and how he saw his roleduring discussion. As he reflected on the discussions he led, he expressed a desire to let students do more of theheavy lifting in terms of demonstrating knowledge, listening to one another, and building off each others’ ideas.He characterized his original sense of his role during discussion as one who steers students toward particularhistorical arguments through a set of leading questions. He had since re-imagined this role as enforcing normsfor active listening and uptake. This shift in vision seemed to manifest in the quality of Zach’s responses tostudent contributions. Specifically, he used two moves to make space for student comments: (1) He made aconscious effort to let students answer questions, rather than filling in the gaps for them; and (2) he used anuptake move the author calls Post to encourage students to respond directly to one another. After a studentoffered an idea, Zach ‘Posted,’ or asked a question that gave the rest of the class a space to respond directly tothat student’s thought before moving on to a new idea.The frequency, sequence, and quality of Samuel’s questions and uptake also seemed to shift as thesemester progressed. The nature of these changes, alongside Samuel’s interview commentary and an analysis ofRob’s debriefs of improv exercises, suggest that Samuel may have responded to Rob’s teaching by noticing,naming, and importing into his history classroom aspects of Rob’s style of discussion leadership. Whiledescribing what he noticed about Rob’s facilitation of discussion, Samuel mentioned both Rob’s overallfacilitative manner and the particular moves Rob made during his facilitation of whole-group debriefs. AmongICLS 2014 Proceedings1452© ISLSRob’s moves, Samuel mentioned the open-ended quality and sequence of Rob’s questions, the generous ‘waittime’ Rob used to give participants time to think after each question, and how Rob responded to studentcontributions by mapping specific student ideas onto the essential understandings Rob wanted students to gatherduring the course.There was also evidence that Samuel began to import features of Rob’s template of talk, or how Robchoreographed questions and uptake to guide participants toward key insights about the nature of improvisation.Samuel may have imported three features of Rob’s template of talk: the use of open-ended, authentic questionsto launch discussion; the move of mapping student contributions onto essential understandings; and – a talkmove of Rob’s that Samuel didn’t reference in his interview data – the use of Press to probe student thinking.Similar to the notion of ‘conceptual press’ in mathematics (Kazemi & Stipek, 2001) and reading comprehension(McElhone, 2012), ‘Press’ is a move in which a speaker responds to a comment with a request for furtherexplanation, elaboration, clarification, or evidence (e.g., “Say more about what you mean by X.”; “What in thetext makes you think X?”).Discussion and ImplicationsAlthough the Common Core State Standards for Speaking and Listening assume that teachers are adequatelyprepared to explicitly teach discussion skills and facilitate discussion that promotes comprehension andcollaboration, this research shows that even teachers who are very motivated to investigate and improve theirfacilitation struggle to do so. Across subject areas, schools, and programs of preparation, teachers consistentlywrestle with how to facilitate discussion and, therefore, with how to support students in exhibiting the speakingand listening capacities outlined by the Common Core.At the same time that this research has highlighted the difficulty of re-imagining habituated forms ofinteraction, it offers hope that change in instructional practice is possible. Within just one semester, Zach andSamuel used higher levels of uptake to a greater degree over time, which suggests that they may have beenlistening more carefully to students’ contributions as the semester progressed. When triangulated with interviewand intervention data, Samuel’s shifts in facilitation suggest that the improv course afforded a space forexperimenting with new facilitative manners and modes of interaction. The improv course provided ongoingopportunities for participants to experience, understand, and exercise the central principles of improv as well asreflect on the relevance of these principles for their professional practice. These reflections, as facilitated byRob, offered Samuel weekly representations of the practice of orchestrating discussion. Based on interview dataand the observed shifts in the quality and frequency of Samuel’s talk moves, he seemed to import improvprinciples into his facilitation of whole-class talk.As research takes on the hard work of investigating improv-based interventions and elusiveimprovisational classroom interactions, we inch closer to understanding how teachers develop and enact thecapacity to respond purposefully in the moment to students’ ideas.Reflection on Action: A Self-Study of Pedagogy and Practice in a TeacherProfessional-Learning Workshop on Classroom Discussion in HistoryLisa M. Barker and Brad FogoOur symposium culminates with a presentation that highlights how we have applied our research findings toteacher professional learning. In particular, we examine an intensive summer professional-developmentworkshop on leading whole-class discussion. The authors (who co-taught the workshop) conducted a self-studydesigned to answer the question: What do the goals, assessments, and activities of the workshop reveal about theinstructors’ (1) underlying pedagogy of professional development and (2) conceptions of the instructionalpractice of leading whole-class discussion?The workshop was called “Investigating the Civil Rights Era: Inquiry-Based Discussion in the HistoryClassroom.” Located on a university campus, the workshop lasted approximately 50 hours over eight days(Monday-Thursday, 9am-4pm, for two consecutive weeks) in July-August 2012, and included 16 historyteachers from Northern California public high schools. The goals for teacher learning were that, by the end ofthe workshop, teachers would:1. Deepen their understanding of a specific historical era – in this case, the causes and effects of postSecond World War civil rights movements in the United States.2. Understand why discussion is important and what components and moves comprise the complexinstructional practice of leading whole-class, text-based discussion.3. Be able to plan for these components and enact targeted moves, including establishing norms forinteraction; selecting and excerpting rich written and visual texts to prepare for, propel, and deependiscussions; devising questions, tools, and opportunities for students to practice interacting withICLS 2014 Proceedings1453© ISLStexts and each other; listening actively during discussion, monitoring student participation, andusing uptake to respond to student ideas; and assessing and providing feedback on discussion.The workshop provided time for teachers to prepare for the following school year by designing and enactingdiscussion-based lesson plans based on topics and questions of their choosing.This choice to build time within the workshop for teachers to plan for and rehearse the instructionalpractice of leading discussion exhibited our commitment to design teacher-learning experiences that adhere toKazemi and Hubbard’s (2008) notion of a ‘pedagogy of enactment,’ or opportunities to “simulate the sorts ofsituations teachers confront in the midst of instructional practice and thus engage teachers in the ways ofknowing involved in classroom teaching” (p. 438). In their investigations of how people are prepared forrelational professions – namely, the clergy, teaching, and clinical psychology, Grossman and colleagues labeledthe three components of a pedagogy of enactment as representations, decomposition, and approximations ofpractice (Grossman, Compton, Igra, Ronfeldt, Shahan, & Williamson, 2009). The authors suggested that oneway to support teachers as they acquire new practices is to structure opportunities for them to (1) observe, (2)unpack, and (3) try out aspects of real-world practice within the context of their professional learningexperiences. The workshop followed this three-part framework as it modeled the practice of discoursefacilitation (i.e., representations) before “breaking down [the] practice into its constituent parts for the purposesof teaching and learning” (i.e., decomposition) (Ibid., p. 2058). Throughout the workshop, teachers also hadmultiple, carefully sequenced opportunities to enact (i.e., approximate) these decomposed practices withcolleagues. Although off-site, among-peer approximations cannot be as authentic as teaching young people inthe context of an actual school, they offer rich opportunities for teachers to rehearse and receive feedback on acomplex set of skills in a safe, supportive, low-stakes setting.FindingsBorrowing from the work of Williamson (2006), we conceptualized the instructional moves required to leaddiscussion as a set of “strategies for getting students into, through, and beyond discussions” (p. 195). Withineach of these three phases is a range of sub-practices; for example, within the ‘through’ phase, a teacher mustlisten actively and respond to students’ contributions.While we applied a full pedagogy of enactment (i.e., including representations, decomposition, andapproximations of practice) to some of the sub-practices we had targeted, other components of leadingdiscussion were given less or, in some cases, no emphasis. For example, the workshop provided opportunitiesfor teacher-participants to observe, examine, and enact the practices within the ‘into’ and ‘through’ phases ofdiscussion, including selecting, adapting, and sequencing rich texts of multiple genres; providing scaffolds (e.g.,from simpler to more complex texts, from smaller to larger groups) that support student learning about texts andtalk; to listen actively; and to respond to student thinking. Other practices – such as establishing and enforcingnorms for interaction, using visual text in discussion, monitoring student participation, synthesizing the contentof a discussion, and providing feedback on students’ participation – although represented and decomposed, werenot fully explored through structured opportunities to approximate practice. The sub-practice of self-reflectionon one’s own facilitation was partially approximated but never visibly modeled or debriefed. Finally, two of ourtargeted practices (designing questions and assessing and evaluating students’ understanding), although madeaudible (i.e., “This is important.”), were not made visible (i.e., “This is what this looks like.”) nor practical (i.e.,“This is how you go about doing this.”). In hindsight, the ‘beyond’ phase of discussion received the least timeand attention, and the planning and facilitation phases received the bulk of our focus as a teaching and learningcommunity.Discussion and ImplicationsAs teacher educators who conduct research on the instructional practices we target in our workshops, we striveto establish explicit connections between our findings and the design of subsequent professional-learningexperiences. At the same time, we see self-study as a way to stay critical of our pedagogies – to be honest aboutthe extent to which our empirical knowledge aligns with our pedagogies, as well as the extent to which thesepedagogies align with our practice as teacher educators. By making transparent these cycles of inquiry, we aimto contribute to the growing body of knowledge of what makes for effective discussion leadership and whatteacher-education practices best support teachers as their acquire these skills.ReferencesApplebee, A.N., Langer, J.A., Nystrand, M. & Gamoran, A. (2003). Discussion-based approaches to developingunderstanding: Classroom instruction and student performance in middle and high school English.American Educational Research Journal, 40(3), 685-730.Ashby, R., & Lee, P. J. (1987). Children's concepts of empathy and understanding in history. In C. Portal (Ed.),The history curriculum for teachers (pp. 62-88). Basingstoke: Falmer Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1454© ISLSBall, D. L., & Cohen, D. K. (1999). Developing practice, developing practitioners: Toward a practice-basedtheory of professional education. In G. Sykes & L. Darling-Hammond (Eds.), Teaching as the learningprofession: handbook of policy and practice (pp. 3–32). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Beck, I. L., & McKeown, M. G. (2006). Improving comprehension with Questioning the Author: A fresh andexpanded view of a powerful approach. New York, NY: Scholastic.Cazden, C.B. (2001). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning (2nd ed.). Portsmouth, NH:Heinemann.Dickinson, A.K. & Lee, P. J. (1984). Making sense of history. In A. K. Dickenson, P. Lee, & P. J. Rogers(Eds.), Learning history (pp. 117-153). London: Heinemann Educational.Fredrickson, G. (1971). Black image in the White mind: The debate on Afro-American character and destiny,1817-1914. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.Fredrickson, G. M. (1975). A man but not a brother: Abraham Lincoln and racial equality. Journal of SouthernHistory, 41, 39-58.Grossman, P., Compton, C., Igra, D., Ronfeldt, M., Shahan, E., & Williamson, P. W. (2009). Teaching practice:A cross-professional perspective. Teachers College Record, 111(9), 2055–2100.Grossman, P., & McDonald, M. (2008). Back to the future: Directions for research in teaching and teachereducation. American Educational Research Journal,45(1), 184-205.Halldén, O. (1994). On the paradox of understanding history in an educational setting. In G. Leinhardt, I. L.Beck, & C. Stainton (Eds.), Teaching and learning in history (pp. 27–46). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Kazemi, E., & Hubbard, A. (2008). New directions for the design and study of professional development:Attending to the coevolution of teachers' participation across contexts. Journal of Teacher Education,59(5), 428-441.Kazemi, E., & Stipek, D. (2001). Promoting conceptual thinking in four upper-elementary mathematicsclassrooms. Elementary School Journal, 102, 59-80.Lee, P.J., Dickinson, A.K., & Ashby, R. (1997). “Just another emperor”: Understanding action in the past.International Journal of Educational Research, 27(3), 233-244.Lee, P. (2005). Putting principles into practice: Understanding history. In S. Donovan & J. D. Bransford (Eds.),How students learn: History, mathematics and science in the classroom (pp. 31–77). Washington, DC:The National Academies Press.Lieberman, C. (2010, Nov. 3). The quote sandwich. The Barker Underground: Official Blog of the HarvardCollege Writing Center. Retrieved from: http://harvardwritingcenter.wordpress.com/2010/11/.Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: language, learning and values. Westport, CT: Ablex.McElhone, D. (2012). Tell us more: Reading comprehension, engagement, and conceptual press discourse.Reading Psychology, 33(6), 525-561.Nystrand, M. & Gamoran, A. (1997). The big picture: Language and Learning in hundreds of English lessons.In M. Nystrand, A. Gamoran, R. Kachur, & C. Prendergast (Eds.), Opening dialogue: Understandingthe dynamics of language and learning in the English classroom (pp. 30-74). New York: TeachersCollege.O’Connor, M.C. (2001). “Can any fraction be turned into a decimal?” A case study of a mathematical groupdiscussion. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 46, 143–185.O’Connor, M.C. & Michaels, S. (1996). Shifting participant frameworks: Orchestrating thinking practices ingroup discussion. In D. Hicks (Ed.), Discourse, learning, and schooling (pp. 63-103). New York:Cambridge University Press.Shulman, L. (2005). Signature pedagogies in the professions. Daedalus, 134(3), 52-59.Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Wells, G. (1999). Dialogic inquiry: Towards a sociocultural practice and theory of education. New York:Cambridge University Press.Wertsch, J. V. (2000). Is it possible to teach beliefs, as well as knowledge about history? In P. Stearns, P.Seixas, & S. Wineburg (Eds.), Knowing, teaching, and learning history: National and internationalperspectives (pp. 38–50). New York: New York University.Williamson, P. W. (2006). Learning to teach with discussion: investigations from novice teachers' practice.(Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses. (Publication number3219409).Wineburg, S. S. (1998). Reading Abraham Lincoln: An expert/expert study in the interpretation of historicaltexts. Cognitive Science, 22(3), 319-346.Wolf, M.K., Crosson, A.C., Resnick, L.B. (2004). Classroom talk for rigorous reading comprehensioninstruction. Reading Psychology, 26(1), 27-53.Wortham, S. (2006). Learning identity: the joint emergence of social identification and academic learning.Cambridge. UK: Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1455© ISLS