Reverberating Words and GED 2014 Academic Writing Instruction:Reflecting on a Functional Linguistics-Based Approach toGrammar Foregrounding the Social Concept of IdentitySasha Lotas, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, sashalotas@gmail.comAbstract: As adult literacy GED programs are increasingly tasked with serving theeducational needs of both young and older adult students in a knowledge-based economy,there is growing interest in how to make these programs more effective and efficient,especially at helping students develop the academic writing skills needed to pass the newcommon-core aligned GED 2014. However, in the attempt to make these programs moreefficiently effective, the promotion of prescriptive GED writing pedagogies, based on anautonomous view of literacy, is likely. The long-term goal of this reflection study is to learnhow to thoughtfully develop a framework - based on a functional linguistics approach togrammar that foregrounds the social concept of identity - that can produce alternative GEDwriting pedagogies, promoting more socially-just effective practices within adult literacyprograms and helping to ensure that adult literacy students have access to empoweringacademic writing curricula.Issues AddressedAlthough adult literacy programs predate public schooling, these programs have historically been marginalizedwithin the educational system; however, as adult literacy programs are increasingly tasked with serving theeducational needs of both young and older adult students in a knowledge-based economy, there is growinginterest in how to make these programs more effective, especially at helping students develop academic writingskills. Starting next year, adult literacy programs will begin to prepare students for the GED 2014, a revisedversion of the exam based on Common Core Standards which will measure “career- and college-readiness (GEDTesting Service, 2013). Although the exam is undergoing numerous changes, one of the greatest changes is itsnew focus on academic writing – a change reflecting the increased national focus on improving writing skills “ina global information economy that continually raises the bar for what counts as literacy” (Juzwik et al., 2006,p.453). While the current version of the exam assesses writing only in its Language Arts Writing section throughmultiple-choice grammar-based questions and a narrative essay prompt (Gillespie, 2007), the 2014 version ofthe GED will test evidence-based, analytic writing in both the Language Arts section as well within the Scienceand Social Studies sections (GED Testing Service, 2013).However, this Common Core Standards makeover with its new emphasis on academic writing does notpresume the adoption of more academically challenging and socially just adult literacy pedagogies. Instead, asthe GED Testing Service (part of the nonprofit American Council on Education) merges with Pearson (a forprofit educational testing company), it may be likely that more commercialized, script-based materials – basedon an autonomous view of literacy – will be adopted by GED instructors, possibly continuing to send cognitive“deficit” messages to GED students and making their “second-chance” at an education unproductively similar totheir “first-chance”. This may be especially true in writing instruction, which may be reduced to superficialculturally irrelevant grammar and skills-based instruction.The goal of this paper is reflect on how to develop an academic writing instructional framework withinGED programs that promote tools to encourage meaningful student participation. One possible framework toexplore is grounded within a functional linguistics approach to grammar that foregrounds the social concept ofidentity.ContextualizationOften, GED preparation classes are overly reliant on remedial educational pedagogy and test-taking strategies,making GED preparation classes less likely to serve as authentic educational pathways for students; this isespecially true in GED writing classes which tend to focus on skill and drill decontextualized grammar exercises,conveying to students “a very restricted model of the composing process” (Rose, 1983, p.109). Russell (cited inGillespie, 1998), for example, in her interviews with GED writing students, found that students’ strong beliefsabout the importance of mechanics was possibly interfering with their writing development. When she asked astudent to describe what makes someone a good writer, the student answered “Knowing how to punctuate things.And not having to have so many mistakes on a paper and everything just being fine the first time” (p.5).Because of the restricting possibilities inherent in a decontextualized-grammar-based GED class, someGED instructors choose not to teach grammar, hoping to “transcend the deluge of skills exercises” by focusingon meaning over form (Shafer, 2004). Yet, there are problems with “dethron[ing]” form and “crown[ing]”ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1162© ISLSmeaning (Myers, 2003, p.55). Powerful academic writing depends on a writer’s grammatical choices, and notteaching students to define and identify grammatical elements may be another way to constrain GED students,constraining their ability to use academic writing to express their intended meanings as well as to make newmeanings (Micciche, 2013). “Meaning does not flow from knowledge of syntax and lexis, but the ability toexpress meaning [in academic context] does” (Myers, 2003, p.55).One possible solution to address this grammar-teaching dilemma - on the one hand, relying ongrammar instruction and basic skills remediation, “which comes from socially constructed deficiencyassumptions about students’ work” (Sanchez & Paulson, 2013, p.117), may further marginalize GED students;on the other hand, choosing not to focus on grammar may also further marginalize GED students by not givingthem access to and the power to affect the academic Discourse community – is to incorporate a functionallinguistics approach to grammar. A focus on grammar that is functional focuses on language in-use. Instead ofpresenting grammar as a set of rules about what is correct or incorrect, a functional linguistics approach presentsgrammar as meaning-making (Halliday & Mathiessen, 2004; Scheleppegrell, 2007).In particular, functional grammar emphasizes syntactic morphological knowledge, the understanding ofhow a derivational suffix changes the part of speech of a word (Kiefer & Lesaux, 2012, p.521). For example,because academic writing often focuses on abstract concepts, academic writers need to be able to turn verbs intonouns (nominalization). Through the use of morphologically related words (e.g., colonies, colonial, colonists,colonize, colonization), students are able to maintain thematic coherence across paragraphs as they subtlyforeground, background, and nuance concepts in service of their intended message. Rather than completingisolated grammar exercises, students come to understand how they can harness word forms and syntax tocommunicate their ideas more effectively without “continu[ing] to confine students to the impoverishedmeaning carried out by the conventional rules of language” (Reither, p.144). Syntactic morphologicalknowledge also allows students to understand and experience the invention in sentence making. AsShaughnessy (1970) explains: “There is a kind of carpentry in sentence making, various ways of joining orhooking up modifying units to the base sentence” (p.7). Instead of feeling afraid of making mistakes and having“everything [on paper] just being fine the first time, students can experience “how to mess with sentences;”students can become “sensitive to the questions that are embedded in sentences, which, when answered, canproduce modifications within the sentence or can expand into paragraphs or an entire essays” (Shaughnessy,1977, p.4). Ultimately, helping students understand how to syntactically play with words brings them closer tobeing able to express their intended meanings, while allowing them to experience writing as “knowledgetransforming” (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987), which, ultimately, makes academic writing worth doing.Although adopting a functional approach to grammar may help to solve the grammar-dilemma, it alsomay be problematic because it does not encourage students to reflect on how they negotiate their identities asacademic writers. Proponents of a functional linguistic approach acknowledge that students bring a range oflinguistic repertoires into the classroom; however, they seem less likely to consider how these linguisticrepertoires may influence students’ perceptions of themselves, as well as impact students’ decisions toparticipate in literacy practices, especially academic writing.Academic writing “is not simply a replacement of some practices by others. It is a process . . . whichrequires deep emotional commitment and involvement on the part of the language user” (Cook-Gumperz, 1993,p.338). Lillis (2001) explains that students’ sense of identity significantly influences “what writers (don’t) writeand (don’t) wish to write in academia” (p.48). Students have many different selves – selves with sometimesconflicting voices – which, if not addressed, may interfere with their understanding and completion of writingassignments (Lea, 2004). The question of identity seems particularly important when it comes to vocabulary andgrammar instruction, for accepting another “set of grammatical paradigms, rhetorical practices, and usageconventions” has identity and ideological implications (Cook-Gumperz, 1993, p.338). As Gee (1996) explains,language use is connected to power “often in the service of privileging certain types of literacies and certaintypes of people” (p.46). Purcell-Gates (1993), in her case-study of Jennie, a white woman attending adultliteracy classes in Appalachia, illustrates what may occur when a student’s primary discourse is marginalizedfrom the dominant Discourse (Gee, 1996). Despite many years of adult literacy grammar instruction, Jenniecontinued failing year after year “trying to memorize rules, trying to memorize terms like adverb and pronoun”because “none of these words, these rules, these linguistic terms were hers . . . and thus she could not succeedbecause her words were never acknowledged and affirmed, never allowed” (as cited in Gillespie, 1998).Theoretical and Methodology ApproachesBecause of the importance of considering identity and literacy, identity should be foregrounded within afunctional linguistic approach to academic writing in a GED program. The diagram below is a start of what thisframework may look like. It depicts how when a word and its forms are taught within an academic writing classto help students eventually build an academic essay, that word and its forms also have an impact on a student’slanguage, which impacts his/her discourse, ultimately impacting his/her identity.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1163© ISLSFigure 1. Reverberating words in GED 2014 writing instructionBased on this emergent framework, questions can be developed to help more effectively develop academicinstructional writing tools. For example:•Based on the idea of a “reverberating” learned academic word, what might a curriculum interventionlook like? What tools might be developed and why? How might these tools be studied within thetheoretical framework?The Credibility and Usefulness of the Study for Raising New Questions andPrompting New PossibilitiesWith the introduction of the new and privatized GED 2014, it is likely that adult literacy education will befurther commodified and focused on measurable skills-acquisition, continuing to link literacy to the needs of apostindustrial economy; in addition, it is also likely that adult literacy programs will remain underfunded andcontinue to lack trained, professional instructors (Gillespie, 2007). Because of this, adult literacy students andtheir needs as learners may be further backgrounded within some GED programs. The long-term goal of thisreflection study is to learn how to thoughtfully develop a framework that can produce student-centeredinstructional tools that promote effective practices with adult literacy programs, helping to ensure that studentshave access to empowering academic writing curricula.The Relevance of the Theme for the ConferenceIn exploring why and how to develop an academic writing instructional framework grounded in a functionallinguistics approach to grammar that foregrounds the social concept of identity, this reflection acknowledgesthat learning involves participating in different practices, encouraging all levels of educational programs –especially adult literacy programming - to respect the becoming of their students in these practices.ReferencesBereiter, C & Scardamalia, M. (1987). Two models of the composing process. In The psychology of writtencomposition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Cook-Gumprez, J. (1993). Dilemmas of identity: Oral and written literacies in the making of a basic writingstudents. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 24(4),336-356Delpit, L. (2001). The politics of teaching literate discourse. In Cushman, C., Kintgen, E.R., Knoll, B.M., andRose, M. (Eds.), Literacy: A Critical Sourcebook. Boston, MA: Bedford.Demetrion, G. (2005). Conflicting paradigms in adult literacy education: In quest of a US democratic politicsof literacy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Flowers, L. & Hayes, J.R. (1980). The Cognition of discovery: Defining a rhetorical problem. In LandmarkEssays on Writing Process, Perl, ed. (1994), Hermagoras Press: Davis, CAGED Testing Service (2011). 2011 Annual Statistic Report on the GED test. Retrieved March 20, 2013 fromhttp://www.iccb.state.il.us/pdf/ged/GEDTS_Report_2011.pdfGee, J.P. (1996). Social linguistics and literacies. Philadelphia, PA: Falmer.Gillespie, M.K. (1998). Using research on writing: Implications for adult literacy education. Retrieved fromhttp://www.ncsall.net.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1164© ISLSGillespie, M.K. (2007). The forgotten R: Why adult educators should care about writing instruction. In A.Belzer (ed.) Toward defining and improving quality in adult basic education (pp.87-106) Mahwah, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Halliday, M.A.K. & MathHull, G. & Rose, M. (1989). Rethinking remediation: Toward a social-cognitive understanding of problematicreading and writing. Written Communication, 6(2), 139-154.Hull, G., Rose, M., Fraser, K.L., & Castellano, M. (1991). Remediation as a social construct: Perspectives froman analysis of classroom discourse. College Composition and Communication, 42(3), 299-328.Ivanic, R. (2004). Discourses of writing and learning to write. Language and Education, 18(3), 220-245.Juzwik, M.M., Curcic, S., Wolbers, K., Moxley, K.D., Dimling, L.M., & Shankland (2006). Writing into the21st century: An overview of research on writing, 1999-2004. Written Communication, 23(4), 451-476.Lesgold, A.M. & Welch-Ross, (2012). (Eds.). Improving adult literacy instruction: Options for practice andresearch. National Academy of Sciences. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.Lillis, T.M. (2001). Student writing: Access, regulation, desire. New York: RoutledgeLillis, T.M. (2003). Student writing as ‘academic literacies’: Drawing on bakhtin to move from critique todesign, Language and Education. 17(3), 192-207.Lytle, S. (2001). Living literacies: Rethinking development in adulthood. In Cushman, C., Kintgen, E.R., Knoll,B.M., and Rose, M. (Eds.), Literacy: A Critical Sourcebook. Boston, MA: Bedford.Micciche, L.R. (2013). Making a case for rhetorical grammar. In Teaching Developmental Writing. New York,NY: Bedford Press.Rose, M. (1983). Remedial writing courses: A critique and a proposal. College English, 45(2), 109-127.Rose, M. (1985). The language of exclusion: Writing instruction at the university. College English, 47(4), 341351.Rose, M. (1988). Narrowing the mind and page: Remedial writers and cognitive reductionism. CollegeComposition and Communication, 39(3), 267-302.Rose, M. (1989). Lives on the boundary: A moving account of the struggles and achievements of America’seducationally unprepared. New York: Penguin Books.Rose, M. (1996). Possible Lives. New York: Penguin Books.Rose, M. (2010). The Smithsonian of basic skills. Retrieved from www.mikerose.comSchleppegrell, M. J. (2007). At Last: The Meaning in Grammar. Research in the Teaching of English, 42, 1,121-128.Schleppegrell, M. J. (March 01, 2012). Academic Language in Teaching and Learning. Introduction to theSpecial Issue. The Elementary School Journal, 112, 3, 409-418Shaughnessy, M.P. (1977). Errors and expectations. New York: Oxford University Press.Stuckey, E. (1991). The violence of literacy. Portsmouth, New Hampshire: Boynton/Cook Publishers.Williams, J.D. (2003). Preparing to teach writing: Research, theory, and practice. Mahwah, NJ: LawrenceErlbaum Associates.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1165© ISLS