Educational Games in the Classroom:Design-Based Research and Methods for Classroom MediationRachel S. Phillips, University of Washington, rachelsp@uw.eduTheresa Horstman, University of Washington, thorst@uw.eduCarmen Petrick Smith, University of Vermont, carmen.smith@uvm.eduChristy Ballweber, University of Washington, christy@cs.washington.eduNoelle Conforti Preszler, University of Washington, noellecp@uw.eduNancy Vye, University of Washington, nancyvye@uw.eduJohn Bransford, University of Washington, bransj@uw.eduAbstract: Educational games are becoming popular tools teachers use in the classroom toimprove students’ learning and understanding. This poster describes a large, ongoing designbased and mixed-methods research study that examines the best practices for using games inthe classroom. We created three video games that target fraction learning. We aim to study theaffects of these games on learning and engagement in the classroom and to understand whatcontexts facilitate the greatest math learning.IntroductionThis research is part of a collaboration between computer scientists and learning scientists. The learning scienceteams conduct classroom-based research to study the games, and as findings are discovered, those results areshared with the computer scientists who quickly revise the games for continued use and study in the classroom.The affordances of technology and our close collaboration allows us to rapidly iterate on both game design andstudy design as a means to track and improve the use of games in the classroom.In the 2012-2013 school year, our group conducted eight classroom-based studies. Our chief goal is tohelp students productively engage in the discipline of math as a means to improve their conceptualunderstanding of fractions. The research questions guiding the studies are: 1) What do different uses of thegames look like in different classrooms?; 2) If we see different learning outcomes with differentimplementations, how were those implementations qualitatively different?; 3) What implementation processesshould be repeated to reproduce learning gains in other classrooms?; and 4) How should both study and gamedesigns change when statistically significant learning gains are not produced?Theoretical FrameworkOur research is supported by sociocultural theories of learning, which examine the cultural and contextualnature of human development (Bronfrenbrenner, 1979; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Rogoff, 2003; Vygotsky, 1978).In our studies we are mindful of the overall “ecology” of gaming as described by Salen (2008), therefore we donot study games without regard to the context in which they are played. Looking at the learning ecologiesallows us to think of gaming beyond just the game and play state to also consider the game and its context as acomplex system.The social interactions and supports that occur during game play help players figure out the game invery different ways (Steinkuehler, 2004). Players playing together online or alone-together online (i.e. MMO)support each other differently than those playing a multi-player console game in the same physical space, anddifferent still from those playing single-player games together in the same physical space (Salen & Zimmerman,2003; Stevens, Satwicz, & Mccarthy 2008).MethodsAligned with our framework, we employ a design-based research methodology (Penuel, Fishman, Cheng, &Sabelli, 2011; Sandoval & Bell, 2004) to study these complex systems and revise both our games andenvironments as we learn and change. Our systematic investigations are iterative and collaborative, and we areconcerned with developing theory related to how games can best be used in the classroom.FindingsThere are three categories of studies: 1) Unmediated game play studies, 2) Peer mediated game play studies, and3) Teacher mediated game play studies.Unmediated Game PlayOverall, we did not find significant learning gains for unmediated game play (i.e., game play without teacherintervention and without peer support). These findings led us to move away from unmediated game play in theclassroom, towards the use of peer mediated game play. Our game designers programmed a two-player versionICLS 2014 Proceedings1647© ISLSof Creature Capture for the study of peer mediated game play. In addition, we tested the use of Refraction ifplayed in pairs (although the game was not redesigned for this use).Peer Mediated Game PlayThe second set of studies examined peer mediated game play. In these studies students played the games with apartner as a form of additional support but without supporting classroom activities surrounding the game. Asexpected, peer-mediated game play was associated with statistically significant gains on the assessment forsome groups and more math talk than unmediated game play. While peer mediated game play was animprovement, we were interested in exploring the contexts and conditions that affect learning via the use ofgames. As a result, we examined the impact of teacher mediated game play on student learning.Teacher Mediated Game PlayThe third set of studies are those for which teachers integrated the games into their classroom instruction. Ingeneral, the lower performing students, who received more focused instruction, produced statistically significantlearning gains. As a result, this led us to create more focused teacher-led interventions around the games.DiscussionThese studies tell a story of continued improvement in study design, game design, and student learning over thecourse of a year. Two types of learning occurred as a result. The first was continual research learning in thecontext of the designed based research. With each study iteration, we were able to draw new conclusions, createnew hypotheses, and quickly test those out in the classroom. The second level of learning relates to studentlearning. As we increased the level of structured mediation around the gameplay, students learned more.ImplicationsFirst, for teachers who use games in the classroom, our findings help demonstrate that using games in isolationmay not be the best use of games in the classroom for learning. Instead, structuring game play and the gameplay context in a way that is more deliberate and planned, and with the inclusion of peer or teacher mediation,will likely promote more student learning. Second, we are moving towards a more careful understanding ofwhat types of teacher mediation and classroom contexts are most helpful for student learning. We believe thatdirected lessons around the games might be the most beneficial.Relevance to the ConferenceOur study and our process embody the ideas of learning and becoming in practice. For the students, we aim tofoster learning that promotes students engagement with mathematics and math talk as a means to productivelyengage with the discipline. As researchers, using design based research is one way in which we are constantlylearning and improving in our practice.ReferencesBronfrenbrenner. U. (1979). The ecology of human development: Experiments by nature and design.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning and legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Penuel, W. Fishman, B., Cheng, B.H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing Research and Development at theIntersection of Learning, Implementation, and Design. Educational Researcher, 40: 331-337.Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.Salen, K. (2008). Toward an Ecology of Gaming. In K. Salen (Ed.), The Ecology of Games: Connecting Youth,Games, and Learning (pp. 1–20). Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.Salen, K., & Zimmerman, E. (2003). Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals (p. 688). Cambridge, MA.: TheMIT Press.Steinkuehler, C. A. (2004). Learning in Massively Multiplayer Online Games. In Y. B. Kafai, W. A. Sandoval,N. Enyedy, A. S. Nixon, & F. Herrera (Eds.), International Conference of the Learning Sciences (Vol.53706, pp. 521–528).Stevens, R., Satwicz, T., & Mccarthy, L. (2008). In-Game , In-Room, In-World: Reconnecting Video GamePlay to the Rest of Kids’ Lives. Digital Media, 41–66. doi:10.1162/dmal.9780262693646.041Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Office of Naval Research for makingthis work possible.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1648© ISLS