Exploring the Role of Theory of Mind and Executive Functions inPreschool Children’s Hypothesis Testing and RevisionJamie Liberti, Susan Golbeck, Rutgers University, 10 Seminary Place, New Brunswick, NJ 08901jamie.liberti@gse.rutgers.edu, susan.golbeck@gse.rutgers.eduAbstract: A major goal of preschool science instruction is to foster children’s scientificreasoning skills. This study explores the influence of children’s theory of mind and executivefunction capacities on their ability to engage in hypothesis testing and revision. Resultsindicate that preschoolers are capable of engaging in basic hypothesis testing and revision on aphysical science task, and theory of mind capacities may be related to children’s performance.Implications for early science instruction are discussed.Issues Addressed and Potential SignificanceThere has been an increased focus on incorporating science instruction in U.S. preschool classrooms. A majorgoal of early science instruction is to aid preschoolers’ development of scientific reasoning skills. Researchindicates that young children’s ability to test and revise hypotheses may depend on their executive function (EF)capacities (i.e., Gropen, Clark-Ciarelli, Hoisington & Ehrlich, 2011). Further, theory of mind (ToM) abilitiesmay also play a role in scientific thinking (Kuhn & Pearsall, 2000). It is around the age of 4 years that childrenare able to think about beliefs as distinct from reality, and 3-year-olds are unlikely to reconcile inconsistenciesbetween a preliminary belief and a later observation that falsifies it, while older children show less difficultydoing so (Gopnik & Astington, 1988). Thus, it is possible that EF and ToM capacities underlie young children’sabilities to confirm and revise hypotheses. This study examines the relationships among preschool children’s EFand ToM capacities and their ability to engage in hypothesis revision, a key scientific practice. Further, asresearch indicates that preschoolers can revise their originally mistaken scientific beliefs when givenopportunities to reflect (i.e., Kloos	   &	   Van	   Ordern,	   2005),	   this study also explores whether the use of aninstructional tool to scaffold children’s hypothesis testing and revision (by facilitating children’s reflection ontheir scientific investigations) leads to improved performance on scientific reasoning tasks in physical science.We hypothesized that use of the instructional tool would foster more accurate hypothesis revision by supportingchildren’s reflection on the differences between their predictions and observed outcomes, and further, that thistool would be most beneficial for children with lower EF and ToM capacities. This work is significant in that itprovides a foundation for creating developmentally-appropriate, early science educational experiences.MethodsParticipants were 36 children (17 female) from a central, NJ public preschool (mean age= 53.6 months; range=43-65). Children were predominantly middle-class and Caucasian. In a corner of their classroom, children wereinterviewed individually and were asked questions about the movement of objects on an inclined plane ofadjustable height. Children were first pretested using a Dimensional Change Card Sort (DCCS) task and threestandard theory of mind tasks. The DCCS task examines children’s ability to sort objects based on two differentdimensions (color and shape). The theory of mind tasks involve presenting a deceptive item to children (acrayon box that contained Band-Aids) and posing questions about the item. Pretest scores were used to createequivalent groups for the experimental and control conditions, controlling for age and gender across groups.Materials included an inclined plane, six objects made from TinkerToys, a chart for recordingpredictions and observations, cards for marking predictions and observations on chart, and blue masking tape.Before the experimental task, children in the experimental condition engaged in a brief training session aimed atfamiliarizing children with using the prediction and observation charts. Immediately after the training session,children in the experimental condition began the test phase. Phase I involved predicting whether various objectswould roll or slide down the inclined plane. For each object, the child made a prediction, recorded the predictionusing the chart, tested the object on the inclined plane, verbally stated the observed outcome, and recorded theoutcome on the chart. The child was then asked to use the chart to determine whether or not the originalhypothesis needed to be revised. The child engaged in this hypothesis testing and possible revision two timesconsecutively for each of the six objects, presented in random order. Phase II involved the same procedure asPhase I, except children were asked to predict whether each object would pass over a piece of blue tape affixedto the floor approximately 18 inches from the bottom of the inclined plane. Children in the control groupengaged in the same manipulations for Phase I and Phase II above, except they did not utilize the chart or imagecards to record their predictions or observations. Rather, they were asked to verbally state predictions, observedoutcomes, and whether the original prediction needed to be revised.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1491© ISLSPreliminary FindingsChildren scored reliably above chance on both the ToM and DCCS tasks. The DCCS mean score was 13.33/14(1-sample t-test [2-tailed]: t=31.793, p< .001), and the ToM mean score was 1.86/3 (1-sample t-test [2-tailed]:t=2.255, p=.03). Under the strict criterion of 3/3 points, 12 children passed the ToM task and 24 did not pass.Scores were near ceiling on the DCCS task. Phase I and Phase II scores were significantly correlated (r=.524,p=.001). For the remainder of analyses, Phase I and Phase II scores were combined to form a Total Score foreach participant out of a possible of 120 points. The combined Total Score was correlated with the ToM scores(r=.518, p=.002) and with DCCS scores (r=.355, p=.039).Children scored reliably above chance on the experimental task, with a mean Total Score of 112.56/120(1-sample t-test [2-tailed]: t=40.258, p< .001). Children in the experimental condition performed as well aschildren in the control condition. The mean Total Score for children in the experimental group was 114/120, andthe mean for the control condition was 111.12/120. Performing a median split by age illustrated that children inthe older age group (mean= 60 months; range=54-65) scored reliably higher than children in the younger agegroup (mean= 47.35 months; range= 43-53), regardless of experimental condition. The mean Total Score for theolder children was 116/120 and the mean the younger children was 109.12/120. A one-way analysis of varianceindicated that this difference was significant (F= 8.534, p=.006).High performance and ceiling effects on the DCCS and the experimental tasks made it difficult todetermine whether pretest scores were associated with performance on the experimental tasks. A multipleregression analysis was used to test whether experimental condition, age group, ToM score and DCCS scoresignificantly predicted children’s Total Score. The results of the regression indicated that the model significantlypredicted Total Score and explained 37.7% of the variance (F(4,29)= 4.389, p=.007, R2 = .337). ToM scoresignificantly predicted Total Score (b =.356, p=.041). No other predictors in the model were significant.The mean Total Score for the 12 children who passed the ToM pretest was 118.5/120; the mean TotalScore for the 22 children who did not pass the ToM was 109.32/120. A one-way analysis of variance found thatthis difference in group means was significant: F=16.654, p<.001. Thus, children who passed the ToM tasksscored reliably higher on the hypothesis testing and revision tasks than children who did not pass the ToM tasks.Among the 12 children who passed the ToM pretest, 7 were in the experimental condition and 5 were in thecontrol condition. The mean Total Score for the 7 children in the experimental condition who passed the ToMpretest was 119.29/120. The mean total score for the 5 children in the control condition who passed the ToMpretest was 117.4/120. Among the 22 children who did not pass the ToM pretest, 10 were in the experimentalcondition, with a mean Total Score of 110.3, and 12 were in the control condition, with a mean Total Score of108.5. Thus, although there was a trend for children who utilized the prediction and observation reflection chartsto perform better than those who did not use the charts when examining groups based on passing/failing theToM tasks, small n’s result in unreliable differences between these groups.Conclusions and ImplicationsThis study illustrates that preschool children are capable of engaging in the key scientific practices of basichypothesis testing and revision on a physical science task, and these abilities increase with age. Further,although the role of EF capacity on children’s hypothesis testing and revision abilities remains unresolved,findings provide evidence that ToM capacities may be related to these scientific skills. More work is needed todetermine the role of prediction and observation reflection charts in supporting children’s hypothesis revisioncapacities. Relevant implications for preschool education include that children can benefit from instructiondesigned to help them develop ToM and EF capabilities, and to apply these capacities to learning in scientificdomains. Further, children can benefit from educational experiences that involve hypothesis testing and revisionas children explore with objects and materials, as well as those which encourage reflection on scientificobservations and investigations. Future work is planned to further explore these questions with a larger sampleincluding younger children as well as participants of diverse cultural and socio-economic backgrounds.ReferencesGopnik, A., & Astington, J. W. (1988). Children’s understanding of representational change and its relation tothe understanding of false belief and the appearance–reality distinction. Child Development, 59, 26–37.Gropen, J., Clark-­‐Chiarelli, N., Hoisington, C., & Ehrlich, S. B. (2011). The importance of executive function inearly science education. Child Development Perspectives, 5(4), 298-304.Kloos, H., & Van Ordern, G.C. (2005). Can a preschooler’s mistaken belief benefit learning? Swiss Journal ofPsychology, 64,195-205.Kuhn, D., & Pearsall, S. (2000). Developmental origins of science thinking. Journal of Cognition andDevelopment, 1, 113–129.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1492© ISLS