Evolution of Communities of Learning Practice in HigherEducation: Collective Units of AnalysisFilitsa Dingyloudi and Jan-Willem Strijbos, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich,Department of Psychology and Munich Center of the Learning SciencesEmail: Filitsa.Dingyloudi@psy.lmu.de, Jan-Willem.Strijbos@psy.lmu.deAbstract: This study explores the development of Communities of Learning Practice (CoLP)over time, using Wenger, McDermott and Snyder’s (2002) indicative developmental model ofcommunities of practice (CoP) as a point of reference. The participants were 23 internationalgraduate students from two different cohorts enrolled in a two-year Learning Sciencesmaster’s program. Students from each cohort formed a different community, with Community1 having thirteen participants and Community 2 having ten participants. A mixed methodsapproach was adopted to capture community development from different angles. Data werecollected through video recordings of community meetings and a needs analysisquestionnaire. Results show that although the stages of development suggested by Wenger,McDermott and Snyder (2002) are apparent in a similar fashion in both communities, they donot follow a linear and smooth sequence, which signifies that communities go through thestages but in their own “living” way.IntroductionSocioculturalism became particularly prominent in the 1980s, when researchers applied Vygotskian premises tounderstand learning, which emphasize the importance of socially shared activities in individuals’ knowledgeconstruction (John-Steiner & Mahn, 1996). Socioculturalists are not interested in the confined individual, but in“(…) events, activity and practice, and they are considered to be irreducible to properties of individuals”(Sawyer, 2002, p. 285). Therefore, the unit of analysis for socioculturalists is the socially situated practice, sincethe individual and the group cannot be studied in isolation due to their interrelation (Hatano & Wertsch, 2000;Sawyer, 2002). The individual is perceived as a singular plural (Nancy, 2000), which emphasizes the idea that“(…) individual actions always constitute concrete realizations of collective actions possibilities” (Roth & Lee,2006, p. 30). As Vygotksy (1986) also claims, “(…) unlike elements, units are capable of retaining andexpressing the essence of that whole being analyzed” (p. 211).Even though behavioral researchers in the 1960s explored group formation and processes, Tuckman(1965) observed that the temporal changes that might occur over time were neglected. While building upon thisobservation, Tuckman (1965) and Tuckman and Jensen (1977) considered the temporal changes in groupdevelopment and were particularly interested in the stages of small group development. On the basis of a reviewof fifty-five articles (Tuckman, 1965) and twenty-two articles (Tuckman & Jensen, 1977) on group formationand development, they suggested a group development model consisting of five stages, namely forming,storming, norming, performing and adjourning. These stages are characterized by different group structures(also: interpersonal realm) and tasks (also: task-activity realm). Although a full description andoperationalization of this model and stages would have been insightful, it moves beyond the scope of this paper.With respect to the development of Communities of Practice (CoPs), Wenger (1998b) proposed adevelopmental model consisting of five stages. The degree to which Wenger (1998b) built his developmentalstages on the stages of small group development suggested by Tuckman and Jensen (1977), has not beenexplicitly clarified in any of his works (yet a small note at the back of the Wenger, McDermott and Snyder(2002) book signifies some awareness of these small group stages). The term CoPs refers to groups of peoplewho share a common interest in a domain of human endeavor and mutually engage in a process of workingtogether to accomplish enterprises like knowledge exchange and construction, or complex problem solvingwithin their shared domain of interest (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998a). According to Wenger (1998b),communities move through various life phases and stages of development with their own rhythm, which isassociated with the members’ interaction levels and the kinds of activities they undertake. Wenger (2000) andWenger et al. (2002) emphasize the developmental nature of CoPs by adopting a humanization approach: CoPsgrow and develop like humans, going through different stages in their lives but still remaining the same persons.Wenger (2000) highlights that although the reasons for staying together over time, may differ from the reasonsthat initiated the community formation, all these reasons are relevant to community members.Wenger (1998b) initially suggested a developmental model, which after some variations in the labelingof the stages, came to be what is shown in Figure 1 (Wenger et al., 2002). According to Wenger (2000) andWenger et al. (2002), the model has indicative and not prescriptive connotations and value. CoPs do notnecessarily progress through all suggested stages, since they may skip, merge, revisit or not even reach some ofICLS 2014 Proceedings1132© ISLSthe stages. They grow in their own rights, and their developmental cycle may vary. Regardless of the shape ofthe developmental cycle, CoPs do have a lifecycle and they should not be perceived as one-state stable entities.Level of energyand visibilityStewardshipCoalescingTransformingMaturingPotentialTimeFigure 1: Stages of development of Communities of Practice (Adapted from Wenger et al., 2002)Based on Wenger et al. (2002), the first stage, called potential, refers to a network of individuals whoidentify an interest in a domain or deal with a similar situation. Within this network of people, the idea ofcommunity formation emerges and individuals start to view their domain of interest from a collectiveperspective, which further intensifies the need for interaction among the potential members. Once individualsidentify the potential for the community to form, the critical coalescing stage in the lifecycle of the communityfollows. At this stage, the community members start building relationships, establishing a public (i.e.,community meetings) and private (i.e., one-to-one discussions) rhythm and finding opportunities to help eachother. With the coalescing stage the community becomes more tangible in the experiences of its members. Afterestablishing its formation, the community proceeds to the maturing stage. During this stage the communityforms its own identity by exchanging information, developing focused activities, establishing ways foraddressing problems, and sharing responsibilities. The community then broadens its scope, through thestewardship stage, during which community aims to solve new problems and increases the complexity of theactivities, relationships and interests involved. Newcomers may also enter the community at this stage, andthrough this modified membership the community is prompted to readapt to the dynamic needs of its old andnew members. During this stage it is time for the community to question and reflect on the gained values and asa result a need for reconfiguration might arise. The community also explores and tries to establish connectionsand implications of gained knowledge beyond the community boundaries. The final stage of communitydevelopment is the transforming stage, when the community has fulfilled the purposes of its existence andmembers move on into other CoPs that are more relevant to their new developmental trajectories.Research questionsDespite the theoretical identification of the developmental stages for CoPs by Wenger et al. (2002), there are todate no studies that empirically examined whether – and to what degree and/or which temporal order –communities develop along the lines of these indicative stages. This study aims to address this gap by exploringthe occurrence of the stages within two communities of learning practice (a detailed theoretical account isprovided in Dingyloudi & Strijbos, 2014) that developed in parallel to a Learning Sciences masters’ program.The following research questions will be addressed: (1) How do communities develop over time in the publicspace?, (2) To what extent are the theoretical stages of community development represented in the communitiesunder study?MethodThe present study applied a mixed-methods approach. In mixed methods there is concurrent implementation ofboth qualitative and quantitative data collection, with qualitative data being more dominant in the present study,due to the main research interest, which is to deeply explore a composite phenomenon within a particular setting(Creswell, 2008). Wenger, Trayner and DeLaat (2011) also highlight the importance of being able “(…) toattribute observable outcomes to community and network activities so that one can establish enough causal linksto go beyond mere correlations between distinct data streams.” (p. 8).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1133© ISLSParticipantsThe participants were twenty-three international graduate students (Mage = 25.1, SDage = 2.3) enrolled in a twoyear research oriented Learning Sciences master’s program. The 23 students are part of two different studentcohorts and constitute two communities of learning practice in parallel to the master’s program: Community 1consisted of thirteen participants (Mage = 25.2, SDage = 2.8) out of the twenty-seven students enrolled in theircohort. Community 2 consisted of ten participants (N = 10, Mage = 25, SDage = 1.8) out of the thirty studentsenrolled in their cohort. Participation in both communities was voluntary and participants were free to join orwithdraw from any community meeting.DesignThe communities of learning practice were formed by students, who gathered together as plain peers in order toaddress their problems and help each other with respect to academic skills that were relevant to their studyprogram. Peers voluntarily participated in the public space of the community through community events (i.e.,informal face-to-face community meetings), which lasted approximately two hours each. There were six andfive events in Community 1 and Community 2, respectively. The community events were co-organized and costructured among the community members and a non-peer facilitator, who was present at every communityevent in order to facilitate the members’ interactions and community activities. The sharing mechanism, used bythe community members and coordinated by the community facilitator, was face-to-face peer feedback on workin-progress that was relevant to the study program. The lifespan of the community was one semester, withCommunity 1 taking place during the second semester of their study program and Community 2 during the firstsemester.InstrumentsVideo recording. Video recording allows for retrospective analyses of group interactions (Brown, 1992; DiSessa& Cobb, 2004). In total eleven community events (i.e., face-to-face community meetings) were recorded: sixevents for Community 1 and five events for Community 2. The events lasted approximately 2 hours each,resulting into 22 hours of video data. A coding scheme was developed to identify and explore the occurrence ofthe five developmental community stages suggested by Wenger et al. (2002). In the first step three codersidentified relevant episodes for each video within which potential thematic units constituting the five stagescould be observed (Krippendorffs alpha = .83). In the second step, several coding trials were conducted on thevideo of two events. After refining the coding scheme, all 22 videos were analyzed by two independent codersand interrater reliability was calculated. The interrater reliability for both communities was high (Community 1:Krippendorff’s alpha = .85; Community 2: Krippendorff’s alpha = .81).Needs analysis. A needs analysis was conducted via a questionnaire designed for this study, andadministered on the cohort level before the initiation of each community. The questionnaire items were contextdependent and aimed to capture “(…) the gap between real and the ideal that is both acknowledged bycommunity values and potentially amenable to change” (Reviere, Berkowitz, Carter, & Gergusan, 1996, p. 5).The items covered three topics: (a) background information, (b) needs realization, and (c) feedback preferences.Background information addressed potential community members’ former participation in extracurriculargroups and the experienced value, the frequency of seeking help from peers in general, and extent ofacknowledgement of improvement after receiving peer feedback. Needs realization addressed students’ needsregarding academic skills they would like to practice and receive support in an extracurricular group, and needsregarding frequency of community events. Feedback preferences addressed the extent to which studentsperceive their peers as valuable feedback source, and appreciate their peers’ opinions on academic work. Theneeds analysis aimed to uncover the potential for a community to emerge.FindingsThe needs analysis was considered vital to identify the potential stage of development, since it indicates thepossibility for a community to emerge based on collective goals. Since the community sharing mechanism waspeer feedback, it was of major importance to also identify any previously experienced value of peer feedback(see Table 1).Table 1: Main results of needs analysis prior to community formation for both cohortsCohort 1(N = 15)Seeking help from peers on academic work80%Appreciation of peers’ opinions on academic work79%Extent of acknowledgement of improvement after receiving peer feedback73%Extent to which they perceive peers as valuable feedback source57%Willingness to participate in extracurricular support groups100%ICLS 2014 Proceedings1134Cohort 2(N = 28)89%86%85%82%100%© ISLSThe results of the needs analysis indicate that there is a potential for students to address their needsregarding the academic requirements through formation of and participation in a community together with theirpeers. This is reflected through the extent to which they had sought help from peers, appreciated peers’ opinionsand acknowledged improvement in their performance after receiving peer feedback. In addition, most of thestudents perceived peers as valuable feedback sources and they all expressed their willingness to participate inan extracurricular group that could support them with academic skills.The analysis of the video data for both communities revealed the presence of the developmental stagesdescribed by Wenger (2000). Also, both communities seem to follow a similar, but not identical, developmentalcycle. As illustrated in Figure 2, analysis of the first community event of Community 1 revealed that 88% of theidentified thematic units referred to the potential stage and 12% to coalescing. Respectively, content analysis ofthe first community event of Community 2, revealed that 60% of the identified thematic units referred to thepotential stage, 30% to coalescing and 10% to the maturing. The content analysis of the second communityevent of Community 1 revealed that 70% of the identified thematic units referred to coalescing stage, 20% topotential and 10% to maturing. Respectively, content analysis of the second community event of Community 2,revealed that 75% of the identified thematic units referred to coalescing and 25% to potential. The contentanalysis of the third community event of Community 1 revealed that 50% of the identified thematic unitsreferred to the potential stage and 50% to coalescing. Respectively, the content analysis of the third communityevent of Community 2 revealed that 50% of the identified thematic units referred to the stewardship stage, 33%to potential and 17% to coalescing. The content analysis of the forth community event of Community 1 revealedthat 33% of the identified thematic units referred to the potential stage, 33% to maturing, 22% to coalescing and11% to stewardship. Respectively, the forth community event of Community 2 revealed that 36% of theidentified thematic units referred to the coalescing stage, 27% to potential, 18% to maturing, and 18% tostewardship. The content analysis of the fifth community event of Community 1 revealed that 60% of theidentified thematic units referred to the stewardship stage and 40% to coalescing. Respectively, the contentanalysis of the fifth and final community event of Community 2 revealed that 62% of the identified thematicunits referred to the transforming stage and 38% to coalescing. Community 1 continued its public developmentin a sixth community event, and its content analysis revealed that 73% of the identified thematic units referred tothe transforming stage, 18% to coalescing and 9% to stewardship.Stages of development100	  Event 1Event 2Event 3Event 4Event 5Event 690	  80	  70	  60	  50	  40	  30	  20	  10	  0	  P C M S T P C M S T P C M S T P C M S T P C M S T P C M S TCommunity 1Community 2Figure 2: Stages of development of Community 1 and Community 2Discussion and ConclusionThe present study explored how communities of learning practice (i.e., extra-curricular communities in aneducational setting) develop over time. In particularly, whether and to what extent the five theoretical stages ofdevelopment (Wenger, 2000; Wenger et al., 2002), were represented in the developmental cycles of theobserved communities. Both communities of learning practice went through the five stages of development, butnot in a linear sequence. This is in line with the evidence for the non-linear and context-dependent order of thestages for small group development as groups may return to a previous stage or even skip a stage (Tuckman &Jensen, 1977). Furthermore, both communities’ developmental cycles evolved in a similar fashion, with slightICLS 2014 Proceedings1135© ISLSvariations. The most prominent stage in both communities was the potential stage, since it emerged and reemerged in every community event up until the fourth event for both communities. This prominence reflects thateither the community (a) continuously reformed itself by identifying different potential interests and ways toconnect to each other, or (b) struggled to find a rhythm and build relationships strong enough for the communityto further develop. The least prominent stage pertains to stewardship. This might be attributed to the way thecommunities structured themselves in this particular setting, i.e. without involving experts as oldtimers andnovices as newcomers, which is a typical feature of CoPs but not for the present CoLPs (see Dingyloudi &Strijbos, 2014). Aspects of prominence and relevance of specific stages in various contexts should be furtherexamined.Overall, the findings of the present study address the gap between the theory of five stages ofdevelopment in CoPs (Wenger, 2000; Wenger et al. 2002) and their actual exploration by researchers andpractitioners. This study provides some empirical evidence for the five theorized developmental stages at acommunity-level as well as some empirical evidence that these stages can be inferred from a needs analysis andvideo-recordings of community meetings. With respect to theoretical implications, this study confirms theapplied value of the theoretical stages of development for communities in an educational setting, although anadaptation of the model can be explored further in order to capture elements of the CoLP community model (seeDingyloudi & Strijbos, 2014). Future research will explore social network data and value creation stories (seeWenger et al., 2011) – collected as part of the research project, but their inclusion is beyond the scope of thepresent paper – which may aid interpreting this prominence. Our findings suggest researchers and educators toobserve how communities under study or in implementation develop, in order to further facilitate thedevelopment and aliveness of communities, while taking into consideration the stage or combination of stagescommunities experience at some given time.ReferencesBrown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141-178.Creswell, J. W. (2008). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods approaches (2nd ed.).Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Dingyloudi. F., & Strijbos, J. W. (2014). Communities of learning practice: Balancing emergence and design ineducational settings. In Proceedings of the ICLS 2014 conference “Learning and becoming inpractice”. Boulder, CO: International Society of the Learning Sciences.DiSessa, A. A., & Cobb, P. (2004). Ontological innovation and the role of theory in design experiments. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 13, 77-103.Hatano, G., & Wertsch, J. V. (2001). Sociocultural approaches to cognitive development: The constitutions ofculture in mind. Human Development, 44, 77-83.John-Steiner, V., & Mahn, H. (1996). Sociocultural approaches to learning and development: A Vygotskianframework. Educational Psychologist, 31, 191-206.Nancy, J.-L. (2000). Being singular plural. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.Reviere, R., Berkowitz, S., Carter, C. C., & Gergusan, C. G. (Eds.) (1996). Needs assessment: A creative andpractical guide for social scientists. Washington, DC: Taylor and Francis.Sawyer, R. K. (2002). Unresolved tensions in sociocultural theory: Analogies with contemporary sociologicaldebates. Culture & Psychology, 8, 283-305.Tuckman, B. W. (1965). Developmental sequence in small groups. Psychological Bulletin, 63, 384-399.Tuckman, B. W., & Jensen, M. C. (1977). Stages of small group development revisited. Group andOrganizational Studies, 2, 419-427.Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Wenger, E. (1998a). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Wenger, E. (1998b) Communities of practice: Learning as a social system. System Thinker, 9, 1-5.Wenger, E. (2000). Communities of practice: Stewarding knowledge. In C. Despres & D. Chauvel (Eds.),Knowledge horizons: The present and the promise of knowledge management (pp. 205-224). Boston,MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.Wenger, E., McDermott, R., & Snyder, W. M. (2002). Cultivating communities of practice: A guide tomanaging knowledge. Boston: Harvard Business School.Wenger, E., Trayner, B., & De Laat, M. (2011). Promoting and assessing value creation in communities andnetworks: A conceptual framework. Heerlen, the Netherlands: Ruud de Moor Centrum.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1136© ISLS