Becoming a Professional through Virtual PracticeTabitha McKay, Andrea Cantarero, Vanessa Svihla, Elizabeth Yakes Jimenez, and Tim CastilloUniversity of New Mexico, 1 University of New Mexico, Albuquerque NM 87131tmckay@unm.edu, arcantarero@salud.unm.edu, vsvihla@unm.edu, eyjimenez@unm.edu, timc@unm.eduAbstract: Disciplinary practices are challenging to teach and assess, yet are integral topersistence and future success. This poster presents findings from an online, interactive casestudy system that allows learners to take on expert roles—in this case, dietitian—and learncontent as they counsel virtual patients. We present results from two design-based researchimplementations, and preliminary findings from an ongoing third implementation. Analysisreveals that undergraduate and graduate nutrition students learned about professionalpractices.Major Issues AddressedA major challenge for educating professionals is providing experiences that help them connect content toprofessional practices. For instance, nutrition assessment is a core professional practice, yet is difficult to teach.Myriad strategies have been sought for improving student learning in nutrition/dietetics courses, includingexperiential approaches and interactive online approaches. Increasingly, there has been a push to moveinstruction online. A systematic review assessed postsecondary online nutrition education courses, showing thatonline instruction was comparable to face-to-face nutrition courses in terms of learning gains, but less successhas been found for changing perceptions (Cohen, Carbone, & Beffa-Negrini, 2011). Understanding more aboutthe design of such environments is key to abstracting how or why they might support learning or foster changein perceptions. In research conducted with focus groups, students reported various challenges; of particularrelevance to the current study is one challenge in particular: way-finding. Organizing relevant resources in anintuitive manner can support students to make productive and repeated use of them (Connors, 2012). Interactive,online instruction significantly increased paraprofessional knowledge, but at a greatly reduced cost (ascompared to face-to-face training) (Christofferson, Christensen, LeBlanc, & Bunch, 2012).SignificanceThe current study reports a combined experiential, interactive online approach that provides authentic context,which has been shown to support learning (Rivet & Krajcik, 2008). Our system (system name blinded forreview) allows students to try on professional roles (e.g., dietitian), use resources (e.g. journal articles) andapply conceptual understanding by counseling virtual clients (e.g., a patient with diabetes). Our system helpsstudents see connections to their future professional selves. Past research on our system focused on high schoollife science, placing students in roles such as genetic counselor or conservation geneticist and asked to counselvirtual clients using resources, including the internet, to prepare responses. Our system helped identifymisconceptions students held, which could be addressed adaptively, because our cases are formative (Black &Wiliam, 1998); this approach enhances participation (Hickey, Barab, Ingram-Goble, & Zuiker, 2008) andincreases retention for students with low confidence about accurate ideas (Butler, Karpicke, & Roediger, 2008).Our system provides a safe atmosphere for students learn how to interact with patients around a new subjectarea. Other strategies that would provide a similar experience such as standardized patients can be costprohibitive, particularly for undergraduate education.Theoretical and Methodological ApproachOur research uses Design-Based Research (DBR) (The Design-Based Research Collective, 2003). The purposeof DBR is to iteratively develop theories of and designs for learning (The Design-Based Research Collective,2003). This paper reports two initial iterations (with a third in progress at time of writing) of a longer DBRstudy. Theory is instantiated in our designs for learning, and iteratively tested under real-world conditions tobetter understand how, when, and for whom learning occurred. The beginning theoretical stance is depicted inFigure 1.Participants and SettingStudents in DBR Iteration 1 (n=15) and 3 (n=30) were recruited from an undergraduate course on nutritionthrough the life cycle. Students in DBR Iteration 2 were recruited from a graduate course (n=14) on nutritionassessment. All courses were taught by one of the authors who is a faculty member in a nutrition program at aresearch university in the southwestern US. The case was completed as a course assignment. Students initerations 1 and 2 completed one out-of-class case in 2-3 hours. Students in the ongoing iteration 3 arecompleting 8 cases distributed throughout the course.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1563© ISLSFigure 1. Beginning theoretical stance for supporting learningFindings, Conclusions and ImplicationsStudents overwhelmingly reported that they would use what they learned in other classes and in their careers,and that what they learned was important for their future professional work. Students also agreed that the caseresembled a real life situation. Students who chose incorrect answers on the interactive case still performed wellon the delayed post test. On the delayed post test, the average score was 98% for items related to the interactivecase. In contrast, the average score for items targeting traditional (paper-based) cases was 89%. While not alarge difference, this suggests that students may retain what they learn in these cases better than traditionalapproaches.Connection to Conference Theme: Learning and Becoming in PracticeThe purpose of the study was to develop and pilot test interactive cases to help nutrition students (1) understandaspects of a professional practice, the Nutrition Care Process (Assessment, Diagnosis, Intervention, Monitoring& Evaluation), and (2) learn to make relevant professional decisions. We found that the cases supported bothundergraduate and graduate students to do this. Our study extended our prior framework from high schoolstudents to undergraduate students at the very beginning of understanding professional practices and graduatestudents looking to extend their professional practice. Our research provides an exemplar of an efficient andfeasible experiential approach to providing students a vision of practice.ReferencesBlack, P., & Wiliam, D. (1998). Assessment and classroom learning. Assessment in Education, 5(1), 7-74.Butler, A. C., Karpicke, J. D., & Roediger, H. L., III. (2008). Correcting a metacognitive error: Feedbackincreases retention of low-confidence correct responses. Journal of Experimental Psychology:Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34(4), 918.Christofferson, D., Christensen, N., LeBlanc, H., & Bunch, M. (2012). Developing an Online CertificationProgram for Nutrition Education Assistants. Journal of nutrition education and behavior.Cohen, N. L., Carbone, E. T., & Beffa-Negrini, P. A. (2011). The design, implementation, and evaluation ofonline credit nutrition courses: a systematic review. Journal of nutrition education and behavior, 43(2),76-86.Connors, P. (2012). Delivery Style Moderates Study Habits in an Online Nutrition Class. Journal of nutritioneducation and behavior.Hickey, D. T., Barab, S. A., Ingram-Goble, A., & Zuiker, S. J. (2008). First things first: design principles forworthwhile educational videogames Proceedings of the 8th International conference for the learningsciences-Volume 1 (pp. 350-357): International Society of the Learning Sciences.Rivet, A. E., & Krajcik, J. S. (2008). Contextualizing instruction: Leveraging students' prior knowledge andexperiences to foster understanding of middle school science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,45(1), 79-100.The Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educationalinquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5–8.AcknowledgmentsThe authors would like to acknowledge funding from a UNM Teaching Allocation Grant (#734059) and fromthe USDA/NIFA Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI) Education Grants Program (#2012-38422-19836).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1564© ISLS