Elementary Students Becoming Engineers through PracticeCathy P. Lachapelle, Christine Gentry, Jonathan D. Hertel, Chris San Antonio-Tunis, Christine M. CunninghamMuseum of Science, Boston; 1 Science Park; Boston, MA 02114clachapelle@mos.org, cgentry@mos.org, jhertel@mos.org, csanantonio@mos.org, ccunningham@mos.orgAbstract: As part of an efficacy study of elementary school engineering curricula, we arerecording all engineering lessons in 24 classrooms. Data collection is split between thetreatment and comparison curriculum, and will continue through June 2014. Our observationnotes and preliminary video analysis suggest that some students self-identify as engineers,while others do not. Our poster will present an analysis of the contexts and contributingfactors leading to students’ adoption of self-concepts in engineering.IntroductionThis poster will present a subset of findings from the first of two years of data collection for the Exploring theEfficacy of Elementary Engineering (E4) study, an NSF-funded efficacy study of an elementary engineeringcurriculum. Data includes work samples, teacher surveys and logs, and assessments from students in 351classrooms, together with intensive video data collection from a subset of 24 of these classrooms.Two different engineering curricula embodying different approaches to teaching engineering are beingimplemented, with random assignment at the school level. In the treatment curriculum, students are presentedwith a challenge through the context of a story about a child with a problem to be solved. Students areencouraged to think of themselves as engineers, and scaffolded to engage in problems the way an engineerwould: for example, in studying structures, the teacher models how to analyze forces on the structures as well ashow to brainstorm and test ways to counter those forces. In the comparison, students are presented withinformation about engineering and the challenge, and given the challenge to solve, without further context: forexample, before trying to build a structure, they are given an informative text and pictures of sample structures.The focus of this poster will be student interest in engineering and the development of an engineeringself-concept. We will combine our findings from analysis of the video case studies with student work samples,an assessment of student conceptions of the field of engineering, and a survey of student interest in and attitudestowards engineering—as a topic of study, as a field, and as a possible future career.Theoretical FrameworkThe treatment curriculum is designed to engage children and teachers in meaningful activity. Its design isgrounded in the learning sciences; research from these fields indicates that students learn concepts and skillsthrough experience as they work and learn in rich contexts (Bruner, 2004; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Rogoff,1990). The treatment endeavors to build a network of connections as the contextual basis of every unit: each unitis set in a real-world and career context; children are invited to “be engineers” as they learn about engineeringpractice in a particular field because learning is more profound with engagement in realistic disciplinarypractices (Roth, 1994; Sawyer, 2006) that include the social and epistemic practices of a discipline and put keyconcepts into productive use (Duschl, 2008; Duschl & Grandy, 2008; Engle & Conant, 2002). Each unit of studyties in to literacy, social studies, science, and mathematics. In every unit, children are invited to reflect upon andbuild their own understanding through experience with materials, inquiry, and design, and their knowledge ofthe world. By engaging in activities that afford reflection on—as well as productive use of—their experienceand understanding of science, students are more likely to learn and retain their understanding (Kolodner et al.,2003; Zubrowski, 2002). Lessons are designed to scaffold student learning through teacher questioning, throughlesson plans that make disciplinary strategies explicit and encourage students to express and reflect upon theirlearning (as recommended by Quintana et al., 2004), and through complex activities supported by structuring ofproblem-solving processes (as recommended by Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007).The comparison curriculum is primarily drawn from engineering lessons and activities freely availableon the internet, featuring both direct instruction and a hands-on component. A few lessons were designed fromscratch to match learning objectives featured by the treatment curriculum, for which no available existinglessons were found. The found lessons have been modified to be more strongly appropriate for grades 3-5—most were specified as appropriate for grades 3-12; also the “direct instruction” aspects of the curricula havebeen improved as necessary with further support for teachers and students and grade-appropriate readings. Theintention is for the comparison curriculum to contrast with the treatment curriculum in pedagogical approach.Methodological ApproachVideo data collection in each class includes all time spent on the engineering curriculum (treatment orcomparison). Between one and three cameras are set up in each class. In all classrooms, one camera is trainedICLS 2014 Proceedings1587© ISLSupon the teacher and a portion of the classroom containing only students with parental consent. Where anothercamera or cameras are available, each follows the same student group throughout data collection. At the end ofimplementation in each classroom, some students are asked to participate in focus groups, where they areinterviewed on a number of topics, including their interest in engineering and self-concept as engineers.Promising episodes from the videos showing student attitudes towards engineering are identified fromobservation notes and first-pass logging of all files. We look for cases where students talk about engineers orengineering, especially in a personal way, for example when a student says “I’m good at engineering”. For theseepisodes, we develop codes and explanatory theories by repeatedly comparing between theory and data in orderto test and refine theory and increase explanatory power. We have collected qualitative measures of studentengineering interest and self-concept, which we will compare to coded student work samples, and the studentinterest/attitude surveys collected from the video case study classrooms. Our goal is to begin to answer thequestions, “Does the treatment foster more positive interest in and attitudes towards STEM careers?” “To whatextent does the treatment affect students’ self-concept as engineers?” and “How do differences in treatment, aswell as differences in fidelity and quality of implementation, moderate outcomes?”Preliminary FindingsThus far, we have collected video from 15 classrooms, and are in the process of collecting from 9 more. Wehave noted episodes where students expressed positive or negative self-concepts in engineering. These tend tobe associated with success or failure in meeting engineering design challenges. In our continuing work, we testthese associations and look for mediating contexts and frames: for example, time available to improve designsand communicate with other teams about what they learned, or a focus on learning through overcoming failure.For final paper see: http://eie.org/sites/default/files/research_article/research_file/icls_poster_proposal_2014.pdfPotential Significance and Relevance to ICLS 2014This research addresses the theme “Learning and Becoming in Practice” by examining how students’ attitudesand self-concept in engineering change as they engage in different engineering curricula—one of which focuseson engaging students explicitly in developmentally appropriate disciplinary practices of engineering. Thepotential significance of this work is in developing a better understanding of the contexts and frames that affectstudents’ disciplinary identification and self-concept; also improving understanding of how educational learningenvironments can be influenced by elements of curriculum design and teacher training.ReferencesBruner, J. S. (2004). A short history of psychological theories of learning. Daedalus, 133(1), 13-20.Duschl, R. A. (2008). Science education in three-part harmony: Balancing conceptual, epistemic, and sociallearning goals. Review Of Research In Education, 32(1), 268-291.Duschl, R. A., & Grandy, R. E. (2008). Teaching scientific inquiry: Recommendations for research andimplementation. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20, 399-483.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., & Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaffolding and achievement in problem-based andinquiry learning: A response to Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark (2006). Educational Psychologist, 42(2),99-107.Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., . . . Ryan, M. (2003). ProblemBased Learning meets Case-Based Reasoning in the middle-school science classroom: PuttingLearning by Design™ into practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(4), 495-547.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning : legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge [England];New York: Cambridge University Press.Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E.,. . . Soloway, E. (2004). A scaffolding designframework for software to support science inquiry. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 337-386.Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. New York, NY: OxfordUniversity Press.Roth, W.-M. (1994). Experimenting in a Constructivist High-School Physics Laboratory. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 31(2), 197-223.Sawyer, R. K. (Ed.). (2006). The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUniversity Press.Zubrowski, B. (2002). Integrating science into design technology projects: Using a standard model in the designprocess. Journal of Technology Education, 13(2), 48-67.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1588© ISLS