Teachers’ Learning about Equitable Practice through Talk withColleaguesIlana Seidel Horn, Vanderbilt University, ilana.horn@vanderbilt.edu (organizer and discussant)Irene Yoon, University of Utah, irene.yoon@utah.eduBritnie Delinger Kane, Vanderbilt University, britnie.kane@vanderbilt.eduNicole Bannister, Clemson University, nbannis@clemson.eduElizabeth A. van Es, University of California, Irvine, evanes@uci.eduVictoria Hand, University of Colorado, Boulder, victoria.hand@colorado.eduAbstract: Using insights from the learning sciences, the four papers in this symposiuminvestigate the ways teachers’ collegial talk contributes to their learning about equitableinstruction. One pair of papers comes from primarily observational studies, investigating howeveryday storytelling and facilitation stand to instantiate or challenge teachers’ knowing abouttheir diverse students and their instruction. The other pair of papers comes from designexperiments aiming to transform teacher knowledge. These contribute frameworks forunderstanding teacher learning through discourse. Together, the collection illuminatesrelationships between teachers’ collegial talk and projects of instructional change.Learning to Teach EquitablyFor education to fulfill its democratic function, teachers must effectively engage students from diversebackgrounds and support their learning and development. Such equitable teaching has been pursued byeducators for decades and has yielded many well-articulated frameworks and practices. Nonetheless, we seeevidence of persistent educational disenfranchisement of students, especially those living in poverty or comingfrom nondominant cultures.Why is widespread implementation of equitable teaching so difficult? Scholars often point tolongstanding traditions and institutional constraints in teaching (D. Cohen, 2011; Cuban, 1993). In thissymposium, we take these conditions as a given but turn our focus onto issues of teacher learning. Frameworksfrom the learning sciences allow us to contextualize teacher learning within the school as a workplace, openingup new avenues for understanding the obstacles to and possibilities for making equitable teaching morecommonplace in US classrooms.To develop our perspective, we offer two observations about the challenges of teachers’ learningequitable instructional practices. First, we note that many well-articulated equitable teaching approaches, suchas culturally responsive teaching (Gay, 2010), tapping into children’s funds of knowledge (Moll & Gonzalez,1994), or complex instruction (E. Cohen, 1994) are characterized by teachers’ responsiveness to theparticularities of their students, making them highly situated forms of instruction. For instance, in Rosebery andcolleagues’ (2010) account of children learning about heat transfer, the students’ key connection to ideas aboutinsulation came from an unexpected fire drill in the dead of winter. After the children huddled to keep warm, theteachers leveraged this incident to build students’ understanding. Likewise, Gutierrèz and colleagues (1999)describe a teacher effectively making a “third space” in her classroom by hybridizing home and schooldiscourses to facilitate students’ understanding of science concepts. In both examples, teachers work with whatstudents bring to the classroom to enrich their understandings of content. For teachers to competently respond inthis way, they need to develop robust pedagogical judgment. In the moment-to-moment of instruction,pedagogical judgment presses on teachers to weigh social, individual, and content concerns, trying to optimizethem in their decision-making with the dual goals of inclusion and learning (Lampert, 2001).Our second observation is that widely available forms of pre-service and inservice education are highlyacontextual, focusing on developing general knowledge for teaching that applies across teaching situationsrather than cultivating the kind of judgment described in these prior examples. Zeichner (2010) has describedtypical teacher education as using a default acquire-apply pedagogy, where teachers “get” theory in courses and“apply” it in the field. In this approach, the underlying conception of professional knowledge can be likened toan appliance: instructional ideas can be plugged in and “work,” regardless of the settings in which they operate.Thus, our primary mode of educating teachers is ill suited to developing the responsive practices equitableteaching demands.If we have a mismatch between pedagogies and knowledge in teacher education, what are we, as afield, to do if we want to enfranchise more students in our schools? In this symposium, we aim to make progresson this question in two ways. First, we bring together papers from four different studies examining teachers’learning in contexts that are pressing for more equitable outcomes. We will identify the contributions of theseanalyses to our understanding of teachers’ situative reasoning. All of the papers use teachers’ talk as a primarydata source and a window into sensemaking, identifying different ways collegial interactions contribute toICLS 2014 Proceedings1209© ISLSpedagogical reasoning. Two of the studies (Yoon, Kane) were primarily observational, looking at how teachersdraw on workplace resources to understand issues of teaching. The second two studies (Bannister, van Es andHand) took place within professional development projects aiming to develop teachers’ knowledge of equitablepractices. As a collection, these papers identify existing teacher discourses around issues of equity and point topossible avenues for shifting those discourses. By analyzing the affordances and obstacles for teachers’ learningabout equitable teaching, we can better understand how teachers come to develop these practices and support thedemocratic goals of public education.Prior Work: Colleagues as Resources for Teachers’ Situative SensemakingAs sociological studies of education have long shown, colleagues are one of the most salient resources forteachers’ learning (Little, 1990; Siskin, 1994; Stodolsky & Grossman, 2000). What makes sense and seems “doable” in the classroom is, in part, a reflection of workplace norms, which get negotiated with other teachers. Infact, schools and departments that demonstrate more equitable student achievement have in common thatteachers take collective responsibility for student learning, signaling the role of colleagues in equitable teaching(Bryk et al., 2002; V. Lee & Smith, 1996)Using these insights as a point of departure, Ilana Horn, the organizer of this symposium, has spentover a decade researching teachers’ collegial learning by examining pedagogical reasoning in teachers’conversations. Some key findings of this work are relevant to the implementation of equitable teaching,including:1.Teachers’ collegial conversations are asynchronous from the interactive work of instruction. Whenteachers talk about instruction, they typically do so prospectively (planning) or retrospectively(debriefing) (Hall & Horn, 2012; Horn, 2010; Horn & Kane, 2012).2.The intersubjectivity achieved through collegial conversations is constrained by a dearth ofprofessional language (Dreeben, 2005; Hall & Horn, 2012). Teachers fill this gap throughrepresentations of teaching (Horn, 2005; Little, 2003), such as artifacts of practice like textbooks orstudent work, or through conversational representations of classroom interactions.3.Local teacher cultures promote epistemic stances on the work, which, in turn, support some framings ofteaching problems over others. Together, epistemic stances and frames shape pedagogical reasoningand “common sense” teaching choices (Hall & Horn, 2012; Horn, 2007; Horn & Little 2010)Together, these three findings provide a basis for understanding how collegial conversations operate as aresource for teachers’ sensemaking about equitable teaching practices. At the very least, they point to the limitedhorizon of observation (Hutchins, 1995) on instruction available to teachers, which compounds the difficultiesof sharing highly situative instructional practices. Adding to their limited learning affordances, collegialconversations often provides emotional support for teachers, but norms of privacy provide few means forpushing back on taken-as-shared ways of viewing pedagogical problems (Horn & Little, 2010; Little, 1990).Overview of PapersThese four papers deepen our understanding of how colleagues contribute to teachers’ sensemaking about theirwork. The studies concern teachers in urban schools and raise questions about how teachers might come to teachmore equitably in these settings. The distinctions among the studies are generative for discussion, as they eachapproach the issue of sensemaking with colleagues in different settings, at different grade levels, and usingdifferent grain sizes for analyses. At the same time, there is enough in common to support comparison: they allfocus on discursive methods for understanding the contribution of colleagues to teachers’ situated sensemaking.There is a balance in this collection between teachers’ discourse as it typically unfolds to reinstate existingconceptions (Yoon, Kane) and discourse as it might be engineered to probe and extend to ways enrich them(Bannister, van Es and Hand).As a whole, these studies help specify our understanding of teacher learning. Instead of viewingprofessional development as effective or ineffective, these analyses point to:1. The interactional details that are consequential for learning (Yoon’s critical discourse analysis ofteachers’ storytelling; Kane’s analysis of expertise and facilitation; Bannister’s frame analysis);2. What learning might look like at the level of teachers’ talk (Bannister’s frame shifting; van Es &Hand’s noticing)3. How rich representations of practice stand to deepen the understandings of already accomplishedteachers (van Es & Hand’s video club).The 90-minute symposium will consist of three 15-minute paper presentations, 15 minutes of commentary fromour discussant, leaving 15 minutes for audience interaction.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1210© ISLSTrading Stories: Middle-Class White Women Teachers and the Creation ofNarratives about Students and Families in a Diverse Elementary SchoolIrene Yoon, University of UtahIn the hallway, in the staff lounge, and in team meetings, teachers tell stories about their day and their students.Starting from this common occurrence, this paper examines collective storytelling in teacher communities in aracially and socioeconomically diverse elementary school that I call Fields Elementary.The narrative progression of a group conversation has the potential to limit or stretch the boundaries ofprofessional learning and the development of shared meaning. An intersectionality perspective on middle-classWhite womanhood affords the tools to interpret storytelling as the central vehicle for creating meaning in theteacher community in this paper.In order to examine storytelling among a group of middle-class, White teachers at Fields Elementary, Iask: first, what are the narrative tropes that these middle-class White women teachers draw upon to createcommon language or understanding about what it means to teach at their school, and how does this narrativeunfold? Second, in what ways does a normative middle-class White culture, specifically related to Whitewomanhood, achieve ideological projects through the ways in which teachers participate in collectivestorytelling in professional communities? A critical discourse analysis provides insight into these questions.Study ContextThe analysis and data presented in this paper come from a larger qualitative case study conducted usingethnographic data collection strategies for roughly five months. I immersed myself in Fields Elementary, aracially and ethnically diverse elementary school where approximately 40% of the students are EnglishLearners. 73% of the students at Fields qualify for free and reduced-price lunch, and Fields also experiencesapproximately 50% student mobility each year. The Fields faculty is predominantly White and female, as wellas middle-class.Fields’s teachers have structured opportunities to collaborate. The conversation that is the focus of thispaper occurs in the second-grade teacher community. All teachers on the team are White, middle-class womenwith varying years of teaching experience. I was not a participant in the study; I interacted with teachers andstudents, but tried to be unobtrusive. In the paper I discuss my experiences as a middle-class Asian Americanwoman researcher at Fields and as the only person of color in the room during this conversation.Data Sources and Methods of InquiryThe teacher conversation presented in this paper comes from an audio recording of a formal teacher communitymeeting of the second-grade team at Fields Elementary, during which I also took scripted fieldnotes. Thesefieldnotes capture interactions nearly word-for-word and include gestural details filled-in immediately afterobservation (Emerson et al., 1995). Transcription of the conversation was first completed for verbal content,with a second round to notate non-verbal participation, such as pauses, sighs, laughter, or people talking overeach other (Gee, 2005; Mazzei, 2004).Discourse, as an instantiation of power, contributes to ideological projects, even if unintended orunconscious (Fairclough, 2001; Gee, 2005). The data were analyzed with a critical discourse analysis (CDA) ofone team conversation. CDA examines language use to reveal and understand power dynamics, sociohistoricalcontexts, and meanings of speech and action in relation to social structure (Fairclough, 2001; Gee, 2005). In thisanalysis I adopt Fairclough’s guidance that CDA include “description of text, interpretation of the relationshipbetween text and interaction, and explanation of the relationship between interaction and social context” (p. 91).Illustrative Findings about Teachers’ LearningIn this paper, storytelling is an activity of learning and socialization in professional communities. Thesenarratives reflect the values and epistemology of the middle-class White women teachers—ways of seeing theworld, and of defining knowledge and practice (Banks, 1998; Collins, 2009; Harding, 1993; Lightfoot, 1978).That is, race, social class, and gender are social locations that are both sources and production sites of meaningin this teacher community.The conversation in this paper begins with sharing concerns related to students’ histories of academicachievement, and many of the stories reflect some level of concern for students’ physical, academic, and socialemotional wellbeing. However, stories also reproduce White, middle-class, deficit-based stereotypes about themorality and childrearing of people living in poverty and people of color. The discourse about parenting impliesauthority on motherhood among the middle-class White women teachers, particularly in the case of students’fathers, who behave like children themselves.The collective narrative progression is central to this story; turn-taking, use of pronouns, and patternsof participation (including silence) contribute to meaning, information, and potential resources for the group’slearning and identity (Duncan, 2004; Engeström, 1987; Horn, 2007; Mawhinney, 2008; Mazzei, 2008; Scott,ICLS 2014 Proceedings1211© ISLS1991; Wenger, 1998). That is, these stories provide knowledge resources for middle-class, White womenteachers to make generalized conclusions about what it means to teach at Fields. The knowledge resources aregrounded in an ideological context of middle-class White womanhood. Four ideological projects accomplishedby this example of trading stories include: 1) establishing social and moral distance; 2) constructingcolormuteness as White middle-class morality; 3) decontextualizing institutional constraints on teaching atFields Elementary; and 4) defining boundaries and identity of middle-class White womanhood.Implications for Teachers’ LearningTeachers, particularly elementary-level teachers who are with their students for a full day, know intimate detailsabout their students’ lives. Though trading stories is an informal part of professional collaboration, it comprisessubstantive moments for teacher learning and professionalization because the stories define the conditions andmeaning of teachers’ work and experiences in racialized, classed, and gendered terms. The kind of learningobserved in this conversation is the generation of what Engeström (2007) calls “stabilization knowledge,” orsharing information that secures, rather than expands, boundaries around how work and identity are envisioned.The focus on the collective process of the storytelling is essential: the narratives and participation thatreproduce middle-class White womanhood are constitutive elements of teacher learning. Resulting groupdynamics shut down equity commitments, such that teachers as a group permit the painting of students andfamilies in broad, demeaning strokes.Finally, it is noted that the teachers at Fields do not address institutional constraints in their stories.Stories about individual merit and moral standing echo the liberalism of Whiteness and middle-class ethics thatavoid institutional critique (S. Lee, 2005). In this way, a colormute middle-class White womanhood becomes theideological and moral lens for professional learning, while the stories also reflexively create the teachers andtheir identities as moralized, racialized, gendered, and classed subjects. Challenging these everyday discourseshas significance for teachers’ identities, students’ experiences, school-family relationships, and the larger goalof equitable education.Facilitators’ Expertise and Teachers’ Opportunities for LearningBritnie Delinger Kane, Vanderbilt UniversityBecause a host of studies note a relationship between teachers’ collaborative work and school improvement(e.g., Langer, 2000; McLaughlin and Talbert, 2001), school districts are beginning to institute time for teachersto collaborate. Yet not all collaborative groups are equally generative for teachers’ professional learning (Hornand Little, 2010), and the mechanisms for how teachers’ collaboration can support school improvement are notwell understood. Recognizing this problem, many schools have placed facilitators on collaborative teams(McLaughlin and Talbert, 2006; Parr and Timperley, 2010). However, this only pushes the issue downstream:facilitation itself is not well understood in relation to teachers’ learning. It seems sensible, though, that thepresent of a more expert other might engender richer learning (Frank, Zhao & Borman, 2004). A more situatedaccount of how expertise is accomplished and tapped into in interaction requires a closer look at this idea.Research Question and Conceptual FrameThis analysis focuses on how facilitators’ expertise contributes to teachers’ learning. Using socioculturalframeworks, I assume that facilitation is an interactional accomplishment in and through the resources thatgroup members leverage in their collaborative work. In turn, the way facilitators accomplish this work willinfluence teachers’ opportunities to learn about instruction. Representations of practice are one importantresource for teachers’ conversational learning, particularly when they highlight relationships among students,teaching, and content (Horn and Kane, 2012). To understand facilitators’ role in supporting opportunities tolearn, we can thus examine how their contributions develop the collective representation of practice. Forinstance, facilitators can ask probing questions and press for elaboration; alternatively, they can bypass suchdetails and focus more on work completion in the group. One might expect facilitators’ expertise to shape thenature of their press in conversation. In this paper, I explore this notion by investigating the relationship betweenexpertise and teachers’ opportunities to learn.Study ContextThis analysis comes from a larger, two-year study in two urban school districts focusing on instructionalimprovement in middle school mathematics. Within that larger study, our research team has focused on a subsetof schools that district and school personnel identified as sites of strong math teacher collaboration. The primarydata for this analysis are a year’s worth of interview and video data from teacher collaborative groups atMagnolia Middle School and Aspen Middle School, both located in the same district. Both schools were understrong pressure to meet state achievement benchmarks because of previous failure to do so. Institutional pressfor more equitable student outcomes often came up in teachers’ conversations. The group at Aspen had noICLS 2014 Proceedings1212© ISLSsanctioned facilitator and no official leader. At Magnolia Middle, on the other hand, bureaucratically appointedfacilitators were in abundance: an assistant principal (and former district-level math coach), a state departmentof education math coach, and a school-based math coach attended. Despite the differences in role, bothfacilitators had expertise in mathematics teaching according to our studies measures (described below).Analytic MethodsTo understand the influence of expertise on facilitation and teachers’ opportunities to learn, I use discourse andinteraction analysis, as well as grounded theory, to analyze video and interview data (Strauss and Corbin, 1998).Specifically, since collaborative work is accomplished asynchronously from instruction, we know thatrepresentations of practice can be a resource for teachers’ learning (Horn and Little, 2010; Little, 2003), Thus, Iused grounded theory to code group members’ contributions according to what aspects of practice theyrepresented. I also coded questions according to the types of representations of practice they supported. Thisdata set and method highlighted connections across facilitators’ conversational processes, their pedagogical andmathematical expertise, and the larger contexts in which workgroups collaborated, in order to better understandteachers’ opportunities for learning.FindingsPreliminary analyses reveal that, in collaborative workgroups, facilitators (emergent or appointed) and activitystructures influence how teachers represent the classroom; these, in turn, affect teachers’ opportunities to learn.At Aspen Middle School, the collaborative group did not have an appointed facilitator. However, an emergentfacilitator emerged, and, according to our study’s VHQMI and VSMC measures, she was, in fact, more expertthan her colleagues. Perhaps more important than the study’s measures, her colleagues ratified her as expert intheir interaction. In this way, she emergently took on a facilitative role, as when she frequently asked, “Whatelse do we need to do today?” If expertise alone led to rich learning opportunities, we might expect her presenceto support conversations in this direction. However, conversations were also shaped by activity structures. AtAspen, the default collaborative activity planning-as-pacing. In this way, facilitation amounted to more than thepresence of one expert; instead, it was accomplished through the emergent facilitator and the dominant activitystructures, which, together, shaped teachers’ opportunities to learn. The resulting conversations representedclassroom practice in generic ways, focusing on classroom management and content coverage. On the whole,the richer representations of practice connecting particular details of students, content, and teaching did notemerge, thus providing teachers little traction on developing situated and responsive instruction.By contrast, at Magnolia Middle, an official facilitator and a different dominant activity structureallowed richer representations of practice to emerge. For instance, a common activity was looking at studentwork. During these conversations, the group discussed how teachers might teach mathematical content in lightof the group’s analysis of these representations of practice. Combined with a highly expert coach, this activitystructure supported rich representations of practice that honed in on the interactional details that would supportresponsive teaching. The facilitator frequently her expertise to model discourse that directly reflected teacherstudent interaction. Through such representation and analysis of classroom practice, the combination of activityand facilitator supported teachers’ opportunities to learn about responsive instruction through their collaborativework.Implications for Teachers’ LearningFacilitating learning in teacher workgroups requires more than the presence of expertise within the group. Thedetails of how that expertise manifests in interaction matters for teachers’ opportunities to learn. Both Aspen andMagnolia had experts present in their groups. The dominant activities at each school were not inherently richerwith learning opportunities: we have seen rich versions of planning and anemic instantiations of looking atstudent work. Instead, using these two case studies as examplars, I argue that the activities get animated by howfacilitators use their expertise. At Aspen, the activity structures and emergent facilitator led her to emphasize themanagement of group processes with an efficiency logic; their joint work got their planning done. At Magnolia,the activity structures and positioning of the coach led her to push on co-constructing specific representations ofthe classroom: she modeled the discursive practices teachers need in order to talk — and learn — about theirpractice in sophisticated ways. Opportunities for teachers’ learning in workgroups, then, are not simply theconsequence of the presence of expertise. The expertise stands to animate activities in ways that may or may notsupport resources for teachers’ learning.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1213© ISLSCapturing Teachers’ Learning Through Their Framing of a Struggling StudentProblemNicole Bannister, Clemson UniversityResearch Question and Conceptual FrameEmpirical examples of teachers’ development of equitable teaching practices within a community are few innumber (Levine, 2010; Little, 2003). I take up this issue in my study by applying concepts from frame analysis(Goffman, 1974; Benford & Snow, 2000; Snow & Benford, 1988) to the trajectory of teachers’ participation(Levine, 2010; Wenger, 1998) in a collaborative planning group. By tracing the evolution of teachers’ framesover time, I analyze collective learning inside a teacher community. Specifically, I examine the shifts inteachers’ framing of one pedagogical problem –– the struggling student problem –– over time.Study ContextThis research took place in the context of a larger project, Adaptive Professional Development for High SchoolMathematics Teachers, a longitudinal design-experiment project. Clark High School, a diverse, large, urbancomprehensive high school in a large school district in the northwestern US, was a partner in this work. Duringthe 2004-2005 academic year, I followed the progress of the five-member Freshman Team at Clark, acollaborative planning team composed of all ninth-grade college preparatory mathematics teachers. Withsupport from our project, teachers had a daily common planning period that they used to make sense of issuesrelated to teaching and curriculum. In response to a student failure crisis the previous year, the teachers were, bytheir own volition, transitioning towards equitable teaching practices and newly implementing a rich curriculum.Analytic MethodsTo document the teachers’ collaborative talk, I collected 35 records of Freshman Team meetings over the courseof the school year. The majority (31 out of 35) of these came from their weekly two-hour long meetings, thetime when the teachers reported doing their deepest talking and thinking together. Of the 35 meeting records, 26had fieldnote records and 32 meetings had audio records, with many meetings have both kinds of recordsavailable.To understand how teachers’ conversations changed as they worked toward more equitable teachingpractices, I analyzed the meeting records. My analysis began with a data reduction, filtering the data set intoepisodes of pedagogical reasoning (EPRs) (Horn, 2005) related to the struggling student problem. Next, Iselected representative episodes for more in-depth analysis. Finally, four episodes from October 2005, January2006, March 2006, and May 2006 were selected for fine-grained re-transcription and analysis because theycontained extended talk about the struggling student problem. When these episodes were taken together, theyconstituted a coherent narrative about the teachers’ developing ideas about struggling students.As a part of the close analysis, I coded these episodes for core framing tasks identified by Snow andBenford (1988) to help identify how teachers framed the struggling student problem in context of their equityoriented reforms. Specifically, I looked for (a) diagnostic frames to understand how teachers conceptualized thestruggling student problem; (b) prognostic frames to understand how teachers conceptualized interventionsrelated to the struggling student problem; and (c) motivational frames to understand how teachers made a casefor their framing.FindingsOver the course of the four episodes, the teachers’ framing about struggling students shifted from fixed studentcharacteristics to framings that provided the possibility of instructional response. For instance, in one of theearly meetings, a teacher explains a struggling student this way:I have the kid [Taylor] who is really flaky and doesn't know what's going on and is starting toannoy the rest of the group. So that's a really struggling kid and so they're starting to opt out.(Rose, 10/6/2005)By focusing on Taylor’s “flakiness,” there is little the teacher can do instructionally to help the student besuccessful in her math class. Other similar language appeared in these early meetings, such as students“choosing to fail,” another frame with very little instructional possibility.In contrast, during the May meeting, frames emerged that focused more on classroom-basedinstructional responses, such as making exceptions for kids who understand the content despite failure:He’s not doing well now, but Taylor is so smart! And so here I am at the end of the year andI’m thinking, “Why would I put him back in Math 1?”… Because he obviously understandsstuff. … So I think there are some kids we need to look at a little differently … there are someICLS 2014 Proceedings1214© ISLSkids maybe we shouldn’t really keep back, ‘cuz then we’re really sentencing them to not everbe able…to come out of that.(Rose, 5/25/2006)In this excerpt, we hear the same teacher (Rose) talking about the same student (Taylor) but in terms thatrecognize his competence (“so smart!”). The evolution of the teachers’ framing reflects a growing collectiveawareness that achievement and ability are related but not synonymous. This is reflected throughout the data.Implications for Teachers’ LearningIn terms of teachers’ learning about equitable teaching, another aspect of the frame shift is worth noting. Theearlier frames place the onus for achievement primarily on the students, while the latter provide teachers ameans for action. As such, the teachers’ frames became more nuanced in their representation of mathematicalcompetence, disentangling issues of ability from school-savvy. By conceptualizing in their own talk ways to beresponsive, the groundwork is laid for them to engage in equitable teaching practices. In this study, we foundthat teachers’ frames shifted from less agentic to more agentic ways of understanding problems of practice asco-occurring with development of more equitable teaching practices.This study contributes a way of operationalizing teachers’ collective learning through its use of frameanalysis, evidenced by how teachers negotiated and framed problems of practice over time. Looking at otherteacher groups in the study, it seems that their changes in participation patterns also mirrored changes in theircollective framing practices over time. Tracking frames offers a productive method for analyzing learningwithin teacher community.Using Video to Collaboratively Examine Equitable Secondary MathematicsTeachingElizabeth A. van Es, University of California, IrvineVictoria Hand, University of Colorado, BoulderResearch Question and Conceptual FrameIt is well documented that students who have experienced disparities in the opportunities afforded to themthrough the educational system consistently underperform in mathematics compared to their peers (Ball &Moses, 2009; NCES, 2005). Mathematics education research has made important progress in identifyinginstructional approaches that can strengthen learning opportunities for diverse student populations (see Nasir,Hand, & Taylor, 2008). Less is known, however, about how teachers come to engage in this complicated workwhile teaching.Research on teacher noticing for ambitious mathematics teaching and learning has begun to articulatepatterns in the ways that teachers attend to and reason about noteworthy features of mathematics classrooms(Sherin, Jacobs, & Philipp, 2010). This focus on teacher noticing is spurred by empirical research thatdemonstrates the link between teachers’ ability to perceive and make sense of student thinking duringinstruction and their success in enacting cognitively demanding mathematics tasks during instruction (Erickson,2011). We draw on the construct of teacher noticing to examine how teachers attend to and reason aboutclassroom features that influence equitable learning for non-dominant groups. We also consider how a videoclub setting (Sherin, 2000) can become a context for teachers to learn about equitable mathematics teaching.Our work is also informed by recent research that suggests that a shortcoming of research on teachingand teacher education is the lack of a shared language and knowledge base for describing and characterizingteaching practice (Grossman & McDonald, 2008; Hiebert, Gallimore, & Stigler, 2002). Progress has been madein the last decade to decompose ambitious pedagogy in several disciplines (Grossman et al., 2009; Thompson,Windschitl, & Braaten, 2013). This study contributes to this body of work by documenting similarities anddifferences in the ways that exceptional equitable mathematics teachers talk about their noticing in practice,with a particular focus on the features of classrooms that teachers attend to for achieving equity in theirclassrooms.Study ContextSix exceptional secondary mathematics teachers (from two large urban regions in the US) participated in thestudy over the course of one school year. District-level administrators and university-based teacher educatorswhose work focuses on improving mathematics teaching and learning with students from non-dominantbackgrounds nominated these individuals because of their record of exceptional success teaching students froma range of ethnic, racial and linguistic backgrounds in their schools and districts. We conducted 10-15observations in each teacher’s classroom and videotaped a subset of these lessons. We also conducted a series ofinterviews where we asked the teachers to view selected segments from their own and other teachers’classrooms and to discuss what they noticed. We view their ways of noticing as a window into their dispositionsas equitable mathematics teachers. Finally, we brought a subset of these teachers together in a video clubICLS 2014 Proceedings1215© ISLSmeeting to view selected segments from each other’s teaching to document what they identify in each other’spractices.Analytic MethodsFor this paper, we analyze video data and field notes from the video club meeting to understand how thiscontext can become a fruitful setting for teachers to develop more robust understandings of and a sharedlanguage for talking about equitable mathematics teaching practice.Data analysis is qualitative in nature. To understand how the video club setting can become a contextfor teacher learning of equitable mathematics practice, we drew first on analyses of the individual teacher data.We reviewed the classroom observation and interview data to construct profiles of the three teachers whoparticipated in the video club meeting. Our analysis was informed by Hand’s (2012) framework that consists ofthree categories for the ways teachers support nondominant students in “taking up space” in inquiry-basedclassrooms: promoting dialogic space, blurring distinctions, and reframing the system. We used this analysis toinform our interpretation of the teachers’ dispositions toward equitable mathematics teaching. We then viewedthe video club meeting data and examined how the teachers’ dispositions arose in their conversations, whatlanguage they used to describe and characterize what they noticed while viewing clips from each other’sclassrooms and how this context provided them opportunities to develop more robust visions of equitablemathematics teaching.FindingsOur first finding is that the three teachers have qualitatively different dispositions toward equitable mathematicsteaching. One teachers’ noticing can be characterized as mathematically oriented. He attended to students’mathematical thinking, their relationship to the mathematics and the ways they see themselves as successfulmathematics learners. Another teacher’s noticing can be described as student oriented. That is, he attended totheir personal histories, lives and experiences and considered how these afforded or constrained theiropportunities to learn in the classroom. And finally, the third teachers’ noticing for equitable teaching can becategorized as developing student autonomy with mathematics. That is, he attended to ways students drew onanother’s thinking to develop their understandings and how the curriculum mediated their abilities to becomeautonomous math learners through collaborative work with each other.Analysis of the video club meeting suggests that bringing teachers together can provide them withopportunities to develop more robust visions of equitable mathematics teaching. While all three teachers wereconsidered exceptional equitable teachers, each exemplified different dimensions of the Hand (2012)framework. Thus, by viewing video of noticing for equitable learning as they arose in their teaching and thentalking about together about their teaching, the teachers could come to see the multi-faceted nature of teachingpractices for equitable learning. For example, when the group viewed clips from the “student oriented” teacher’sclassrooms, they saw him noticing disruptive behavior (e.g. student beat boxing in class) and then using thatstudents’ behavior to represent the mathematics they were learning, in this case rates of change. In this case, theteacher who is more “mathematically oriented” could see ways of promoting dialogic space and reframing theclassroom system in ways that draw on students’ ways of knowing and doing to create rich opportunities toaccess and learn the mathematics. Likewise, by watching videos from the other teachers’ classrooms, this sameteacher could begin to see ways that mathematically rich tasks can afford opportunities for deeper mathematicalthinking and ways that teachers’ interactions with students can blur distinctions to promote a range ofparticipation structures and ways of representing mathematics.Implications for Teachers’ LearningThis study suggests that video of teaching practice can provide not only insight into noticing equitablemathematics practice, but also ways that teachers can collaborate to learn about equitable teaching from oneanother. The findings of this work have implications for the design of professional development for supportingteachers in adopting more equitable dispositions to mathematics teaching and learning.ReferencesBall, D. & Moses, R. (2009, October). Equity and mathematics: An Interview with Deborah Ball and BobMoses. Phi Delta Kappan, 92, 3, 54-59.Banks, J.A. (1998). The lives and values of researchers: Implications for educating citizens in a multiculturalsociety. Educational Researcher 27(7): 4-17.Benford, R.D., & Snow, D.A. (2000). Framing processes and social movements: An overview and assessment.Annual Review of Sociology, 26, 611-639.Bryk, A.S., Sebring, P.B., Allensworth, E., Luppescu, S. and Easton, J.Q. (2010). Organizing schools forimprovement: Lessons from Chicago. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.Cohen, D. (2011). Teaching and its predicaments. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1216© ISLSCohen, E. G. (1994). Designing Groupwork: Strategies for the heterogeneous classroom. New York: TeachersCollege Press.Collins, P.H. (2009). Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness, and the politics of empowerment (2nded.). New York: Routledge.Cuban, L. (1993). How teachers taught: Constancy and change in American education, 1890-1990. New York:Teachers College Press.Dreeben, R. (2005). Teaching and the Competence of Occupations. In L. V. Hedges, B. Schneider (Eds.) TheSocial Organization of Schooling (pp. 51 – 90). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.Duncan, P. (2004). Tell this silence: Asian American women writers and the politics of speech. Iowa City, IA:University of Iowa Press.Engeström, Y. (1987). Expansive learning at work: Toward an activity theoretical reconceptualisation. Journalof Education and Work 14: 133-156.Erickson, F. (2004). Talk and social theory: Ecologies of speaking and listening in everyday life. Cambridge,UK: Polity Press.Erickson, F. (2010). On noticing teacher noticing. In M. G. Sherin, V. R. Jacobs, & R. A. Philipp (Eds.),Mathematics teacher noticing: Seeing through teachers' eyes (pp. 17-34). New York: Routledge.Fairclough, N. (2001). Language and power (2nd ed.). Harlow, Eng.: Longman.Gay, G. (2010). Culturally responsive teaching: Theory, research, and practice. New York: Teachers CollegePress.Gee, J.P. (2005). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.Goffman, E. (1974). Frame analysis: An essay on the organization of experience. New York: Harper & Row.Grossman, P., & McDonald, M. (2008). Back to the Future: Directions for Research in Teaching and TeacherEducation. American Educational Research Association, 45(1), 184-205.Gutiérrez, K.D., Baquedano-López, P., & Tejeda, C. (1999). Rethinking diversity: Hybridity and hybridlanguage practices in the Third Space. Mind, Culture, Activity. 6(4), 286-303.Hand, V. (2012). Seeing culture and power in mathematical learning: toward a model of equitable instruction.Educational Studies in Mathematics, 80, 233-247.Hall, R.P. & Horn, I.S. (2012). Talk and conceptual change at work: Analogy and epistemic stance in acomparative analysis of statistical consulting and teacher workgroups. Mind, Culture, Activity, 19(3),240-258.Harding, S. (1993). Rethinking standpoint epistemology: What is "strong objectivity"? In L. Alcott & R.E.Potter (Eds.), Feminist epistemologies (pp. 49-82). New York: Routledge.Hiebert, J., Gallimore, R., & Stigler, J. W. (2002). A knowledge base for the teaching profession. EducationalResearcher, 31(5), 3–15.Horn, I.S. (2005). Learning on the job: A situated account of teacher learning in high school mathematicsdepartments. Cognition and Instruction, 23(2), 207-236.---. (2007). Fast kids, slow kids, lazy kids: Framing the mismatch problem in mathematics teachers’conversations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences 16(1): 37-79.Horn, I.S. & Kane, B.D. (2012, April). The development of teachers pedagogical reasoning in mathematicsteachers’ conversations. American Educational Research Association annual meeting, Vancouver,B.C., Canada.Horn, I.S. & Little, J. (2010). Attending to problems of practice: Routines and resources for professionallearning in teachers’ workplace interactions. American Educational Research Journal, 47 (1), 181-217.Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Jackson, K., & Gibbons, L. (2013, May). Accounting for practitioners’ views of students’ mathematicalcapabilities. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational ResearchAssociation, San Francisco, CA.Lampert, M. (2001). Teaching problems and the problems of teaching. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.Langer, J. A. (2000). Excellence in English in middle and high school: How teachers' professional lives supportstudent achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 37(2), 397-439.Lee, S.J. (2005). Up against Whiteness: Race, school, and immigrant youth. New York: Teachers College Press.Lee, V. and Smith, J. B. (1996). Collective Responsibility for Learning and Its Effects on Gains in Achievementfor Early Secondary School Students, American Journal of Education, 104, 103-147.Levine. T. (2010). Tools for the study and design of collaborative teacher learning: The affordances of differentconceptions of teacher community and activity theory. Teacher Education Quarterly, 37(1), 109-130.Lightfoot, S.L. (1978). Worlds Apart: Relationships between families and schools. New York: Basic Books, Inc.Little, J.W. (2003). Inside teacher community: Representations of classroom practice. Teachers College Record,105(6), 913-945.Mawhinney, L. (2008). Laugh so you don't cry: Teachers combating isolation in schools through humour andsocial support. Ethnography and Education 3(2): 195-209.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1217© ISLSMazzei, L.A. (2004). Silent listenings: Deconstructive practices in discourse-based research. EducationalResearcher 33(2): 26-34.---. (2008). Silence speaks: Whiteness revealed in the absence of voice. Teaching and Teacher Education 24(5):1125-1136.McLaughlin, M. W. and Talbert, J. E. (2001). Professional communities and the work of high school teaching.Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.McLaughlin, M. W. & Talbert, J. E. (2006). Building school-based teacher learning communities. New York:Teachers College Press.Moll, L.C. & Gonzalez, N. (1994). Lessons from research with language-minority children. Journal of LiteracyResearch, 26(4), 439-456.Munter, C. (2009). Defining visions of high-quality mathematics instruction. In S. L. Swars, D. W. Stinson, &S. Lemons-Smith, (Eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty First Annual Meeting of the North AmericanChapter of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (pp. 983-991).Atlanta, GA: Georgia State University.Nasir, N. S., Hand, V., & Taylor, E. V. (2008). Culture and mathematics in school: boundaries between culturaland domain knowledge in the mathematics classroom and beyond. Review of Research in Education,32, 187-240.Parr, J. M., & Timperley, H. S. (2010). Multiple 'black boxes': Inquiry into learning within a professionaldevelopment project. Improving Schools, 13(2), 158-171.Rosebery, A.S., Ogonowski, M., DiSchino, M. & Warren, B. (2010). “The coat traps all your body heat”:Heterogeneity as fundamental to learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences. 19(3), 322-357.Scott, J.W. (1991). The evidence of experience. Critical Inquiry 17(4): 773-797.Sherin, M. G. (2000). Facilitating meaningful discussions about mathematics. Mathematics Teaching in theMiddle School, 6(2), 186-190.Sherin, M., Jacobs, V. & Philipp, R. (2010) Mathematics teacher noticing: Seeing through teachers' eyes (pp.17-34). New York: Routledge.Siskin, L. (1994). Realms of Knowledge: Academic Departments in Secondary Schools. New York: Routledge.Snow, D.A., & Benford, R.D. (1988). Ideology, frame resonance, and participant mobilization. In B.Klandermans, H. Kriesi & S.G. Tarrow (Eds.), International Social Movement Research (Vol. 1, pp.197-217). Greenwich, CI: Jai Press Inc.Thompson, J., Windschitl, M. & Braaten M. (2013). Developing a theory of early-career teacher practice.American Educational Research Journal, 50(3), 574-615.U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (2005, June). The Condition ofEducation (NCES 2005-094). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Zeichner, K. (2010). Rethinking the connections between campus courses and field experiences in college- anduniversity-based teacher education. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1-2), 89-99.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1218© ISLS