Research and Design of Learning Experiences for FamiliesCo-chairsMegan Luce, Stanford University, mluce@stanford.eduJessica Umphress, Northwestern University, j-umphress@northwestern.eduDiscussantPhilip Bell, University of Washington, pbell@u.washington.eduAuthorsMaureen Callanan University of California, Santa CruzCatherine Eberbach Rutgers UniversityShelley Goldman Stanford UniversityJennifer Jipson Cal Poly, San Luis ObispoAmber Levinson Stanford UniversityElyse Litvack University of Washington BothellMegan Luce Stanford UniversityLucy R. McClain Penn State UniversitySinem Siyahhan Arizona State UniversityCarrie Tzou University of Washington BothellJessica Umphress Northwestern UniversityTanner Vea Stanford UniversityHeather Toomey Zimmerman Penn State UniversityAbstract: In family activity children learn how to be participants in family practices, how tobe learners and teachers within family relationships, and to approach learning and knowing inways valued by their families and communities. Increased attention to children’s learningacross contexts highlights that meaningful learning can be ubiquitous across time, space, andsituations. However, we need more understanding of how learning can be constructivelylinked across facets of children’s lives, especially as they move through the world with theirfamilies. This poster symposium brings together people working on research and design offamily learning experiences, in a variety of contexts. We aim to further understand 1)processes of learning across practices, time, persons and social/physical contexts, 2) the natureof learning processes in families, considering varied goals, values, and possible learningsituations, and 3) what is being learned from new forays into research and design for familylearning environments.Symposium OverviewFamilies play a prominent role in children’s learning about the world around them, and families are an obviouscontext in which children learn to become a certain kind of person (“becoming in practice”). For example,children of politically engaged parents often become politically engaged as emerging adults (e.g., Dinas, 2013),and family attitudes toward and engagement with science contributes to whether children see science as anidentity or trajectory that they can pursue (e.g., Archer et al., 2012). In family activity and conversation childrenlearn how to be a participant in family practices, learn how to be learners and teachers within familyrelationships (e.g., Goodwin, 2007; Ochs & Taylor, 1995), and learn to approach learning and knowing in waysthat are valued by their families and communities (e.g., Rogoff, 2003). In many ways, family life sets the stagefor children’s learning both at home in the early years as well as throughout their diverse activities across theirlives.Although schools have long made efforts to involve families in their children’s learning, and museumsand other informal education institutions often design for learning with attention to how adults might play a rolein children’s learning experiences (e.g., Crowley, Callanan, Tenenbaum, & Allen, 2001), designing for familylearning in its own right is less represented and research on family learning in informal settings is slowlyconverging on a coherent disciplinary framework (Ellenbogen, Luke, & Dierking, 2004). This is the case evenat a time when increased attention in research and theory about children’s learning across contexts highlightsthat meaningful learning can be ubiquitous across time, space, and situations (e.g., Connected LearningResearch Network; Ito et al, 2013; LIFE Center). A growing body of research on Science, Technology,Engineering, Art, and Math (STEAM) learning in the home and other everyday or informal settings suggeststhat engagement with STEAM ideas is fluid across settings and activities, and can look very different from whathappens in school. For example, Barron, Martin, Takeuchi, & Fithian (2009) have found that family membersICLS 2014 Proceedings1228© ISLSsupport children’s interactions with technology in a variety of ways including collaborating and providinginformation and resources. In math, families draw on cultural resources, values and mathematically-relevantproblem solving to accomplish everyday goals that include budgeting and planning for a special event, makinghome improvements, and engaging in leisure activities (Goldman et al., 2010; Pea & Martin, 2010).These sorts of studies point the way towards the need for more understanding about how children’slearning can be constructively linked across varied facets of life. For example, how does a child transfer herunderstanding of a biology concept from her classroom science lesson to a nature walk with her parents? Howdo the media practices of a family shape the epistemic practices of media use elsewhere? How do familiestranslate and/or adopt learning practices imported by group members through new tools, toys, or sharedactivities? How can learning design respond to and be effective in these contexts? In contribution to answeringquestions like these, this symposium brings together people working on the research and design of learningexperiences for families in a variety of contexts. As a community of analysts, researchers, and designers, thecollective aims to further understand 1) processes of learning across practices, time, and social/physicalcontexts, 2) the nature of learning processes in families, considering the varied goals, values, and possiblelearning situations, and 3) what is being learned from new forays into research and design for family learningenvironments.The work represented in this symposium is grounded in the premises that children and their parentsinteract successfully with many kinds of learning opportunities in their everyday lives and that well-designedresources and tools can help families engage in collaborative learning. Symposium participants will addresschallenges and lessons learned from designing for and researching family learning, and we aim for attendees toparticipate in a discussion about translating research findings into design principles. This symposium willaddress the research and design of learning experiences for families by focusing on the following issues:1.2.3.4.Developing case studies of family learning processes in informal environmentsIdentifying the unique challenges in researching and designing for family learningLeveraging design to provide opportunities for collaborative learning processes in family activity.Understanding how research and the design process work together in family learning/family-focusedenvironments.We bring together eight posters that present studies of family learning in the following contexts: gardeningin the backyard, exploring museum and botanical garden exhibits, nature walks and beaches, playing videogames and engaging in other media use at home. The learning activities that are studied span topics in scienceand media: astronomy, identifying and observing plants, soil testing, exploring natural features of a beach, andlearning through computer and iPad® games. This body of research and design of family learning processesdraws upon socio-cultural, informal learning, and joint media engagement theory and research (e.g., Nasir,Rosebery, Warren, & Lee, 2006; National Research Council, 2009; Takeuchi & Stevens, 2011), and employs avariety of analytic lenses including case studies, interaction and conversation analysis of video-recordedactivity, and mixed-methods approaches including video, questionnaires, and interviews (e.g., Jordan &Henderson, 1995).In addition to brief descriptions of each poster here, separate poster abstracts are listed in the nextmajor section. Jennifer Jipson and Maureen Callanan present research on young children’s concepts ofastronomy and family conversations about astronomy. They have collaborated with educators and museumexhibit designers to create astronomy activities for families with young children, and they will offer reflectionson how to effectively navigate combined research and design collaborations. Jessica Umphress introduced adesigned activity (soil testing kit) into families’ established gardening practices. She presents in-depthinteraction analysis of questioning and epistemic practices used when exploring the science kit. She alsoanalyzes the features of the designed activity that may have contributed to the results.Megan Luce, Shelley Goldman, and Tanner Vea designed playful, exploratory learning experiences forfamilies that provide science-related activity prompts and conversation starters at various locations andenvironments. They present analyses of the ways that family members engage in science-related activities at alocal beach. They also discuss the potential for location-based science learning activities to offer learningopportunities that are flexible and fit with families’ varied goals and interests. Heather Toomey Zimmermanand Lucy McLain also designed for collaborative discoveries and conversations on self-guided nature walks.They present research on how their designed learning tools functioned in family processes of identifying plantsand other features in nature. Their research highlights the need for family learning materials that can be flexiblyused by families within forms of social interaction.Catherine Eberbach studied how families observed and discussed pollination at a botanical garden. Sheoffered parents simple “instructions” in conversational strategies (e.g., asking wh-questions) they could use toengage their children. These strategies evoked elaborative talk and encouraged shared noticing of phenomena.Catherine will discuss how conversational strategies may be a transportable tool that can be used across contextsICLS 2014 Proceedings1229© ISLSto facilitate collaborative family learning. Carrie Tzou and Elyse Litvack designed science backpacks, withactivities related to current science content in school, which children could check out from school and takehome. Based on videos the families took of themselves, Tzou and Litvack report on the ways in which familiesappropriated the backpacks at home, and offer insights into designing for family learning that straddles homeand school.Sinem Siyahhan reports on a design-based research study that investigated the effectiveness of differentgame design elements in supporting collaborative intergenerational play experiences where parents and childrenreciprocally take on expert and novice roles. She will offer insights into how video game-based learningexperiences can be designed to position parents and children as learning partners. Amber Levinson reports onin-depth case studies of how Latino immigrant families use media at home. She also introduced an iPad® intothe families’ homes to better understand the roles that media devices come to play in family life and learning.This research has implications for potential innovation in designing for family learning through media.Poster Symposium FormatThe symposium format will include a 10-minute introduction by the co-chairs, followed by 50 minutes ofbrowsing posters, and the final 30 minutes will be used by the discussant to synthesize and comment on thepresented work and to facilitate questions from attendees.DiscussantDr. Philip Bell, University of Washington and the LIFE Center, will provide synthesizing remarks based on hisexpertise in informal learning research and theory. The issues addressed will align with the main issues of thesymposium: 1) How do we move forward as a field in research on family learning processes in informalenvironments? 2) How can we expand our methods in family learning research? 3) How can design be leveragedto provide opportunities for collaborative learning processes in family activity? Dr. Bell will also co-facilitate,with the chairpersons, a question and discussion session with attendees and presenters.Individual PostersMy Sky Tonight: Researching Young Children’s Ideas about Astronomy andDesigning Informal Astronomy Activities for FamiliesJennifer Jipson, Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo, jjipson@gmail.comMaureen Callanan, University of California, Santa CruzIn this collaborative project, cognitive developmental and educational researchers are working with astronomyeducators to study preschool-aged children’s conceptions of astronomy, and to develop and test new activitiesfor preschool children and their families. The focus of the design project is to develop developmentallyappropriate astronomy activities for 3-5 year-old-children and their families to engage with at planetariums,nature centers, and other informal learning environments. To explore the ways in which families engage ineveryday conversations about nature, including astronomy, we conducted a two-week diary study asking parentsto keep track of their children’s conversations about nature. Sixty families participated; while the majority ofparents are highly educated and largely European-American, we also included a targeted sub-sample of 15Mexican-heritage families with basic schooling. We also invite the same families to visit a local museum whereprototype astronomy activities were being tested, and observed family interactions. In this poster symposiumwe will report on preliminary findings regarding (1) the frequency of preschool children’s spontaneousconversations about astronomy, presence of talk about causal mechanisms and evidence, and how theseconversations vary by age, gender, and schooling background of parents, (2) observations of preschoolers andparents’ collaborative engagement with workshop astronomy activities, and (3) reflections on the challengesinvolved in such a combined research and design collaboration.Complex Family Questioning Around a Garden Soil Science KitJessica Umphress, j-umphress@northwestern.eduNorthwestern UniversityFamilies often have shared internal practices, interests or hobbies that can be the site of rich learning andconversations. Some of those practices, like gardening, can naturally span generations and involve informalapprentice-type relationships where knowledge is passed down to younger gardeners during the act of gardeningtogether. Do these relationships and activities leave room for both children and adults to ask questions and meeteach other on equal epistemic footing, or are they epistemologically hierarchical?In this research 10 gardening families with children ages 7-12 years old videotaped themselves doing ascience kit about their garden soil in their own homes. The kits involved a multi-part activity wherein theICLS 2014 Proceedings1230© ISLSfamilies collected a soil sample, manipulated it to make it testable, combined the sample with different chemicalreagents to reveal nutrient levels and other properties, interpreted the results, and applied them to their owngardening plans and experiences. The learning goals for the kit included having the families be able to talk aboutthe relationship between soil and plants, and being able to make meaningful connections between those ideasand their own gardens. One research goal for the activity was to reveal the epistemological properties ofparent/child interaction around their shared practice of gardening together. Who would be the knower and howwould knowing get done or knowledge be built while using the science kit?Analyses of question practices in the resulting videos reveal an interesting and complicatedepistemological relationship between parents and children around the science kits. For example, analyses showthat while parents did take a fairly managerial stance towards the activity, they also engaged in deliberate andgenuine information-seeking and worked to solicit their children’s opinions about what was being revealed bythe kit. In turn, children actively engaged in asking questions about the activities and results, and also askedfrequent repair questions (e.g. Schegloff, 1992) to ensure that they were understanding what was happening andthe relationships between the chemical properties of their soil and their garden plants. Further analyses showthat although functionally parents’ questions are doing real epistemic work with their children, more than half ofthem were simple polar questions (i.e. requiring yes/no responses). On the other hand, more than half ofchildren’s questions used question words (e.g. what, where, why, etc.) that place a greater demand on theirrecipient by requiring more complex responses. Is this a meaningful disparity in how the work of knowing getsdone in this setting, a developmental difference in how questions are asked, or simply an artifact of the design ofthe science kit? These and other results will be shown in the poster.Evolving Participation Structures in Family Science ActivityMegan Luce, mluce@stanford.eduShelley Goldman, Tanner VeaStanford UniversityIn our efforts to design and research playful science learning experiences for families with young children (4- to11-year-olds) we created activities and conversation starters that are meant to engage families in scienceexploration “any time, anywhere.” Drawing upon socio-cultural and informal learning theory and research, weaim to design science-relevant activities that are exploratory, fun, open-ended, and that spark conversation andcollaborative sense-making about the world (e.g., Allen & Gutwill, 2009; Hammer & van Zee, 2006). Our goalis to prompt children and families to explore the world, be inquisitive, and use their senses to observe, discuss,reflect, and learn. The experiences we designed locate points of interest in the environment and cue families asto how they might engage, question, and explore (see also Zimmerman & Land, 2014) without the need forspecialized tools, instruments, or objects. The content and science exploration prompts are generally in thepurview of, and benefit from, parents and children’s cultural understandings and funds of knowledge (González,Moll, & Amanti, 2005). For example, one set of activity prompt invites families to predict and test what willhappen when they throw a buoyant ball into the ocean waves…What do you think will happen if you throw a ball out into the waves?Throw the ball out into the water and see what happens!Does the ball tell you anything about wave patterns, rates, or direction?Try this: each person chooses a spot on the beach where they think the ball will come back to.Throw it out! Who guessed closest?In this poster we present case studies of families pilot-testing a set of activities designed for exploration atcoastal environments. Three families used wearable GoPro® video cameras to record themselves during a tripto a beach. The activities were available for view on a mobile device, but each family chose to use the printouts we also provided them.As one lens on understanding family learning processes over time, we focused the video analysis on thevarious ways that family members engage each other and with the activities over time during their trip (Jordan& Henderson, 1995). From studies of informal science learning we know that parents and children may take avariety of roles during museum visits, and parents ask questions, provide explanations, and help children frametheir experiences (Callanan & Jipson, 2001; Zimmerman, Reeve, & Bell, 2008, 2010). We present analysis of“participation structures” (Philips, 1972) that emerge and change as families navigate science activities andconversations outdoors. We report case analysis for three families, which indicate that 1) families move througha variety of stances including questioning, being an expert, being skeptical, and rescuing interests, and 2)collaborative sense-making seemed to be facilitated when both parents and children didn’t know the “answers”or when they came across surprising phenomena or inconsistencies in their ideas and observations, 3)epistemological orientations (what counts as “knowing,” how we know, who knows) shift over time and inICLS 2014 Proceedings1231© ISLSrelation to phenomena under consideration. We discuss the potential for our location-based informal, or casual,science activities and conversation starters to contribute to playful family science learning that can take manyforms within and across families. We offer suggestions for design principles of science-relevant activities andconversation starters that families can do “anywhere.”Designing for Collaborative Discoveries and Conversations: Families TogetherOutsideHeather Toomey Zimmerman, haz2@psu.eduLucy R. McClainPenn State UniversityOur research project examined families’ interactions with each other and the outdoors in order to developmaterials for families that would spark playful scientific explorations on nature trails. Our goal is to understandhow to support people as they engage in questioning and explanation-building (see Allen & Gutwill, 2009) inthe life sciences. A conceptual framework based on informal learning research and sociocultural theory situatesour project. Thinking and learning in everyday life is often guided by family interactions in a process calledguided participation (Rogoff, 2003). Guided participation occurs in informal settings when family membersmutually support each others’ sense making (Callanan & Jipson, 2002; Crowley & Jacobs, 2002; Palmquist &Crowley, 2007; Zimmerman, McClain & Crowl, 2013). We build on research (e.g., Eberbach & Crowley, 2005;Rowe & Kisiel, 2012; Zimmerman & McClain, 2012) that asserts that guided participation allows children andparents to connect new biological knowledge outdoors to shared family experiences and other forms of priorknowledge.Participants in our study were families attending nature walk programs on a wheelchair and strolleraccessible Americans with Disabilities Act compliant trail outdoors. Families were ethnographically shadowedas they interacted together, with a subgroup of families videotaped for deeper analyses (Derry et al, 2010).Collective case studies (Stake, 1995) were created through video-based analyses of learning processes found infamilies’ interactions.Across the families in our study, more prolonged exploration of natural objects occurred when a childinitiated a ‘discovery,’ rather than a naturalist or a parent. Our findings showed that when families usedscientific tools to support observations, these investigations were tied to families’ goals to identify thediscovered animals, plants, fungi, and abiotic elements. Correct identifications of species most often required acomplex coordination of tools, scientific representations, and families’ conversations and social interactions.Two common interaction patterns emerged from the video analyses: (a) discovery first, followed by tool andrepresentation use second and (b) selection of a tool and representation first followed by trying to find an objectto identify. Implications were drawn on designs that support family learning processes, including the need formaterials that can be flexibly used by families within forms of social interaction.Facilitating Collaborative Observational Practice During Family ActivityCatherine Eberbach, catherine.eberbach@gse.rutgers.eduRutgers UniversityA central challenge of scientific observational practice is to reach agreements about what an individual sees withwhat others see (Daston, 2008). To address this challenge, scientists have forged cultural tools—language,equipment, and disciplinary systems of knowledge and practice—that enable the collaborative construction ofshared vision (Goodwin, 1994). Yet little is understood about how people begin to participate in these scientificobservational practices (Eberbach & Crowley, 2009). This study explores how parent knowledge and use ofconversational strategies mediated joint attention, knowledge sharing, and collaborative agreements during anobservational activity.79 parent-child pairs that included children aged 6-10 observed and talked about pollination during avisit to a botanical garden. Families were organized by parent knowledge of pollination and randomly assignedto treatment or control groups for parent conversational strategies. To help parents elaborate upon children’sobservations, parents in the treatment groups received instruction in the use of particular conversationalstrategies (e.g., asking wh-questions, focusing talk on children’s expressed interests). Family interactions werevideotaped, coded, and analyzed. Statistical analyses revealed that a simple training protocol significantlymodified how parents interacted with their children. Case study analyses suggested that parents’ use of the whquestions strategy facilitated participation, clarification, and focusing attention. In turn, these questions evokedelaborative parent-child talk and extended shared noticing of phenomena. Parents’ use of the focus talk strategyshifted how parents actively managed children’s attention in ways that also enabled collaborative observationsand knowledge sharing, but from the perspective of the child.This study expands our knowledge of how families collaboratively practice science together inICLS 2014 Proceedings1232© ISLScommunity settings. “Designing” for parent conversational strategies can support interactions between parentsand children in ways that foster collaborative observational practices and knowledge sharing. One way to framethese findings is to think about the use of parent conversational strategies as transportable tools that can beapplied across learning contexts to support joint attention and talk in ways that help parents and children tocollaboratively see the same things during observations.Backpacks as Boundary Objects: Documenting How Families Appropriate Take-HomeScience BackpacksCarrie Tzou, ctzou@uwb.eduElyse LitvackUniversity of Washington BothellThe goal of this research project was to design, implement, and study a science backpack program that connectselementary school science learning with science activities that can be done at home with families. Specifically,we designed mini science kits that contain simple materials, directions, and ideas for conducting scientificinvestigations at home that connect conceptually to science being learned at school. The backpacks served asboundary objects (Akkerman & Bakker, 2011) —as such, they potentially allow for science practice at homethat is infused with rich and varied funds of knowledge present in the home. Research questions we asked were:(1) How did the backpacks as boundary objects get appropriated by the youth and their families at home?, (2)What roles do parents take on while engaged with the backpack activities and how do these roles positionchildren as science learners?, and (3)What are implications from this study for designing boundary objects thatcross from school to home (and vice versa)? As a theoretical framing, we used a modified version of culturalhistorical activity theory (CHAT) (e.g., Cole, 1996) which allowed us to understand how boundary objects cantransform roles, division of labor, and mediating tools from one activity system (e.g., school) to another (e.g.,home).We placed digital cameras in the backpacks, and the videos made by families and youth were analyzedfor the ways in family members took on various roles while engaging with science learning that subsequentlypositioned youth in certain ways and how youth and their families transformed (or did not transform) the scienceactivities into new types of activities. We found three main types of appropriation of backpacks by youth andtheir families: (1) appropriating school roles in which traditional power relationships between “teacher” (usuallyan older sibling or parent) and “student” (the youth who checked out the backpack) were recreated, (2) hybridappropriation, in which parents and youth share positions of power and expertise, and (3) repurposingappropriation, where the backpack activities were turned into occasions for youth to host “reality tv”-likeepisodes as they recorded themselves engaging in the activities. This study points to the need to design formultiple configurations of learning, with activities that suggest various roles that parents and youth can take on.Intergenerational Play Around Video Games: A Context for Family Connection andLearningSinem Siyahhan, Sinem.Siyahhan@asu.eduArizona State UniversityIntergenerational play around video games provides unique opportunities for families to connect and learntogether (Aarsand, 2007, Horst, 2009). At the same time, the nature of intergenerational play around videogames varies across different families, with some parent-child interaction styles and patterns being moreproductive in supporting family connection and learning than others (Mitchell, 1985; Siyahhan, Barab, &Downton, 2009). Using the lens of a socio-cultural theoretical framework, this presentation reports on findingsfrom the second iteration of a design-based research study that investigated the effectiveness of different gamedesign elements in supporting collaborative intergenerational play experiences where parents and childrenreciprocally take on expert and novice roles and engage mutual scaffolding behaviors. To this end, 16 motherchild pairs (children ages 9 to 13) played through different science, language arts, and social games designed inFamily Quest—a family game space created within Quest Atlantis, a three-dimensional educational gamingenvironment (www.QuestAtlantis.Org)—as part of a family program at different informal learning sites. Datasources include parent questionnaires, video recordings of parent-child gameplay, and semi-structuredinterviews with parents and children about their experiences playing together. This presentation will sharefindings on parent-child interactions around different game designs, and provide illuminative cases ofcollaborative intergenerational play experiences that support family connection and learning. Results from thisstudy contribute to our understanding of the nature of computer-mediated communication and learning betweenparents and children, and how to design learning experiences for families in the context of video games thatposition parents and children as learning partners.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1233© ISLSTapping In: Latino Immigrant Families, Media and Learning at HomeAmber Levinson, amlevinson@stanford.eduStanford UniversityThis poster shares design-relevant findings from a dissertation study that investigates how low-income Latinoimmigrant families with young children use broadcast and digital media. Media – on television, computers,mobile devices and other platforms – has become a substantial part of families’ language and literacyenvironment but its role is little understood. Using a lens of joint media engagement (JME), the study looks athow both children and parents use media at home and the opportunities to design educational content for thispopulation. In these families, multiple generations are learning a new language and media often constitutes theonly presence of that language (English) within the home. The study takes a three-pronged approach thatincludes:1) ethnographic case studies to provide rich and detailed data on this little-studied topic;2) survey responses that are compared to a nationwide sample, and3) an intervention wherein I distributed a tablet device (iPads) to each case family and documented therole it comes to play in family life and learning.The case studies provide rich data regarding media practices and interests within families, while the interventiongives a glimpse of what opportunities and/or challenges a new technology can bring and how families take upthese media tools. The poster will share both qualitative and quantitative results related to how participatingfamilies – who all have at least one child between the ages of five and seven and speak Spanish as their primaryhome language – use media for learning. The poster will also focus on how to identify within these findingspotential design spaces for innovation.ReferencesAarsand, P. A. (2007). Computer and video games in family life: The digital divide as a resource inintergenerational interactions. Childhood, 14, 235-256.Akkerman, S.F. & Bakker, A. (2011). Boundary crossing and boundary objects. Review of EducationalResearch, 81(2), 132-169.Allen, S., & Gutwill, J. P. (2009). Creating a program to deepen family inquiry at interactive science exhibits.Curator, 52(3), 289–306.Archer, L., Dewitt, J., Osborne, J., Dillon, J., Willis, B., & Wong, B. (2012). Science aspirations, capital, andfamily habitus: How families shape children’s engagement and identification with science. AmericanEducational Research Journal, 49(5), 881-908.Barron, B., Martin, C. K., Takeuchi, L., & Fithian, R. (2009). Parents as learning partners in the development oftechnological fluency. The International Journal of Learning and Media, 1, 55-77. DOI:10.1162/ijlm.2009.0021Callanan, M. A. & Jipson, J. L. (2001). Explanatory conversations and young children’s developing scientificliteracy. In K. Crowley, C. D. Schunn, and T. Okada, Eds., Designing for Science: Implications fromEveryday, Classroom, and Professional Settings (pp. 21-49). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Callanan, M. A., & Jipson, J. L. (2002). Maps, globes, and videos: Parent-child conversations aboutrepresentational objects. In S. G. Paris (Ed.), Perspectives on Object-Centered Learning in Museums(pp. 261–283). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Harvard University Press.Connected Learning Research Network: http://clrn.dmlhub.net/Crowley, K., Callanan, M. A., Tenenbaum, H. R., & Allen, E. (2001). Parents explain more often to boys that togirls during shared scientific thinking. Psychological Science, 12, 258-261.Crowley, K., & Jacobs, M. (2002). Building islands of expertise in everyday family activity. In G. Leinhardt, K.Crowley, & K. Knutson (Eds.), Learning Conversations in Museums (pp. 333–356). Mahwah, NJ:Lawrence Elrbaum Associates.Daston, L. (2008). On scientific observation. Isis, 99, 97-110.Derry, S., Pea, R., Barron, B., Engle, R., Erickson, F., Goldman, R., Hall, R., et al. (2010). Conducting videoresearch in the learning sciences: Guidance on selection, analysis, technology, and ethics. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 19(1), 3-53.Dinas, E. (2013). Why does the apple fall far from the tree? How early political socialization prompts parentchild dissimilarity. British Journal of Political Science, early view. DOI:10.1017/S0007123413000033Eberbach, C., & Crowley, K. (2009). From everyday to scientific: How children learn to observe the biologicalworld. Review of Educational Research, 79(1), 39-68.Ellenbogen, K. M., Luke, J. J., & Dierking, L. D. (2004). Family learning research in museums: An emergingdisciplinary matrix? Science Education, 88(Suppl. 1): S48-S58.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1234© ISLSGoldman, S., Pea, R., Blair, K..P., Jimenez, O., A. Booker, A., L. Martin, L., & Esmonde, I. (2010). Mathengaged problem solving in families. In Learning in the Disciplines: Proceedings of the 9thInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2010) - Volume 1, Full Papers, K. Gomez, L.Lyons, and J. Radinsky, Eds. Chicago IL International Society of the Learning Sciences, 380-388.Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.Goodwin, M. H. (2007). Occasioned knowledge exploration in family activity. Discourse & Society, 18(1), 93110. DOI: 10.1177/0957926507069459González, N., Moll, L.C. and Amanti. C. (2005). Funds of Knowledge: Theorizing Practices in Households,Communities, and Classrooms. New York: Routlege.Hammer, D. & van Zee, E. (2006). Seeing the science in children’s thinking: Case studies of student inquiry inphysical science. Portsmouth, New Hampshire: Heinemman.Horst, H. (2010). Silicon Valley Families. In M. Ito, S. Baumer, M. Bittanti, d. boyd, R. Cody, B. HerrStephenson, et al. (2010). Hanging out, messing around, and geeking out: Kids living and learningwith new media. The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Series on Digital Media andLearning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Schor, J., Sefton-Green, J., & Watkins,S. K. (2013). Connected Learning: An Agenda for Research and Design. Irvine, CA: Digital Media andLearning Research Hub. Downloaded from: www.dmlhub.net/publicationsJordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4, 39-103.LIFE Center: http://life-slc.org/research/research.htmlMitchell, E. (1985). The dynamics of family interaction around home video games. Special Issue: Personalcomputers and the family. Marriage and Family Review, 8(1-2), 121-135.Nasir, N. S., Rosebery, A. S., Warren, B., & Lee, C. D. (2006). Learning as a cultural process. In R. K. Sawyer(Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 489-504). New York: Cambridge UniversityPress.National Research Council. (2009). Learning Science in Informal Environments: People, Places, and Pursuits.Committee on Learning Science in Informal Environments, P. Bell, B. Lewenstein, A. W. Shouse, & M. A.Feder, (Eds.). Board on Science Education, Center for Education. Division of Behavioral and SocialSciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Ochs, E. & Taylor, C. (1995) ‘The “Father knows best” dynamic in dinnertime narratives.’ In K. Hall & M.Bucholtz (Eds.), Gender Articulated: Language and the Socially Constructed Self (pp. 97–120). New York:Routledge.Palmquist, S., & Crowley, K. (2007). From teachers to testers: How parents talk to novice and expert children ina natural history museum. Science Education, 91, 783–804.Pea, R. & Martin, L. (2010). Values that occasion and guide mathematics in the family. In Learning Research asa Human Science, 109, W. R. Penuel & K. O'Connor, (Eds.), National Society for the Study ofEducation Yearbook, 34-52.Philips, S. (1972). Participant structures and communicative competence: Warm Springs children incommunity and classroom. In C. B. Cazden, V. P. John, & D. Hymes (Eds.), Functions of languagein the classroom (pp. 370-394). New York: Teachers College Press.Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. New York: Oxford University Press.Rowe, S., & Kisiel, J. (2012). Family engagement at aquarium touch tanks: Exploring interactions and thepotential for learning. In Understanding Interactions at Science Centers and Museums (pp. 63-77).Rotterdam, NL: SensePublishers.Schegloff, E. (1992) Repair after next turn: The last structurally provided defense of intersubjectivity inconversation. American Journal of Sociology, 97(5), 1295-1345.Siyahhan, S., Barab, S., & Downton, M. (2009). Using activity theory to understand intergenerational play: Thecase of Family Quest. International Journal of Computer-supported Collaborative Learning, 5(4), 415432.Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: SageTakeuchi, L. & Stevens, R. (2011). The new coviewing: Designing for learning through joint mediaengagement. The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop and LIFECenter.http://www.joanganzcooneycenter.org/publication/the-new-coviewing-designing-for-learningthrough-joint-media-engagement/Zimmerman, H. T., & Land, S. M. (2014). Facilitating place-based learning in outdoor informal environmentswith mobile computers. TechTrends. 58(1), 77-83.Zimmerman, H. T., & McClain, L. R. (2013). Understanding intergenerational learning in environmentaleducation programs. Studies in Educational Evaluation. Advance online publication.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1235© ISLSZimmerman, H. T., McClain, L. R., & Crowl, M. (2013). Understanding how families use magnifiers duringnature center walks. Research in Science Education. 43:5, 1917-1938.Zimmerman, H. T., Reeve, S., and Bell, P. (2008). Distributed expertise in a science center: Social andintellectual role-taking by families, J. of Museum Education, 33, 143-152. DOI: 10.1002/sce.20374Zimmerman, H. T., Reeve, S. and Bell P. (2010). Family sense-making practices in science centerconversations. Science Education, 3, 478-505. DOI: 10.1002/sce.20374ICLS 2014 Proceedings1236© ISLS