Conditions for Successful Learning-by-Teaching:Lessons Learned in Training Prospective Science TeachersMoseli A. Mafa, Lesotho College of Education, moseli3712@gmail.comAbstract: Learning in the 21st century where knowledge is constantly changing, requires theuse of strategies that create knowledge building communities (Bielaczyc, Paik & Ow, 2012).Learning-by-teaching is one such strategy. This entails forming students’ groups of enquiry,who come to discuss their research findings with the whole class (learning forums), toencourage the building of shared knowledge. This poster uses quasi-experimental method toinvestigate the change in the performance of teacher-trainees when using learning-by-teachingstrategy, after using non-learning-by-teaching strategies. The poster also explores students’perceptions on their use of the pedagogic strategy, in order to illuminate the conditionssuitable for successful implementation of method. Three cohorts of students participate in thestudy over three years. Findings indicate that the strategy succeeds when students’ motivationis high, resources are adequate, and timely corrective feedback is provided.In classes where Learning-by-teaching is used, tutors divide students into groups consisting of about three toeight students. Each group is given its own specific learning task which they research about, discuss and makepreparations to teach the rest of the class. These learning tasks may be given as home work or (in the case oflower classes) could be given during the lesson. Therefore, each group designs its own ways and pedagogicstrategies of imparting the knowledge to other students( Skinner,2006). After each group has taught, a learningforum, where corrections, comments, additions and elaborations are made, is opened. The tutor (teacher) doesnot ‘teach’, but participates as a member of the forum, while also providing guidance and support to students asthey teach each other (Martin, 2008). The support mainly comes through providing resources such as books,reference materials, and teaching-learning tools, including electronic and digital media tools.The argument for the use of the strategy is that it recognises students’ abilities and prior knowledge,which can become one of the most enabling and most powerful factors for motivation (Shor and Freire, 1987). Itis also deemed to provide collaborative-constructive ways of knowing that tend to encourage self-managementand self-monitoring, resulting in improved performance on educational objectives (Garrison, 1997; Kuusissari,2013)). The promotion of ‘talk’ found in ‘learning forums’ and inquiry-group discussions, are viewed as waysof encouraging seamless knowledge creation in the communities of learning (Wenger,1998; Mitchell andSackney, 2000) which could elevate interest, engagement and motivation to learn. This poster seeks to find ifthe learning- by- teaching can increase performance and, if so, under what conditions can this be possible.MethodParticipants were three cohorts of student-teachers. The first cohort were 23 prospective secondary biologicalscience teachers. They did not use learning-by-teaching in the 1st course done in their 2nd year, but they usedlearning-by-teaching in the course learned in their final/third year of study. The second cohort were 53(later 52)prospective primary science teachers. They did not use learning-by-teaching in the course done in their firstyear, but used learning-by-teaching in their final/third year of study. The last cohort were 84 (later77)prospective primary science teachers. They partially used learning-by-teaching in the course done in their firstyear of study and wholly used learning-by-teaching in the course done in their final/third year of study). Theoverall end-of term performance of all these students in the courses were recorded and compared.Table 1: Descriptions of the Three Groups of ParticipantsCohort1st cohort2nd Cohort3rd CohortCharacteristics of each Cohort of studentsProspective secondary biology teachers studying with fewer resources in 2nd year, but moreresources in 3rd year. They had enough time for both courses and were 23 in both years.Prospective primary science teachers that had fewer resources in first year (were53), but moreresources in 3rd year (were 52). They had enough time for the courses in both years.Prospective primary science teachers with extremely scarce resources in 1st year (were 84) andstudied under severe time constraints. They studied with more resources in 3rd year (were 77)and had more time for the course.Data was also collected from all the participants, using end-of-course evaluation questionnaires. Thequestionnaires were meant to find responses pertaining to the strengths and weaknesses of strategies andICLS 2014 Proceedings1529© ISLSresources used, as well as proposing improvements in the delivery of each course. The responses were codedand analysed qualitatively to find conditions leading to successful use of learning-by-teaching method.FindingsThe graphs below shows number of students and their overall course marks obtained, using learning-byteaching & when not using learning-by-teaching.Figure 1. Marks obtained by 1st cohortFigure 2. Marks obtained by 2nd cohortFigure 3. Markes obtained by 3rd cohortAnalysis and DiscussionThe performance outcomes of all the three cohorts indicate that there was a general improvement when eachgroup used learning-by-teaching. However, these results could not be very conclusive as there could be otherfactors that could have let to improved performance, such as the experience of learners and the content of thecourse. More controlled and stricter experiments are needed to draw more accurate conclusions. Nevertheless,learning-by-teaching appears to be a promising strategy and further investigation are needed. The findingsemanating from the analysis of the questionnaires confirm learning-by-teaching as a worthy learning strategywhich needs more exploration and could yield better results if students understood the justification for its use,were motivated to learn that way, adequate resources were provided, there was enough time forresearching/preparations and discussions, and timely corrective feedback was always given.ReferencesBielaczyc, K., Paik, S. & Ow, J. (2012). Investigating teacher change in creating classroom knowledgeCommunities, In Proceeding of International Conference on Learning Sciences.Garrison, D.R. (1997). ‘Self-directed learning: Toward a comprehensive model.’Adult Education Quartely.48(1). [EBSCO].Kuusisaar,H. (2013).Teachers’ collaborative learning –development of teaching in group discussions. Teachersand teaching: theory and practice.19(1)50-62.Martin, P. (2008). Learning by Teaching. [On line]. Available at http://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/learning_by_teaching (on 14th March, 2014).Mitchell, C. and Sackney, L. (2000). Profound Improvement –Building capacity for Learning Communities.Lisse: Swerts and Zeitlinger publishers.Shor, I. & Freire, P. (1987). A pedagogy for Liberation: Dialogues on Transforming Education. Massachusetts:Bergin and Garvey publishers.Skinner, Jody (2006).Learning by Teaching. [On line]. Retrieved from http://en.wikipedia.org/Learning byTeaching (on 23rd June 2009).Wenger, J. (1998).Communities of Practice: Learning meaning and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1530© ISLS