Scaffolding Argumentation Competence:The Shift from First to Second Order Skill AcquisitionOmid Noroozi, Wageningen University, The Netherlands, omid.noroozi@wur.nlPaul A. Kirschner, Welten Institute – Open University of the Netherlands, paul.Kirschner@ou.nlHarm J.A. Biemans, Wageningen University, The Netherlands, harm.biemans@wur.nlMartin Mulder, Wageningen University, The Netherlands, martin.mulder@wur.nlAbstract: This conceptual article argues that the focus of research on argument-scaffoldsshould shift from first-order towards second-order scaffolding. If learners acquireargumentation skills and learn to self-direct argumentation activities, they also engage inepistemic discussions with partners that help them acquire knowledge, correct falseviewpoints and refine misunderstanding. This article presents a 3-step guideline for secondorder argument-scaffolding, namely (1) diagnosis of internal argumentative script,(2) adaptive external support, and (3) adaptive fading of external support.IntroductionArgumentation is an essential aspect of scientific thinking and entails the ability to reason by applying rules offormal logic to deal with complex problems in academic settings. Research on fostering educationalargumentation as a pedagogical approach for collaborative learning has been influenced by developments intechnology-enhanced environments focusing on the role of computer-support systems for scaffolding variousaspects of argumentation processes (see Noroozi et al., 2011, 2012, 2013a, 2013b, 2013c). Various instructionalscaffolds have been embedded in online environments through graphical representational tools in the form ofschemes, tables, or visualizations to support dialogical argumentation processes, or in a more textualimplementation in the form of cues, prompts, or scripts to orchestrate various roles and activities of learners forprocedural scaffolding of specific interaction patterns (see Kirschner et al., 2003; Scheuer et al., 2010; Norooziet al., 2012 for an overview). The scaffolds developed, implemented and researched up until now have beenmeant primarily to stimulate argumentative discourse activities for learning within a particular domain (i.e., toachieve effects with argument scaffolding) and not to help learners acquire argumentation skills and selfregulate them for application in new situations (i.e., to achieve effects of argument scaffolding). The focus ofargument-scaffolds should not only be on providing support for the performance of the complex skill (first-orderscaffolding) but also on decreasing that support over time for promoting acquisition of self-directed learningskills (second-order scaffolding) (see Merriënboer & Kirschner, 2013).The process of acquiring argumentation skills can differ depending on the learners’ own individual,already developed, and often idiosyncratic internal script that indicates how a person will act in and understanda particular situation (see Kollar et al., 2007). An argumentation script can be seen as a specific instantiation ofa CSCL script. “A [CSCL] script describes the way students have to collaborate: task distribution or roles, turntaking rules, work phases, deliverables, etc. This contract may be conveyed through initial instructions orencompassed in the learning environment” (Dillenbourg & Jermann, 2007, p. 275). In turn, an internalargumentation script is an instantiation of what Fischer et al. (2013) call an internal collaboration script: “aconfiguration of knowledge components [that a person has] about a collaborative practice and its parts atdifferent levels of complexity…that guide the person’s understanding of and actions in the collaboration” (p.57) while an external script is “a configuration of representations (e. g. textual or graphical) of a collaborativepractice and its parts at (potentially) different levels of complexity…presented to a group of learners by anexternal source (e.g., a teacher or a website interface) as a means to guide their collaborative activities” (p. 57).Scientific evidence suggests that the optimal learning scenario - in this case acquiring and applyingargumentation skills - depends on the interplay between external and internal scripts (see Kollar et al., 2007),meaning that overly detailed instruction impedes learning when the provision of the external support inhibits thelearner’ self-regulated application of the internal script (Fischer et al., 2013). In such a situation, the externalscript may interfere with the internal script. Specifically, this occurs when the external script targets alreadydeveloped internal script components that do not need further scaffolding or targets them in a way that conflictswith how the person already effectively works rather than targeting those internal script components that need tobe scaffolded. As a result, processing these unneeded or interferential/conflicting scaffolds not only may causeunnecessary cognitive load but may also prevent developing higher level internal script components by takingaway the self-regulation from the learners (see Fischer et al., 2013).External scripts will only be effective when they trigger the accompanying specific collection ofinternal script components, if these internal script components exist in the learner or if the external scripts do notconflict with or are not redundant to the internal script components. In this situation, learners are first supportedby the external scripts to further develop their corresponding internal script components by repeated applicationICLS 2014 Proceedings1569© ISLSand are then given the opportunity to practice and apply their newly developed internal script components forregulating their activities, which in turn results in the internalization of the external scripts and enrichment ofthe internal script (Fischer et al., 2013). This situation is particularly effective for learners when theiridiosyncratic internal script is or becomes similar to the external script. Internalization of the external script anddevelopment of the internal script occurs if and when the learner is aware of the corresponding activities and theunderlying reasoning behind the activities; otherwise it becomes a procedure aiding the student at that moment(i.e., effects with) that will not be transferred to other relevant situations (i.e., effects of). Fading external scriptsor gradually transferring the learning responsibility from the environment to the learner has been argued to be aneffective approaches to realizing an optimal interplay between external and internal scripts (see Kollar et al.,2007). However, additional support during the fading is needed if learners are to dynamically reconfigure theirinternal script components as a response to changing situations and their individual goals to continue acting inaccordance with the strategy suggested by the external script (Fischer et al., 2013; Wecker & Fischer, 2011).Few instructional approaches have been proposed to complement fading for internalizing and securingcontinuous application of the strategy in external scripts. This conceptual paper uses a narrative analysisapproach to synthesize and integrate literature on this topic with the goal of developing a guideline for secondorder scaffolding of collaborative argumentation-based learning and for addressing practical implications andavenues for future research. This paper proposes a 3 step guideline for scaffolding collaborative argumentationbased learning in such a way as to secure acquisition and continuous application of the argumentation strategies,namely 1) diagnosis of the internal argumentative script, 2) adaptive external support, and 3) adaptive fading ofthis external support. Specifically, this paper suggests mechanisms in which automated analysis techniques canbe used to recognize the internal scripts of both individuals and groups of learners and their learning processesfor providing dynamic support and adaptive fading. It also suggests to combine artificial intelligence andcomputer-linguistic tools to provide learners with dynamic support and adaptive fading depending on theirargumentative discourse activities. Finally, this paper suggests to complement adaptive fading support with selfassessment, peer-assessment, and automatic response tools to ensure that learners actually understand and learnthe targeted argumentative activities in the external support.ReferencesDillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. (2007). Designing integrative scripts. In: F. Fischer., I. Kollar., H. Mandl., & J.Haake (Eds.), Scripting computer-supported collaborative learning: Cognitive, computational andeducational perspectives (pp. 275-301). New York: Springer.Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computersupported collaborative learning. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 56-66.Kirschner, P.A., Buckingham-Shum, S.J., & Carr, C.S. (Eds.). (2003). Visualizing argumentation: softwaretools for collaborative and educational sense-making. London: Springer.Kollar, I., Fischer, F., Slotta, D.J. (2007). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborativeinquiry learning. Learning and Instruction, 17(6), 708-721.Noroozi, O., Biemans, H.J.A., Busstra, M.C., Mulder, M., & Chizari, M. (2011). Differences in learningprocesses between successful and less successful students in computer-supported collaborative learningin the field of human nutrition and health. Computers in Human Behaviour, 27(1), 309-318.Noroozi, O., Biemans, H.J.A., Weinberger, A., Mulder, M., & Chizari, M. (2013a). Scripting for construction ofa transactive memory system in multidisciplinary CSCL environments. Learning and Instruction,25(1), 1-12.Noroozi, O., Teasley, S.D., Biemans, H.J.A., Weinberger, A., & Mulder, M. (2013b). Facilitating learning inmultidisciplinary groups with transactive CSCL scripts. IJCSCL, 8(2), 189-223.Noroozi, O., Weinberger, A., Biemans, H.J.A., Mulder, M., & Chizari, M. (2013c). Facilitating argumentativeknowledge construction through a transactive discussion script in CSCL. Computers and Education,61(2), 59-76.Scheuer, O., Loll, F., Pinkwart, N., & McLaren, B.M. (2010). Computer-supported argumentation: A review ofthe state of the art. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5(1), 43102.Noroozi, O., Weinberger, A., Biemans, H.J.A., Mulder, M., & Chizari, M. (2012). Argumentation-basedcomputer supported collaborative learning (ABCSCL). A systematic review and synthesis of fifteenyears of research. Educational Research Review, 7(2), 79-106.Van Merrienboer, J.J.G., & Kirschner, P.A. (2013). Ten steps to complex learning (Second Revised Edition).New York: Routledge.Wecker, C., & Fischer, F. (2011). From guided to self-regulated performance of domain-general skills: The roleof peer monitoring during the fading of instructional scripts. Learning and Instruction, 21(6), 746–756.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1570© ISLS