Comparison of Specific and Knowledge Integration AutomatedGuidance for Concept Diagrams in Inquiry InstructionKihyun Ryoo, UNC Chapel Hill, 309E Peabody Hall, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, khryoo@email.unc.eduMarcia C. Linn, UC Berkeley, 4611 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720, mclinn@berkeley.eduAbstract: This study compares two types of automated adaptive guidance for conceptdiagrams to improve middle school students’ science learning in web-based inquiryinstruction. Specific guidance tells students precisely what to improve, while knowledgeintegration guidance suggests revisiting a specific visualization to locate useful information.The results suggest that knowledge integration guidance is more effective in helping studentsdistinguish among multiple ideas and develop more coherent views than specific guidance.IntroductionFormative guidance plays an important role in improving inquiry learning (Shute, 2008), but many teachersoften lack the time or resources to provide appropriate guidance to individuals (Ruiz-Primo & Furtak, 2007).Advances in automated scoring technologies can help teachers by providing timely and flexible guidance onindividual responses in a variety of web-based settings, but the design of effective automated guidance remainsunderexplored. Most automated guidance is specific, identifying incorrect ideas or providing correct answers onproblems (Chase & Houmanfar, 2009). This type of guidance could help students fix their responses, but it mayencourage students to change their answers without improving their understanding of the concept. Designingguidance that promotes inquiry processes could support students in distinguishing the newly acquired ideas fromtheir initial views to formulate a more coherent understanding of complex scientific processes. For instance,guidance that suggests ways for students to improve their work, such as by pointing to a helpful resource, canprompt students to actively identify gaps in their knowledge and search for relevant information to revise theirwork (Chi et al., 2001). In this study, we compared specific guidance to inquiry-oriented guidance aligned withknowledge integration (Linn & Eylon, 2011) to help middle school students revise student-generated conceptdiagrams and improve their understanding of energy flow in life science in web-based inquiry units.Methods202 students from eight 7th grade classrooms were assigned to either a specific guidance (N=109) or aknowledge integration (KI) guidance condition (N=93). They worked in pairs for 13 days on two web-basedinquiry units on photosynthesis and cellular respiration. Designed following the knowledge integrationframework (Linn & Eylon, 2011), the web-based units consist of inquiry activities that help students develop anintegrated understanding of energy flow in life science (Ryoo & Linn, 2014). Before, immediately after, andthree months after the study, all students individually completed pre-, immediate post-, and delayed post-testsonline. 30 students who missed one or more tests were excluded from our analyses.At the end of the second unit, students were asked to create a concept diagram showing how plants getand use energy from the sun using a computer-diagramming tool called MySystem (Ryoo & Linn, 2014. Thisformative assessment activity requires students to make connections among various energy concepts todemonstrate their integrated understanding of how energy flows in life science. Once students submitted adiagram, MySystem immediately generated automated adaptive guidance based on scientifically validconnections among core energy ideas in students’ responses and encouraged students to revise their diagram.The specific guidance identified precisely what to improve in the diagram, whereas the KI guidance suggestedgoing back to a relevant visualization step to locate the evidence needed to improve the diagram (see Figure 1).Results and DiscussionsWe scored each pair’s initial and final diagrams using a KI rubric designed based on elaborated links amongnormative energy ideas. To examine the effects of specific (pair n=55) and KI guidance (pair n=47) in helpingstudents revise their concept diagrams, we compared the two conditions’ final diagram scores using an analysisof covariance (ANCOVA), taking their initial diagram scores as a covariate. The results revealed a significantmain effect of condition, F(1,99)=6.64, p<.05, ηp2=.06, indicating that the KI group performed significantlybetter on the final diagrams than the specific group. More specifically, 70.2% of the KI group took advantage ofthe guidance to add target energy concepts and successfully improved their depiction of energy flow. However,52.7% of the specific group did not make any changes that led to improved understanding. Although specificguidance told students exactly which energy ideas to add or fix, students still had to determine how to visuallyrepresent those ideas using icons, colors, and labels in their diagrams (see examples in Figure 1).To better understand why KI guidance was more successful than specific guidance, we analyzed each	  ICLS2014 Proceedings1585© ISLSpair’s log data. We focused on how they used the guidance to revise their diagrams. As expected, the KI group(74.5%) was more likely to revisit visualization steps, as recommended in the guidance, than the specific group(3.6%), F(1,100)=117.04, p<.001, ηp2=.54. Despite the recommendation, 25.5% of the KI group revised theirdiagram without revisiting. When comparing students who revisited and did not revisit visualization steps in theKI condition, we found a significant effect of revisiting visualizations, F(1,44)=4.47, p<.05, ηp2=.09, indicatingthat students who revisited made higher learning gains than those who did not. This suggests that KI guidanceencouraged students to revisit visualizations to reintroduce important key concepts, which allowed students toidentify gaps in their initial understanding and actively search for useful information to improve their work.Figure 1. Initial and Final Diagram Examples of Two Pairs by Condition.To examine the effects of specific and KI guidance on individual students’ learning, we conductedANCOVA on the immediate and delayed post-tests with pre-test scores as a covariate. The results revealed asignificant effect of condition for both the immediate, F(1, 169) = 8.92, p <.01, ηp2 = .05, and delayed post-tests,F(1,169)=5.44, p<.05, ηp2=.03. The KI group demonstrated a significantly more durable understanding ofenergy flow in life science than the specific group by connecting multiple energy concepts. Benefits of revisitingvisualizations were also observed on the immediate post-tests, F(1, 79) = 6.76, p <.05, ηp2 = .08. Students whorevisited visualizations in the KI condition continuously performed better on the post-tests than those whorevised their diagrams without revisiting the visualization steps. However, the difference between the twogroups was not statistically significant on the delayed post-tests, F(1,79)=2.37, p=.13, ηp2=.03.ConclusionsThis study shows the value of automated adaptive guidance that promotes inquiry processes for students andclarifies how middle school students took advantage of such guidance to improve their work, compared tospecific guidance. The results of the study suggest that knowledge integration guidance can serve studentslearning by encouraging them to diagnose problems with their responses and use evidence from the unit torevise their work. This study offers promising directions for the design of automated guidance that canencourage students to autonomously sort out their ideas and improve their science learning.ReferencesChase, J. A., & Houmanfar, R. (2009). The differential effects of elaborate guidance and basic guidance onstudent performance in a modified, personalized system of instruction course. Journal of BehavioralEducation, 18(3), 245-265.Chi, M. T., Siler, S. A., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., & Hausmann, R. G. (2001). Learning from human tutoring.Cognitive Science, 25(4), 471-533.Linn, M.C., & Eylon, B.S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology to promoteknowledge integration. New York: Routledge.Ruiz-Primo, M. A., & Furtak, E. M. (2007) Exploring teachers’ informal formative assessment practices andstudents’ understanding in the context of scientific inquiry. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,44(1), 57-84.Ryoo, K., & Linn, M. C. (2014). Designing guidance for interpreting dynamic visualizations: Generating versusreading explanations. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 51(2), 147-174.Shute, V. J. (2008). Focus on formative guidance. Review of Educational Research, 78(1), 153-189.	  ICLS2014 Proceedings1586© ISLS