A Study of Subjective Emotions, Self-Regulatory Processes, andLearning Gains: Are Pedagogical Agents Effective inFostering Learning?Nicholas Mudrick, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, nvmudric@ncsu.eduRoger Azevedo, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, razeved@ncsu.eduMichelle Taub, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, mtaub@ncsu.eduReza Feyzi Begnagh, McGill University, Montreal, QC, reza.feyzibegnagh@mail.mcgill.caFrançois Bouchet, Université Pierre et Marie Curie – LIP6, Paris, France, francois.bouchet@lip6.frAbstract: Though some research has focused on agent-direct affective processes, none hasexamined its impact on multi-agent learning environments and on the detection, modeling andfostering of self-regulated learning processes. 38 participants interacted with MetaTutor, anintelligent, multi-agent hypermedia-learning environment, to learn about the humancirculatory system. The log files, containing information about their overall performance, andself-report measures, assessing emotions and impressions towards agents obtained from theirinteractions with MetaTutor were used to assess the relationship between subjective agentdirected emotions, SRL processes and overall learning gains. Results indicate that agentdirected emotions were not significantly related to SRL strategy use, negative agent-directedemotions were significantly related to negative learning gains and negative agent-directedemotions for two specific agents (representative of two SRL pillars) were related to negativelearning gains. Implications for the design of multi-agent systems and the role of emotionsduring human-agent interactions and their relation to learning are discussed.IntroductionWhile some researchers have focused on agent-directed affective processes, none have examined the impact thatmulti-agent systems have on the detection, tracking, modeling and ultimately fostering of different selfregulated learning processes. Within the literature, there is an implicit assumption that the use of pedagogicalagents (PAs) is effective for learning and beneficial in fostering cognitive, affective, metacognitive andmotivational (CAMM) processes (Azevedo et al., 2013). However, none have asked the fundamental questionof whether or not PAs actually do facilitate the use of self-regulated learning (SRL) processes and impactoverall learning about complex topics. Because of the paucity of current research regarding this topic, this studyaims to address these issues through an examination of the associations between subjective emotions towardsagents, SRL processes, and overall learning gains.A recent review of the literature on PAs (Veletsianos & Russell, 2014) has revealed that research onPAs has been predominantly couched within socio-cognitive and cognitive-load theories, following theparadigm of computers as social actors (Kim & Baylor, 2006). A prevalent assertion within this paradigm is theview that PAs are able to aid learning with adaptive, supportive scaffolding and guidance of cognitive andmetacognitive skills (Biswas, Leelawong, Shwartz, Vye & the Teachable Agents Group at Vanderbilt, 2005).Researchers within this area purport the possibility that agents can provide adaptive, individualized scaffoldingand feedback to students and the basis for this idea rests in the success of one-to-one human-human tutoring(VanLehn, 2011). Another claim noted in the literature is the perceived ability of agents being able to emulatehuman behavior through realistic simulations (Sklar & Richards, 2010; Veletsianos & Russell, 2014). Theemployment of this strategy intends to facilitate natural communication between the PAs and the learners, andsome research evidence indicates that when agents are highly realistic, an overall emotional connection isincreased (Gulz, 2005; Woo, 2008). Furthermore, research has indicated that a sense of social interaction withthe agents can help with collaboration in social learning (Gulz, 2005; Kim & Baylor, 2006; Sklar & Richards,2010; Woo, 2008). Some studies indicate that engaging in unconstrained interaction with agents, learners treatthe agents as conversational partners (Graesser & McNamara, 2010) while other research indicates that theycould also lead to frustration and disappointment (De Angeli & Brahnam, 2008).Contemporary research also operates on the expectation that the presence of agents increases students’motivation (Kim & Baylor, 2006; Kim & Wei, 2011; Kramer & Bente, 2010; Lusk & Atkinson, 2007). Agentsare presumed to impact learners’ interest, attention, and provide students a medium between humans andcomputers through the provision of motivational and affective instructions (Baylor, 2011; Lusk & Atkinson,2007). Some have situated their examination into these processes within the persona effect, which claimslearners perceive their learning experience positively as a result of understanding computers to be social actors(Choi & Clark, 2006).ICLS 2014 Proceedings309© ISLSA universal assumption within the research exists that PAs improve learning and performance throughthe combination of the aforementioned factors. Agents can provide various affordances that lead to a deeperunderstanding of the presented material (Veletsianos & Russel, 2014). Most importantly, empirical research“has shown that simply adding pedagogical agents in a digital environment does not lead to better learningoutcomes,” (Veletsianos & Russel, 2014, p. 764). Much of the literature has shown no significant differencesbetween the presence and absence of agents on learning outcomes within an intelligent tutoring system (ITS)(Choi & Clark, 2006; Louwerse, Graesser, Lu, & Mitchell, 2005). While research that has found significance ofagent presence has been predominantly focused on the design of the agents themselves (Jackson & Graesser,2007; Veletsianos, 2007, 2010). All of the claims and assumptions about the effects of agents within ITSs arepredicated on the students’ interpretations of the agents themselves. However, the effects of these claims haveyet to be addressed in a comprehensive manner.We have begun to address some of these issues using an intelligent, hypermedia multi-agent learningenvironment called MetaTutor (Azevedo et al., 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013) that attempts to facilitate SRL instudents as they learn about complex science topics. SRL rests on the assumption that successful learning isbased in a learner’s ability to accurately monitor and regulate their cognitive, affective, metacognitive, andmotivational processes during learning (Zimmerman & Schunk, 2011). As such, it is a fundamental educationconstruct that has been shown to be effective in students’ ability to learn and study about various concepts(Azevedo, 2007; Winne & Perry, 2000; Zimmerman & Schunk, 2011). Research has shown that when studentsengage in SRL in the context of learning in computer based learning environments (CBLEs), they achieve highlearning gains (Azevedo et al., 2013; Greene & Azevedo, 2010).The impact of agent-directed self-regulation on learning gains with the MetaTutor environment hasalso been discussed. Within the learning environment, there are four PAs present who act to assist the student inlearning through the provision of appropriate scaffolding for each participant. Each of the three agentsspecializes in one of the three pillars of self-regulated learning; Sam the Strategizer facilitates the use oflearning strategies, Pam the Planner supports setting sub-goals and planning learning, and Mary the Monitorassists the learner monitor their overall learning. An additional agent, Gavin the Guide, functions to guide theparticipants through the learning environment as well as to prompt the self-report measures meant to assess theCAMM states of each participant. Several studies with the MetaTutor have revealed that these agents have asomewhat beneficial influence on learning and self-regulated learning processes (Azevedo et al., 2012, 2013).However, we also have not examined the extent of the impact of PAs on SRL and learning gains,especially within the context of affect and SRL processes. It is of fundamental importance to look at thestudents’ perceptions of the agents in relation to their performance. Their affective connotation towards theagents is a potential mediator of the agents’ effectiveness in the promotion of self-regulated learning processesand overall learning. As such, the present study assesses the following research questions; (1) Are students’feelings towards agents associated with the frequency of their use of SRL processes; (2) What is the extent ofthe association between feelings towards the agent and the students’ learning gains; (3) Are feelings towards thespecific agents of MetaTutor (who are representative of specific SRL processes and the environment itself)related to learning gains?MethodsParticipantsA subset of 38 (68% female) undergraduate participants was sampled from a large multi-site research project.The sample included undergraduate students from two Canadian universities in Montreal, Canada, and one fromChicago, USA. The participants’ ages ranged from 18 to 31 years old (M = 21.13, SD = 2.84) and were paid upto $40 dollars for completing the study.Research DesignThe data used in this paper comes from a larger database that involved an experimental study that examined theeffectiveness of pedagogical agent facilitation of SRL in STEM education. There were two conditions in thisstudy; a control condition and a prompt and feedback condition. In the control condition, participants were freeto navigate the system, read content pages, and deploy SRL processes without any scaffolding or feedback fromany of the pedagogical agents. In the prompt and feedback condition, participants were provided with promptsfor use of SRL processes, scaffolding from the PAs, and received adaptive feedback and content from the PAs.A t-test was conducted to determine if there existed a significant difference between conditions on proportionallearning gain. Results indicated the participants in the feedback condition (M = 31.09, SD = 30.14) did notsignificantly differ from those in the control condition (M = 40.24, SD = 35.92) in terms of proportional learninggain (t(78) = 1.22, p = .225). Because of this lack of statistical significant difference, only the members of theprompt and feedback condition were examined, as this was where the participants had the most interactions withthe agents.ICLS 2014 Proceedings310© ISLSMetaTutor: An intelligent, Hypermedia Multi-Agent SystemMetaTutor is an intelligent, multi-agent, hypermedia learning environment, which engages students in learningabout a complex science topic, the human circulatory system (Azevedo et al., 2012, 2013). In MetaTutor, thereare 38 pages of text and diagrams, all of which address different topics pertaining to the circulatory system.MetaTutor allows for the collection of a wide array of data, including log-file, eye-tracking, think-aloud data,electro-dermal activity (EDA), screen recordings of learner-system interactions, and facial expressions ofparticipants’ emotions. These multi-channel data were collected from students while they navigated the systemand learned about the circulatory system. This aim of this analysis is to discuss the impact of agent-directedemotions and on self-regulated learning and overall learning gains.Figure 1. The four pedagogical agents in MetaTutorFigure 2. A Screenshot of MetaTutorExperimental Set UpStudents were asked to participate in two sessions (the first, for one hour and the second, for three hours total)and were required to complete both sessions within three days of each other. During the first session,participants completed a consent form and were given an explanation of the study. Then participants beganinteracting with the environment, but only completing a series of self-report questionnaires that measureddemographic information and their emotions. Participants then completed a 25-item multiple choice pre-test toassess prior knowledge of the human circulatory system and were paid $5 for completing this session.In the second session, participants began interacting with the environment by first creating two out ofthe seven pre-determined sub-goals based on different aspects of the circulatory systems, which the pedagogicalagent, Pam the Planner was programmed to recognize and lead the participants to set. Once the two sub-goalswere established, Gavin the Guide presented multiple videos, which introduced the system, including all of theinterface elements and how to engage in self-regulated learning strategies. Pam the Planner was presented againand prompted students to provide anything they knew about the given sub-goal they were working on. Finally,students began to learn by using the system freely and were able to use self-regulated learning strategies (e.g.,taking notes, summarizing, etc.) and metacognitive monitoring and judgments (e.g., monitor their emergingunderstanding of the content, coordinate informational sources, etc.) at any point during the session by selectingwhich strategy they wished to from the SRL palette presented on the right of the screen. During learning withMetaTutor, a variety of different multi-channel data were collected, which included log-files, concurrent thinkaloud protocols, EDA, facial expressions, eye-tracking, and audio-recordings, about each participants’ selfregulated learning. Furthermore, the participants were also asked to provide responses to self-report measureslike the Agent Persona Inventory (API), which was presented at the end of the session after the post-test, and theEmotions, Interests, and Values Questionnaire (EIV) that was administered every 14 minutes until a total of 5EIVs were completed. At the end of the learning session, the participants were required to take a 25-item multichoice post-test over the content presented during the session. The participant was then paid up to $40 for theircompletion of the study.Data Sources: Learning Outcomes, Self-Report Measures, and SRL BehaviorsTwo equivalent 25-item multiple choice pretests and posttests developed by Azevedo and colleagues (Azevedoet al., 2010) were used to assess participants’ learning during the one-hour learning session with MetaTutor. Asample item was: “What is the effect of the clotting process?” Each item was scored as 0 or 1 depending on theaccuracy of the answer (range for pretest and posttest was 0-25, respectively). Proportional learning gains werecalculated using Witherspoon, D’Mello, and Azevedo’s (2008) formula determine the amount of learning frompretest to posttest.ICLS 2014 Proceedings311© ISLSTwo self-report measures were administered during the second session with MetaTutor, including theEIV and the API. The EIV consists of 20 questions that measure students’ emotions, interests and values at agiven time and is based Pekrun’s (2011) model of academic achievement emotions. The responses are set on aLikert scale ranging from 1-5, where 1 is strongly disagree and 5 is strongly agree. A sample item was “Rightnow I feel happiness”. The range of scores for the EIV is 20-100.The objective of the API is to get the student to think about his or her interaction as a whole with eachof the four agents. There are 22 questions that assess emotional states, with the 23rd a free response questionasking what the agents could do differently to help. The student is asked to indicate the frequency with whicheach agent made them feel the state expressed in the question on a Likert scale of 1 to 5, where 1 indicatednever and 5 indicated always. A sample item was “Sam made me feel angry”, and this was repeated across theother three agents. The range of scores for the API is 88-440.Data about learners’ frequency of use of SRL processes during learning were extracted from the logfiles, which captured the students’ interactions with the MetaTutor environment. The extracted data consisted ofthe SRL strategies students engaged in, as well as their frequency of occurrence throughout the entire learningsession. This was based on students’ clicking on an SRL palette that was part of the system’s interface. Asample button on the SRL palette was “Evaluate how well I already know this content”.Data AnalysisFor this study, the data from API and EIV measures were combined into three categories, positive emotions,negative emotions and neutral. For the EIV, the positive emotions category included questions that asked “Rightnow I feel”: happy, enjoyment, hope, pride, curiosity, eureka and surprise. The negative emotions categoryincluded a combination of “Right now I feel”: anger, frustration, anxiety, fear, shame, hopelessness, boredom,contempt, disgust, confusion and sadness. The neutral category was the data collected from the question “Rightnow I feel neutral.” Because the EIV was prompted a total of 5 times throughout the learning session, ratingsdata from each EIV administration for each respective student was combined to create a composite measure foroverall affect when engaging in the MetaTutor learning environment.The data collected from the API were combined in a similar manner to the EIV. Participants wereasked, for each agent, how the agents made the participants feel. For example, “Sam made me feel happy.” Apositive emotions score for each agent was then combined, for the same emotions as combined for the EIV.Then, the negative emotions composite for each agent was created. The neutral composite was data from themeasure assessing the extent to which all four agents “made me feel neutral.” Finally, a compound measure wascreated for each emotion category. The positive emotions from each agent were combined into a total positiveemotions score. The same process was done for the negative and neutral emotion categories.Finally, the frequencies of cognitive and metacognitive processes for each participant were created intoa total SRL category, which was a combination of measures that assessed the frequencies of judgments oflearning, content evaluations, feelings of knowing, monitoring progress towards goals, prior knowledgeactivation, planning, taking notes, summarizing and inferring.ResultsResearch Question 1: Are Students’ Feelings towards Agents Associated with the Frequencyof Their Use of SRL Processes?Correlations were conducted to measure the association between proportional learning gains and the SRLcomposite scores. Table 1 demonstrates that the total composite score for SRL (r = .10, p = .536) was notsignificantly associated with proportional learning gain. The results tend to reveal that proportional learning andSRL strategy frequency were not significantly associated within this analysis. To further explain thisassociation, the relation between the SRL composite and agent-directed emotions was then examined. Resultsindicated that positive agent-directed emotions (r = .29, p = .150), negative agent-directed emotions (r = .18, p =.377) and the neutral agent-directed emotion (r = .27, p = .096) were not significantly related to the SRLcomposite scores (see Table 2). Overall, this suggests that learners’ agent-directed emotions were notsignificantly related to SRL frequency.Table 1: Correlations between frequencies of SRL strategies and proportional learning gainProportional Learning GainSRL FrequenciesProportional Learning Gain--.104SRL Frequencies.104---ICLS 2014 Proceedings312© ISLSTable 2: Correlations between frequencies of SRL processes and agent-directed emotionsSRL FrequenciesAgent-DirectedAgent-DirectedPositive EmotionsNegative EmotionsSRL Frequencies--Agent-DirectedPositive EmotionsAgent-DirectedNegative EmotionsAgent-DirectedNeutral EmotionAgent-DirectedNeutral Emotion.238---.147-.025----.221.274.012-.221---Research Question 2: What is the Extent of the Association between Feelings towards theAgent and the Students’ Learning Gains?Then, associations between agent-directed emotions and proportional learning gain were examined (see Table3). The correlations revealed a significant, negative relationship between proportional learning gain andnegative agent-directed emotions (r = -.38, p = .023), while the associations between positive and neutral agentdirected emotions (r = -.08, p = .624; r = .07, p = .640) remained non-significant. The more negative emotionslearners experienced directed towards the agents, the worse their overall performance from pretest to posttest.Table 3: Correlations between agent-directed emotions and proportional learning gainProportionalAgent-DirectedAgent-DirectedLearning GainPositive EmotionsNegative EmotionsProportional--Learning GainAgent-Directed-.082--Positive EmotionsAgent-Directed-.367*-.025--Negative EmotionsAgent-Directed.078.012-.221Neutral Emotion* p < .05 level.Agent-DirectedNeutral Emotion---Research Question 3: Are Feelings towards the Specific Agents of MetaTutor (Who AreRepresentative of Specific SRL Processes and the Environment Itself) Related to LearningGains?Because the relationship between negative agent-directed emotions was statistically significant, specific agentdirected negative emotions were then examined to determine whether or not any specific agent contributed tothe negative relationship found. Within the four agents, the emotions towards two were found to be significantlyand negatively associated with proportional learning gains. More specifically, results revealed negative directedemotions were found to be significant and negatively related to proportional learning gain for the male agents,Gavin (r = -.34, p = .036) and Sam (r = -.38, p = .018). While negative directed emotions towards the femaleagents, Pam and Mary (r = -.24, p = .15; r = -.27, p = .12) were not significantly related to proportional learninggains. These results suggest that negative emotions directed towards Gavin and Sam were associated withnegative proportional learning gains.Table 4: Correlations between specific agents directed emotions and proportional learning gainSam-DirectedPam-DirectedGavin-DirectedMary-DirectedProportionalNegativeNegativeNegativeNegativeLearning GainEmotionsEmotionsEmotionsEmotionsProportional--Learning GainSam-DirectedNegative-.383*--EmotionsPam-DirectedNegative-.240.721**--EmotionsGavin-Directed-.342*.623**.597**--.NegativeICLS 2014 Proceedings313© ISLSEmotionsMary-DirectedNegativeEmotions** p < .01 level.* p < .05 level.-.256.519**.526*.593**---DiscussionThis study examined the often-neglected area of PAs, the emotions they induce in learners and their impact onSRL strategy use during complex learning with intelligent, multi-agent adaptive hypermedia systems. Theresults obtained from this study illustrate the potential impact that subjective feelings towards PAs have onstudents’ learning gains within a multi-agent, adaptive hypermedia-learning environment. The analyses revealedthat students’ agent-directed emotions, at least negative ones, are associated with performance of SRL strategiesand learning gains on macro, all agents considered, and micro, accounting for specific agents, levels.The initial research question assessed the extent of the relationship between students’ subjectivefeelings towards the PAs of the MetaTutor learning environment and SRL strategy frequency throughout theirinteraction within the environment. The correlation between SRL frequency and proportional learning gainindicated that, within this analysis, the two were unrelated. An examination was then conducted to assesswhether an association between agent-directed emotions and SRL strategy frequency existed. No significantrelationship was obtained. This result has tremendous implications for the incorporation of agents withinCBLEs. One of the fundamental assumptions behind the inclusion of agents within CBLEs is that the PAs arehelpful in fostering student SRL processes. However, results obtained from this analysis indicate thisassumption more ambiguous than previously considered. This finding is bothersome since pedagogical agentsare designed and embedded in technology systems based on the fundamental premise that learners’ positivefeelings towards them should be engaging, which should have led to a significant correlation between theirfeeling and the use of SRL processes and learning gains.A second correlation analysis was conducted to determine whether a relationship existed between thestudents’ emotions towards the agents were related to their proportional learning gains. The analysis indicated asignificant, negative association between proportional learning gains and agent-directed emotions; the morenegative the students’ emotions towards the agents, the worse their proportional learning gain. This isunderstandable considering the agents’ purpose themselves. As each agent is responsible for specific SRLstrategies (i.e., planning, metacognitive monitoring, learning strategies), and negative emotions towards themcould possibly interfere with learners inclination and compliance to enact the SRL strategies they are trying topromote the student to employ. If the students ignore the agents’ SRL strategy suggestions, their performanceand overall learning would be negatively affected. Furthermore, the presence of the agents themselves couldaccount for this negative relationship between learning gain and negative, agent-directed emotions. Students’negative subjective feelings towards the agents could reflect their disdain for the agents’ presence themselves,and this disdain could possibly impact their overall performance both through SRL strategy use and learninggain.The results from third research question indicated similar results from those presented above. Negativeemotions directed towards specific agents were examined in relation to proportional learning gain to determineif feelings towards any specific agent could account for this effect. Results indicated that negative emotionsdirected towards two of the agents, Gavin the Guide and Sam the Strategizer were negatively related toproportional learning gains. Contextualizing this finding within the framework of the MetaTutor learningenvironment explains these associations. Gavin is responsible for the provision of the self-report measuresthroughout the learning session. His presence is abrupt and the self-report measures he presents the students tofill-out during the session may detract from their attention to the ongoing learning about the human circulatorysystem. As such, specific negative feelings towards Gavin himself could be indicative of the student perceivinghis presence as ultimately distracting, potentially negatively impacting performance and learning gain. Specificnegative feelings towards Sam the Strategizer could be interpreted in line with his intended purpose withinMetaTutor as well. Sam instructs students to perform specific SRL strategies, such as taking notes andsummarizing. Once prompted by Sam, the student is required to use the strategies immediately prior tocontinuing to read and inspect additional hypermedia content about the body system. Due to learners’ potentialinability to comprehend or enact the effective learning strategy, they can go through many iterations ofsummarization before being allowed to resume interacting with the hypermedia material. As such, negativeemotions directed at Sam could reflect a level of frustration and anger towards Sam that could divert students’attention from the task at hand and spiral into a cycle of negative emotions that require emotion regulation inorder to deal with Sam’s expectation of learner compliance. Furthermore, the negative feelings could also beindicative of the student not wanting to perform these SRL strategies, which, by not performing wouldultimately negatively impact their overall learning gain. It is of interest to note that only the male agents were ofICLS 2014 Proceedings314© ISLSsignificance within the relationship between subjective feelings towards agents and learning gain. This suggeststhe operation of a potential gender bias on students’ perceptions towards the agents as a whole.Overall, this study provides several questions for future research. Theoretically, this study calls for anamalgamation of current models of self-regulated learning (e.g., Winne & Hadwin, 1998; Schunk &Zimmerman, 2011) and emerging models of externally-regulated learning (e.g., Hadwin et al., 2011) toincorporate social, cognitive, metacognitive, and affective mechanisms to account for the complex humanartificial agents’ interactions during complex learning with pedagogical agents. Understanding the complexinteractions between multiple pedagogical agents and learners is key to designing effective agents that are notonly sensitive to students learning needs but also monitor and regulate their own behaviors (e.g., Samrecognizes a student’s frustration when it asks the learner to makes inference and therefore does not repeatedlyask the learner to make inferences) so as to not negatively impact students’ ability to monitor and regulate theirlearning and overall performance.Methodologically, this study raises several questions about the measurement of self-regulatoryprocesses and analytical approaches used to study complex agent-learner interactions. First, this study calls forthe temporal alignment and convergence of multi-channel data (Azevedo et al., 2013). For example, eyetracking data could be employed to determine the extent to which engaging with one of the four PAs results inspecific emotions (e.g., frustration vs. confusion vs. neutral) and measure a tri-state affective cluster for eachagent. More specifically, micro-level analyses can be conducted to determine affective transition state beforeinteraction with an agent, during an interaction with an agent, and following the interaction with the agent. Thistype of data is key to understand the dynamics of emotion generation and regulation and provide fine-graineddata on the impact of agents on learners’ emotions and learning. Similarly, EDA data could augment eyetracking data to determine physiological-emotional correspondents while interacting with agents.In terms of analytical approaches, this study used molar-level aggregation of learning outcomes andself-report measures. A major challenge for the interdisciplinary field of learning sciences remains thedevelopment and testing of more sophisticated analytical methods that can be used to describe the underlyingphenomena (e.g., impact of agents’ presence on the fluctuation of students’ affective states during contextuallybound episodes of learning). In addition, the overreliance on self-report measures as the dominant measure ofaffective and motivational processes must be augmented with processes-oriented measures of emotions. Also,clusters across self-report scales or a trifurcation of positive, negative and neutral emotions could be explored inaddition to specific learning centered emotions themselves.The implications for these findings are staggering and have been left largely unexplained bycontemporary research. Assessing whether PAs within CBLEs are effective in what they are designed to do, ona larger scale within different learning environments, has yet to be asked. Contemporary research rests on theassumption that PAs are effective in facilitating the use of SRL strategies, yet the results presented here are indirect conflict with that expectation. Furthermore, the inclusion of PAs is presumed to increase performance andoverall learning, while the outcomes of this paper indicate a negative relationship. As these results suggest,including agents for the sake of including agents could potentially be deleterious to students’ overall learning.ReferencesAzevedo, R. (2007). Understanding the complex nature of self-regulatory processes in learning with computerbased learning environments: an introduction. Metacognition and Learning, 2, 57-65.Azevedo, R. (2009). Theoretical, methodological, and analytical challenges in the research on metacognitionand self-regulation: A commentary. Metacognition & Learning, 4(1), 87–95.Azevedo, R., Feyzi-Behnagh, R., Duffy, M., Harley, J., & Trevors, G. (2012). Metacognition and self-regulatedlearning in student-centered learning environments. In D. Jonassen and S. Land (Eds), Theoreticalfoundations of learning environments. NY: Routledge.Azevedo, R., Harley, J., Trevors, G., Duffy, M., Feyzi-Behnagh, R., Bouchet, F., & Landis, R. S. (2013). Usingtrace data to examine the complex roles of cognitive, metacognitive, and emotional self-regulatoryprocesses during learning with multi-agents systems. In R. Azevedo & V. Aleven (Eds.). Internationalhandbook of metacognition and learning technologies. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Springer.Azevedo, R., Johnson, A., Chauncey, A., & Burkett, C. (2010). Self-regulated learning with MetaTutor:Advancing the science of learning with MetaCognitive tools. In M. S. Khine and I. M. Saleh (Eds.).New science of learning: Computers, cognition, and collaboration in education, 225-247. Heidelberg:Springer.Baylor, A. L. (2011). The design of motivational agents and avatars. Educational Technology Research andDevelopment, 59(2), 291-300.Biswas, G., Leelawong, K., Schwartz, D., Vye, N., & The Teachable Agents Group at Vanderbilt. 2005.Learning by teaching: A new agent paradigm for educational software. Applied Artificial Intelligence,19, 363-392.ICLS 2014 Proceedings315© ISLSChoi, S., & Clark, R. (2006). Cognitive and affective benefits of an animated pedagogical agent for learningEnglish as a second language. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 34(4), 441-466.De Angeli, A. & Branham, S. (2008), I hate you! Disinhibition with virtual partners. Interacting withComputers, 20(3), 302-310.Graesser, A., & MacNamara, D. (2010). Self-regulated learning in learning environments with pedagogicalagents that interact in natural language. Educational Psychologist, 45(4), 234-244.Greene, J., & Azevedo, R. (2010). Theoretical, conceptual, and methodological issues in the measurement ofcognitive and metacognitive processes during learning with computer-based learning environments.Educational Psychologist, 45(4), 203-209.Hadwin, A. F., Järvelä, S., & Miller, M. (2011). Self-regulated, co-regulated, and socially shared regulation oflearning. In B. J. Zimmerman & D. H. Schunk (Eds.). Handbook of self-regulation of learning andperformance, 65-84. NY: Routledge,Pekrun, R., Goetz, T., Frenzel, A., Barchfeld, P., & Pery, R. (2011). Measuring emotions in students’ learningand performance: The Achievement Emotions Questionnaire (AEQ). ContemporaryEducationalPsychology, 36, 36-48.Gulz, A. (2005). Social enrichment by virtual characters-Differential benefits. Journal of Computer AssistedLearning, 21, 405-418.Jackson, G. T. , & Graesser, A. C. (2007). Content matters: An investigation of feedback categories within anITS. In R. Luckin, K. Koedinger, & J. Greer (Eds.), Artificial intelligence in education: Buildingtechnology rich learning contexts that work. Amsterdam: IOS Press.Kim, Y., & Baylor, A. (2006). A socio-cognitive framework for pedagogical agents as learning companions.Educational Technology Research and Development, 54(6), 569-596.Kim, Y., & Wei, Q. (2011). The impact of learner attributes and learner choice in an agent-based environment.Computers in Education, 56, 505-514.Kramer, N. C., & Bente, G. (2010). Personalize e-learning: The social effects of pedagogical agents.Educational Psychology Review, 22, 71-87.Louwerse, M. M., Graesser, A. C., Lu, S., & Mitchell, H. H. (2005). Social cues in animated conversationalagents. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19(6), 693-704.Lusk, M.,& Atkinson, R. (2007). Animated pedagogical agents: Does their degree of embodiment impactlearning from static or animated worked examples? Applied Cognitive Psychology, 21, 747-764.Sklar, E., & Richards, D. (2010). Agent-based systems for human learners. The Knowledge Engineering Review,25(2), 111-135.VanLehn, K. (2011). The relative effectiveness of human tutoring, intelligent tutoring systems, and othertutoring systems. Educational Psychologist, 46(4), 197-221.Veletsianos, G. (2007). Cognitive and affective benefits of an animated pedagogical agent: Consideringcontextual relevance and aesthetics. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 36(4), 373-377.Veletsianos, G. (2010). Contextually relevant pedagogical agents: Visual appearance, stereotypes, and firstimpressions and their impact on learning. Computers in Education, 55(2), 576-585.Veletsianos, G., & Russell, S. R. (2014). Pedagogical agents. In J. M. Spencer, M. D. Merrill, J. Elen, & M. J.Bishop (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and Technology (pp. 759-769).New Yotk, NY: Springer.Woo, H. L. (2008). Designing multimedia learning environments using animated pedagogical agents: Factorsand issues. Journal Computer Assisted Learning, 25, 203-218.Winne, P. H. , & Hadwin, A.F. (1998). Studying as self-regulated learning. In D.J. Hacker, J. Dunlosky, & A.Graesser (Eds.), Metacognition in educational theory and practice (pp. 277-304). Hillsdale, NJ:Erlbaum.Winne, P. H., & Perry, N. E. (2000). Measuring self-regulated learning. In M. Boekaerts, P. Pintrich, & M.Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 531-566). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.Zimmerman, B. & Schunk, D. (Eds.) (2011). Handbook of self-regulation of learning and performance. NewYork: Routledge.Witherspoon, A., Azevedo, R., & D’Mello, S. (2008). The dynamics of self-regulatory processes within selfand externally-regulated learning episodes. In B. Woolf, E. Aimeur, R. Nkambou, & S. Lajoie (Eds.),Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems: Lecture Notes inComputer Science (LNCS 5091) (pp. 260–269). Berlin: SpringerAcknowledgementsThe research presented in this chapter has been supported by funding from the National Science Foundation(DRL 1008282), the Institute of Educational Sciences (R305A120186), the Social Sciences and HumanitiesResearch Council of Canada (430–2011–0170 and 890–2012–0138), the Canadian Foundation for Innovation,and the Canada Research Chairs program awarded to the second author.ICLS 2014 Proceedings316© ISLS