Exposing and Assessing Learners’ Epistemic ThinkingMaggie Renken, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, mrenken@gsu.eduClark Chinn, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, clark.chinn@gse.rutgers.eduPenelope Vargas, Clemson University, Clemson, SC, pvargas@clemson.eduWilliam Sandoval, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, sandoval@gseis.ucla.eduAbstract: The conceptualization of students’ personal epistemologies has been criticized forbeing inconsistently defined, overly simplistic, and inappropriately decontextualized. Broadly,epistemic cognition encompasses explicit thoughts about the nature of knowledge as well asreasoning processes related to knowledge claims and justifications. Learning scientists areinvested in understanding epistemic cognition in a variety of authentic settings, but it ischallenging to analyze data in meaningful epistemic categories. Participants in this workshopwill briefly discuss varied conceptualizations of epistemic cognition and will focus on how toapply these conceptualizations to empirical research. We will explore empirical methods thatextend beyond traditional interview and questionnaire methods to better expose authentic,ongoing epistemic thinking. Presentations and discussions will explore means of revealingepistemic thinking in classrooms and other settings and methods of analyzing data fromlearners’ interactions and discourse. A primary goal of the workshop is to foster collaborative,interdisciplinary future work.Theoretical FrameworkEpistemic cognition broadly refers to an array of understanding, practices, and motivations related to topics suchas what counts as knowledge and how knowledge claims are justified. Included in this array are the practicesand processes for achieving knowledge. As such, epistemic cognition encompasses both explicit beliefs as wellas situated reasoning practices. Recent work by learning scientists, as well as others, has challenged overlysimplistic conceptualizations of epistemic cognition (c.f., Chinn, Buckland, & Samarapungavan, 2011). Thesechallenges have emphasized the situated nature of epistemic cognition and have severely criticized some of themost common methods of measuring epistemic cognition, such as questionnaires. At the same time, recent workhas stressed and begun to reveal evidence for the role of epistemic cognition in reasoning skills important forlearning, education, and civic responsibility (e.g., Bagley & Shaffer, 2009; Schommer‐Aikins & Easter, 2006).A primary challenge for researchers investigating epistemic cognition is that its definitions and thespecification of its key components vary widely. On one hand, this means that although emerging trends may besimilar across studies, variations in how epistemic cognition is conceputalized create an obstacle for integrativereviews of the relevant literatures (Maggioni & Parkinson, 2008). Differences in terminology and operationaldefinitions result both in a rich array of ideas for analyzing epistemic cognition and in difficulties making senseof how the diverse approaches tie together. A central goal of this workshop is not only to share ideas about howto conceptualize epistemic cogntion but to share and discuss how these conceptualizations play out in theanalysis of data. We frame the workshop in terms of epistemic cognition, emphasizing students’ explicitthoughts and beliefs as well as their reasoning processes and motivations relevant to the nature of knowledgeand knowing.Most research on students’ personal epistemologies has relied on quantitative data from questionnairesand surveys. This methodological approach is most likely responsible for the widespread characterization ofindividuals’ epistemologies in terms of a naive/sophisticated dichotomy across prescribed, domain-generaldimensions such as certainty, structure, and source of knowledge (Greene, Azevedo, & Torney-Purta, 2008;Maggioni & Parkinson, 2008; Mason, Ariasi, & Boldrin, 2011). One approach to correcting simplisticconceptualizations has extended research beyond domain-general individual beliefs about the nature ofknowledge to include survey measures that consider domain-specific individual epistemologies (see Stahl &Bromme, 2007; Maggioni, VanSledright, & Alexander, 2009), epistemic practices (see Hennessey, Murphy, &Kulikowich, 2013) and motivations (see DeBacker & Crowson, 2008). However, more qualitative approaches,including student interviews and think alouds, have revealed that epistemic cognition is more complex, nuanced,and context-dependent than questionnaire-based research has indicated (see Alexander, Winters, Loughlin, &Grossnickle, 2012; Ferguson, Bråten, & Strømsø, 2012; Gottlieb, 2007; Gottlieb & Wineburg, 2012). Researchsituated in inquiry environments has shown further that students’ specific epistemic practices and their ideasabout these specific epistemic practices are much more sophisticated than what has been revealed byquestionnaire-based research and even interview research (Herrenkohl & Cornelius, 2013; Pluta, Chinn, &Duncan, 2011). It is evident that epistemic cognition is not only situated within a particular domain, ordiscipline. Instead, recent studies suggest it is situated within task and context as well. For example, in a reviewICLS 2014 Proceedings1686© ISLSof studies of teachers’ epistemologies, Maggioni and Parkinson (2008) found contextual constraints with regardto curricular and institutional factors, including student contribution to classroom discourse.RationaleResearch aimed at learners’ knowledge acquisition and reasoning must investigate cognitive, metacognitive, andepistemic processes. Extensive research in the scientific reasoning literature has examined cognitivemechanisms related to skills such as hypothesis generation and experimental design in science and sourceevaluation in history (for review see Zimmerman, 2007; Wineburg, 1991). Metacognitive processes such ashypothesis revision, explanation, and argumentation also have been studied extensively with regard to studentlearning, particularly in science and math domains (Kuhn, 2005). Coherent, interdisciplinary study of epistemiccognition, however, is only beginning to emerge. As mentioned above, traditional approaches for studyingstudent epistemology have relied on interviews and questionnaires, which have been severely criticized asinadequate methods. More recent emphasis on learners’ epistemic cognition and related practices calls forinvestigating situated facets of epistemic cognition and its progression in authentic settings, such as ongoinginquiry environments. We aim, with this workshop, to bring consideration of means of exposing and analyzinglearners’ epistemic thinking in such environments to the forefront of this area of inquiry. We expect this framingto be particularly relevant for considering the relation among facets of epistemic thought and between epistemicprocesses and meaningful, effective instruction.The study of learners’ epistemic cognition is challenging and the problems of measuring epistemiccognition in its many facets continue to vex the field. Specific challenges create a need for better ways ofmodeling practical modes of epistemic cognition (Greene, Torney-Purta, & Azevedo, 2010). For instance, weneed better ways of analyzing practices (such as practices exhibited in oral discourse) in terms of epistemiccategories (Chinn, Buckland, & Samarapungavan, 2011). It is also the case that developmental trajectories ofepistemic cognition are unclear in the current literature base. This calls for better ways of modeling students’epistemic cognition progressions within and outside of instructional contexts. To address the challenges raisedhere, we see as a vital first step the convening of researchers engaged in work that involves novel approaches toexposing epistemic thinking beyond traditional questionnaire and interview methods.Beyond novel approaches to exposing epistemic cognition, challenges must be addressed throughrelevant assessment and analysis. The Exposing and Assessing Learners’ Epistemic Thinking workshop allowsfor sharing recent and ongoing attempts at uncovering learners’ epistemic and related thinking processes and fordiscussing next steps in data analysis and future study design. Exploring means of assessing students’ thinking istimely as practitioners and researchers consider how to align assessment with the newly released Common Coreand Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). NGSS, in particular, emphasize the integration of studentknowledge and practices requiring not only summative, but formative assessment aimed at revealing howstudents are thinking (National Research Council, 2013). As such, the National Research Council (2013) hascalled directly for new modes of assessing student thinking and assessing the development of students’understanding of knowledge and associated practices. We expect a discussion of means for assessing learners’epistemic thinking to be highly relevant to this call.GoalsIn order to address the challenges outlined here, the first goal of the workshop is to promote dialoguesurrounding design research of epistemic cognition’s nature and development. This goal counters the currenttrend for segmented, disciplinary study of student epistemologies by targeting an interdisciplinary focus ondesign research. This goal also emphasizes the situated nature of epistemic cognition, especially in authenticsettings. We expect such focus is best for advancing our understanding and modeling of epistemic cognitionbeyond prior discrepant conceptualizations. The second goal of the workshop is to explore workshopparticipants’ conceptualizations of the measurement of epistemic cognition. Within this goal, strong emphasiswill be placed on the practical dimensions of epistemic cognition in authentic settings such as the classroom.Importantly, emphasis will not necessarily be limited to dimensions of epistemic cognition that students are ableto access and reveal metacognitively. Third, we aim for the workshop to foster discussion of means ofanalyzing, interpreting, and expanding on existing data. The fourth and final goal of the workshop is to provideopportunities to develop collaborative work across disciplinary lines. Epistemic cognition has been studiedthrough various theoretical lenses – each of which provides a different perspective on the construct. Overall, weaim to converge these perspectives with a specific focus on research design and data analysis in this area.Discussion will aim at fostering collaborative products such as a special topics issue, for example on proposalsfor exposing epistemic thinking and analyzing data, review papers, or future studies.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1687© ISLSConnections to the Conference ThemeThe ICLS 2014 theme of “Learning and Becoming in Practice” highlights the need to develop an understandingof real learning and thinking practices. This workshop seeks to move the study of epistemic cognition fromlargely decontextualized questionnaires and interviews to settings of rich, authentic inquiry practices. Followinglong standing philosophical and theoretical consideration of epistemic cognition, it is important to beginexploring possibilities regarding the practical applications of this research -- that is, to determine viableapproaches for assessing epistemic cognition, its progression within the individual, its impact on learning, andthe role of authentic instructional interventions in promoting its development. By encouraging interdisciplinaryparticipation, we echo the ICLS theme’s recognition that the community of scholars represents a myriad ofstances, all with valuable potential to contribute to the advancement of this line of research.Workshop Agenda: Expected Contributions and OutcomesWorkshop participants will be invited to submit abstracts in order to present their work. Abstracts submitted forworkshop acceptance will be required to include recent or ongoing considerations of epistemic cognition orrelated reasoning processes. Relevant related reasoning processes may include those such as evidence or sourceevaluation, argumentation skills, or the psychology of understanding. Emphasis will be placed on research thatinvolves design-based methods of revealing epistemic thinking in the practice of inquiry. In the event moreabstracts are received than can be accommodated, preference will be given to presentations of collected data.We expect this will best facilitate discussions of practical methods of data analysis as well as methods foreliciting students’ epistemic cognition. Accepted abstracts and examples of measures, tasks, transcripts, andcoding schemes will be posted by facilitators on a wiki page prior to the workshop. The proposed full dayworkshop will include a fire hose presentation session, whole group discussion, and discussions in smaller“breakout” groups that focus on specific topic strands.Fire hose presentations will provide the opportunity for participants to present their perspectives withregard to methodology for exposing epistemic thinking. Each presenter will take three minutes to describe his orher current conceptualization of epistemic cognition framed around recent or ongoing methods of assessmentand analysis. Fire hose presentations will promote the cross-disciplinary work espoused by our workshop.Following fire hose presentations, workshop facilitators will moderate a whole group discussion structuredaccording to our primary goals. Having whole group discussion immediately after fire hose presentations willgive participants an opportunity to respond to peers’ work, as well as to engage in further discourse about thechallenges that may arise as epistemic cognition is considered. The discussions will focus on (1) how toconceptualize epistemic cognition, (2) how to expose and capture epistemic cognition in interactiveenvironments, (3) how to analyze data in terms of epistemic categories, and (4) important but neglected areas ofresearch. Ideas generated during discussion will be captured on large sticky notes for later compilation anddistribution to small groups. A main goal of this task is to develop a broad range of ideas that merit furtherexploration and to organize these ideas around challenges specifically related to the workshop and broader ICLSconference theme. Whole group discussion will generate questions and issues to be discussed further in specifictopic strand discussions.Small group discussions will follow whole group discussion. Although facilitators may have ideas forspecific topic strands after reviewing the research proposals submitted by workshop applicants, topics willlargely emerge in whole group discussion. As an example, a topic strand might address coding schemes foranalyzing revealed student thinking. We aim to recruit interdisciplinary researchers and will also encouragetopic strands that are representative of these varied perspectives. We aim to have 4-6 distinct topic strands.Small groups will be charged with deciding on an appropriate resulting product (e.g., special topics issue, orreview paper) and devising a plan for completing the product. Following the breakout discussions, each groupwill be given an opportunity to present an overview of their discussions and conclusions. We will close withquestions and comments following small group presentations and remarks.Workshop OrganizersMaggie Renken is Assistant Professor in the College of Education at Georgia State University. Her researchexplores how science knowledge is acquired, considering the role and development of mechanisms likeepistemic cognition. Her study of hands-on experimentation and computer-simulated experiences in students’physics knowledge is published in Learning and Instruction. Work developing a measure of psychologyspecific epistemological beliefs is in press in Teaching of Psychology.Clark Chinn is Professor in the Graduate School of Education at Rutgers University. His research focuses onepistemic cognition, argumentation, and promoting growth in reasoning through model-based inquiry. Drawingon philosophical work, he and his colleagues recently argued for a substantive reconceptualization of epistemicICLS 2014 Proceedings1688© ISLScognition in a 2011 paper in Educational Psychologist. He is currently working on developing epistemic codingschemes to understand students’ interactions in inquiry classrooms.Penelope Vargas is Assistant Professor in the Eugene T. Moore School of Education at Clemson University.Her research focuses on the relationships between epistemic beliefs and motivations, and justification processesin different domains. Her work on epistemic cognition and making sense of evidence in history will appear inthe Journal of Social Studies Research in 2014. She is currently working on investigating the connectionsbetween epistemic cognition and researcher identity in engineering and science students.William Sandoval is Associate Professor in the Graduate School of Education & Information Studies at UCLA.He is interested in the development of epistemic cognition especially in relation to people’s understanding andengagement with science. He has written on the topic in Science Education and Journal of the LearningSciences, and the 2012 ICLS proceedings, and is currently co-editing the first ever Handbook on EpistemicCognition to be published by Routledge.ReferencesAlexander, P. A., Winters, F. I., Loughlin, S. M., & Grossnickle, E. M. (2012). Students’ conceptions ofknowledge,information,andtruth.LearningandInstruction,22(1),1–15.doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2011.05.004Bagley, E., & Shaffer, D. W. (2009). When People Get in the Way: Promoting Civic Thinking ThroughEpistemic Gameplay. International Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations, 1(1), 36–52. doi:10.4018/jgcms.2009010103Chinn, C. A., Buckland, L. A., & Samarapungavan, A. (2011). Expanding the Dimensions of EpistemicCognition: Arguments From Philosophy and Psychology. Educational Psychologist, 46(3), 141–167.doi:10.1080/00461520.2011.587722Chinn, C. A., Rinehart, R. W., & Buckland, L. A. (in press). Epistemic cognition and evaluating information:Applying the AIR model of epistemic cognition. In D. Rapp and J. Braasch (Eds.), Processinginaccurate information. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.DeBacker, T. K., & Crowson, H. M. (2008). Measuring need for closure in classroom learners. ContemporaryEducational Psychology, 33(4), 711-732. doi: 10.1016/j.cedpsych.2007.06.001Ferguson, L. E., Bråten, I., & Strømsø, H. I. (2012). Epistemic cognition when students read multiple documentscontaining conﬂicting scientiﬁc evidence: A think-aloud study. Learning and Cognition. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2011.08.002Gottlieb, E. (2007). Learning how to believe: Epistemic development in cultural context. Journal of the LearningSciences, 16, 5-35.Gottlieb, E., & Wineburg, S. (2012). Between veritas and communitas: Epistemic switching in the reading ofacademic and sacred history. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21, 84-129. doi:10.1080/10508406.2011.582376Greene, J. A., Azevedo, R., & Torney-Purta, J. (2008). Modeling Epistemic and Ontological Cognition:Philosophical Perspectives and Methodological Directions. Educational Psychologist, 43(3), 142–160.doi:10.1080/00461520802178458Greene, J. A., Torney-Purta, J., & Azevedo, R. (2010). Empirical evidence regarding relations among a modelof epistemic and ontological cognition, academic performance, and educational level. Journal ofEducational Psychology, 102(1), 234–255. doi:10.1037/a0017998Greene, J. A., & Yu, S. B. (2013). Modeling and measuring epistemic cognition: A qualitative re-investigation.Contemporary Educational Psychology, 39, 12-28.Hennessey, M. N., Murphy, P. K., & Kulikowich, J. M. (2013). Investigating teachers’ beliefs about the utilityof epistemic practices: a pilot study of a new assessment. Instructional Science, 41, 499-519. doi:10.1007/s11251-012-9241-6Herrenkohl, L. R., & Cornelius, L. (2013). Investigating Elementary Students’ Scientific and HistoricalArgumentation. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 22(3), 413–461. doi:10.1080/10508406.2013.799475Kuhn, D. (2005). Education for thinking. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Maggioni, L., & Parkinson, M. M. (2008). The Role of Teacher Epistemic Cognition, Epistemic Beliefs, andCalibration in Instruction. Educational Psychology Review, 20(4), 445–461. doi:10.1007/s10648-0089081-8Maggioni, L., VanSledright, B., & Alexander, P. A. (2009). Walking on the borders: A measure of epistemiccognition in history. The Journal of Experimental Education, 77(3), 187-213. doi:10.3200/JEXE.77.3.187-214ICLS 2014 Proceedings1689© ISLSMason, L., Ariasi, N., & Boldrin, A. (2011). Epistemic beliefs in action: Spontaneous reflections aboutknowledge and knowing during online information searching and their influence on learning. Learningand Instruction, 21(1), 137–151. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2010.01.001National Research Council (2013). Developing Assessments for the Next Generation Science Standards.Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Pluta, W. J., Chinn, C. A., & Duncan, R. G. (2011). Learners’ epistemic criteria for good scientific models.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48, 486-511.Schommer‐Aikins, M., & Easter, M. (2006). Ways of Knowing and Epistemological Beliefs: Combined effecton academic performance. Educational Psychology, 26(3), 411–423. doi:10.1080/01443410500341304Stahl, E., & Bromme, R. (2007). The CAEB: An instrument for measuring connotative aspects ofepistemological beliefs. Learning and Instruction, 17, 773-785. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2007.09.016Wineburg, S. S. (1991). Historical problem solving: A study of the cognitive processes used in the evaluation ofdocumentary and pictoral evidence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83(1), 73-87. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.83.1.73Zimmerman, C. (2007). The development of scientific thinking skills in elementary and middle school.Developmental Review, 27(2), 172–223. doi:10.1016/j.dr.2006.12.001ICLS 2014 Proceedings1690© ISLS