Becoming Reflective: Designing for Reflectionon Physical PerformancesTom Moher (chair), University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, moher@uic.eduCynthia Carter Ching, Sara Schaefer, University of California, Davis, Davis, CAEmail: ccching@ucdavis.edu, seschaefer@ucdavis.eduVictor R. Lee, Utah State University, Logan, UT, victor.lee@usu.eduNoel Enyedy, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, enyedy@gseis.ucla.eduJoshua Danish, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, jdanish@indiana.eduPaulo Guerra, Alessandro Gnoli, Priscilla Jimenez, Brenda Lopez-Silva, Leilah Lyons, Anthony Perritano, BrianSlattery, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, ILEmail: pguerra2@uic.edu, alessandro.gnoli@gmail.com, pjimen5@uic.edu, brendita@uic.edu, llyons@uic.edu,bslatt2@uic.edu, aperritano@gmail.comMike Tissenbaum, James Slotta, Rebecca Cober, Cresencia Fong, University of Toronto, Toronto, ONEmail: mike.tissenbaum@utoronto.ca, jslotta@gmail.com, rebeccacober@mac.com, cresencia.fong@gmail.comAndee Rubin (discussant), TERC, Cambridge, MA, Andee_Rubin@terc.eduAbstract: Learners’ physical performances can serve as focal objects for reflection andinsight across a variety of contexts and content areas. This session brings together a set ofprojects that leverage the physical performances of learners, construct concrete and abstractrepresentations of those performances, and investigate how learners reflect on and understandthe relationships between their performances and target content—physics, health and fitness,data literacy and navigation, animal foraging, and climate change. The session will sharefindings and design principles from each of the studies around constructing technologicalscaffolds for physical performance reflections. The symposium highlights the various waysperformance can be used to engage learners, and how different settings and learning goalsaffect the designs of performance representations.IntroductionThe use of participants' physical performances as a focal object has several potential benefits. It leveragespeoples' (and especially children's) innate interest in the state and performance of their own bodies; the"quantified self" movement (Lee, 2013) is only the latest reminder of this phenomenon. Experiencing orwitnessing the performance leaves little doubt as to the authenticity of the data set, nor, in transparent designs, tothe relationship between performance actions and their representation as data. There may be immediate benefit(physical, cognitive, identity) to the physical performances themselves (Abrahamson, et al., 2012). Common toall of the designs presented here is the provision of opportunity and support for reflection, including bothreflection-in-action (during performances) and reflection-on-action (before or after performances) (Schön,1983). Each project, however, offers distinctive strategies for fostering reflection, differing in the goals ofreflection, the objects of reflection, the nature of the reflective activity, and the temporal and social contexts ofreflection. Taken together, these define a multi-dimensional design space for supporting reflective activitiessurrounding learner performances.In the following we briefly describe each project, including a description of the participants, theirperformances, and the technologies used for capturing those performances. The remainder of each projectdescription is devoted to addressing the following questions:• Goal(s) of reflection. What is the purpose of reflection? How are the outcomes of the reflective processbe used by participants?• Object(s) of reflection. Beyond the performance itself, what facets of the performance are captured, andhow are these represented and made accessible to participants?• Nature of the reflective activity. How do participants work with and use the representations of theirperformances?• Temporal contexts of reflection. How do the projects manage the scheduling, frequency, and durationof reflective activities?• Social contexts of reflection. In what social contexts does reflection take place? What role dofacilitators play in fostering reflection?Tom Moher will serve as chair for the symposium. During the symposium, each speaker will briefly (10minutes) present their intervention and their designs for supporting reflection. Discussant Andee Rubin willcomment on the presentations, with the remainder of the session devoted to an audience-plus-panel discussionfocusing on elaborating the list of design considerations outlined in this symposium.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1273© ISLSDevices, Dashboards, Games, and Reflections: Quantitative Data and theSubjective Experience of Fitness TechnologiesCynthia Carter Ching and Sarah Schaefer, University of California, DavisThe Learning Sciences has long been interested in how engaging with various kinds of digital representations ofinformation and experience can facilitate learning and transformative change (e.g., Linn, Clark, & Slotta, 2003;Quintana, et al, 2004; Songer, 2007; Pea & Maldonado, 2006; Scardemalia & Bereiter, 1994). Recently, with thewidespread nature of handheld devices such as smartphones and other wearable or portable technologies, thereis great potential for such representations to be inclusive of a broad swath of learners’ experiences within andacross multiple sociocultural contexts (White, Booker, Ching, & Martin, 2012). For the most part, however,these representation studies have been focused on acquiring knowledge and habits of mind of some academicdomain (usually mathematics or science), or perhaps learning to see everyday life through a domain-specificlens. Immediate impact on learners’ everyday behavior, however, is not the typical goal.This study has as its explicit goal the development of a device-and-gaming model for the improvementof adolescent health, via awareness of physical activity patterns and increased physical exercise. United Stateschildhood obesity rates have doubled for children from 7% to 18%, and tripled for adolescents from 5% to 18%,since 1980 (Ogden, et al, 2012). Demographic studies also find that these national rates are disproportionallyhigher in low-income and minority communities (Calzada & Anderson-Worts, 2009). Changing physicalactivity behavior in sedentary individuals is a critical piece of a comprehensive approach to health improvement;however, studies employing pedometers in particular as a motivator typically find short-term but not long-termeffects (Gardener & Campagna, 2011; Schofield, Mummery, & Schofield, 2005). The overall inquiry that thispaper comes from aims to develop multiple ways for youth to engage with commercially available pedometersand their data, including in a narrative-driven online game that converts pedometer data into action events, andthen to examine (a) the meanings youth construct around the various representations they encounter, (b) theirreflections on the ways these representations relate to the physical activity contexts of their everyday lives, (c)the effects of this combination of meanings and representations on physical activity behavior.For the past year, we have been working with an after-school program at an urban middle-school inNorthern California, putting Fitbit™ activity monitors on approximately 30 youth ages 12-14 and talking withthem about their reactions to the devices and their own data. Of the youth in our project, approximately 85% areon free and reduced lunch at school, 95% are non-white, and 67% speak a language other than English at home.Our data corpus consists of continuous device syncs during the four months in 2013 that students wore thedevices, focus group discussions and individual interviews with a subset of students, multiple questionnaires andinventories, and pre-post BMI measurements. One of our first questions was how youth would react to wearingthe devices themselves and the representations of their physical activity that the devices generate. Figure 1shows two types of Fitbits™, both with digital displays that rotate (via a button or tap-screen) through numericaland graphical symbol representations of steps walked, calories burned, miles traveled, and flights of stairsclimbed.Figure 0. Device Display.Figure 2. Commercial website dashboard display.When we talked with youth about their experiences wearing the devices and the information they were gettingabout their physical activity, their talk focused primarily on the immediacy of looking down to find out, rightthen and there, how many steps or calories they had logged for a strenuous activity. Youth also discussed a greatdeal about subjective constraints that the data were not accounting for (such as “not everybody can walk toschool”), or inaccuracies that they felt were giving them less “credit” than they deserved (such as questionsabout how many stairs counts as a “flight,” and what happened if they rode bikes instead of walked). In mostcases, however, the discussions were about the affordances of the device for immediate feedback, not aboutaggregates or larger patterns.One of the ways that we hoped youth would reflect on aggregates or larger patterns was in looking attheir profiles on fitbit.com. The commercial website associated with the Fitbit™ device has many moreaffordances for engaging with multiple representations of data. Figure 2 shows a snapshot from the first author’sprofile from 10/31/13, wherein the daily activity graph shows how activity is distributed over hours of the day(including a four-mile run in the morning and taking kids trick-or-treating in the evening). Yet when weICLS 2014 Proceedings1274© ISLSengaged in project activities taking youth to their profiles and encouraging them to look at their online data, theyseemed confused or uninterested in the representations. Many of them needed help to decipher the graphs, andthey did not make easy connections between what they saw on the graphs and their everyday activities until weprompted them individually asking specific questions such as, “what did you do yesterday between 5-6 pm thatgot you these steps?” In general, however, youth were not motivated to spend much time on their profiles.Figure 3. Game interface display.A third way for youth in our project to interact with representations of their physical activity is througha game interface, which will hopefully prove more compelling than the online profile graphs. On this aspect wehave been working with an indie game developer, Funomena, to create TERRA, a narrative-driven online game(Figure 3). In TERRA, players are space explorers who have landed and set up individual domed bases on adesolate and uninhabitable planet, with the goal of completely terraforming it within a limited number of weeksso more of their people can come live there. Players explore and terraform the planet using energy generated byreal-world Fitbit™ steps they’ve taken, which are boosted by the metrics of their home base. As the gameprogresses, the landscape of the world they create becomes an aggregate representation of their synced activityover the variable timeframe of the game campaign, with each player’s landscape reflecting not only strategic ingame decisions but also the extent of their daily fitness. Investigating the effect of this in-game representationon youth insights about their activity and behavior is the goal of the coming year of the project.Getting Lost and then Found in Physical DataVictor R. Lee, Utah State UniversityThis presentation draws upon two research and design activities that were both oriented toward providing fifthgrade students with opportunities to collect and reflect upon large amounts of data from their own physicalactivities while at school, using wearable physical activity data sensing technologies. In both efforts, students’reflections were anchored by canonical representations of those data, such as computer-generated timelines andhistograms. Also, a design decision was made in both activities to ensure that while students would be directlyinvolved in the process of generating data from their own physical activities, an instructor or facilitator workingwith the students knowingly withhold, at least initially, information about which specific activities from the datacollection phase were associated with which portion of the computer-generated data representation. Therationale for this withholding of information was twofold. First, this added uncertainty was intended toencourage students to collaborate with their peers in reconciling the specific features of a given datarepresentation with their recalled experiences of a physical activity. This is comparable to an approachdemonstrated by Nemirovsky and colleagues in which episodic feelings of a bodily experience can be seenthrough conversation as becoming “fused” with representations of those experiences (Nemirovsky, 2011;Nemirovsky, Tierny, & Wright, 1998). Second, there was a methodological goal of eliciting students’ ideas byrequiring additional acts of explicit coordination for representation interpretation processes that are often bothrapid and fleeting and may require prompting to uncover (Lee & Sherin, 2006).In contrast to the aforementioned work of Nemirovsky and colleagues, a fairly long time delay betweenthe bodily experiences and the representations to be inspected was also introduced. This was necessary becausethe wearable sensing technologies used were commercial, designed with specific capabilities and users in mind.Such devices are typically designed to support physical training and wellness goal attainment, as may becommon for competitive athletes or active adults (Lee & Drake, 2013). As such, the data analysis software thatwas packaged with these devices tended to support summative reports of overall physical activity for periods oftime longer than what is typically allowed during a portion of a school day. While those were real limitations,these commercial devices at the same time also provide a freedom of mobility and diverse set of features andcapabilities that still made them in some ways more desirable than comparable devices designed primarily forchildren and schools (Lee & Thomas, 2011). So, to make the commercial devices work for the educationalresearch and design purposes, small tools were developed to obtain fine-grained activity data (on the scale ofindividual seconds or minutes) that was stored on the devices but generally kept out of view of the intendedusers. These data were then provided in the TinkerPlots dynamic data visualization software (Konold & Miller,2005), which was designed based on empirical research on student’s intuitive reasoning of statistics and dataICLS 2014 Proceedings1275© ISLS(Konold, 2007; Lehrer, Kim, & Schauble, 2007). This extraction and conversion process necessarily added in atime delay on the scale of several minutes.Given that students had direct embodied experience with performing the physical activities thatproduced the data, that the exact match between data representation and experienced bodily activity wasdeliberately withheld, and that there was a necessary time delay between activity and data-supported reflection,the students were to some extent, ‘lost’ at the time of reflection. They knew and could draw on a few differentresources and such had some familiarity with the terrain in which they had been placed, but determining whatthey were looking at and coming up with actionable interpretations constituted a metaphorical ‘wayfinding’.Figure 4. Two students participating in the running activity (left) and thenworking together to identify who was associated with which set of data (right).This presentation proposes this spatial metaphor of data interpretation as a wayfinding process in a spacepopulated by recalled aspects of bodily experience coupled with representational features in a data display. Thefirst activity in which this metaphor is used is one where pairs of students participated in a running activityinvolving each student simultaneously running around their school gymnasium but with each student running ina different way (forward, backward, or sideways depending on which lap they were completing). Their task wasto determine which time-ordered line of recorded second-by-second heart rate data in TinkerPlots was theirs.The second activity to be analyzed with the ‘wayfinding’ metaphor was a portion of full class design experimentduring which students calculated the distances of each of their strides using three different distance inferencemethods they had invented that each involved a combination of Fitbit activity trackers, high speed cameras, andrulers. In both the heart rate and stride length activities, students proceeded to test ideas about which set of datawas associated with which activity based on pairings of specific recalled experiences with visual features on thedata displays that were especially salient. Much as one might familiarize themselves to a new city by identifyingsome familiar landmarks and orienting themselves relative to those them, these students familiarized themselveswith the data by way of identifying and orienting their recalled experiences relative to temporary ‘eventmarks.'While this wayfinding process in data interpretation could be traced to the design decisions and constraintsassociated with the two activities, the suggestion made by this presentation and supported by other observationsfrom the research project is that ‘eventmarking’ is actually a very sensible, and likely typical, way for people tomake sense of inscribed data representations of what would otherwise be, in absence of a body sensor andperformance capturing technology, ephemeral lived experiences.Action and Reflection in an Embodied Foraging SimulationTom Moher, Alessandro Gnoli, Anthony Perritano, Paulo Guerra, and Brenda Lopez-Silva, University ofIllinois at Chicago; Mike Tissenbaum, James Slotta, Rebecca Cober, and Cresencia Fong, University of TorontoOver the past year, we have developed a learning environment designed to support upper elementary learners'construction of understandings surrounding animal foraging behaviors. In Hunger Games, classroom learnersenact foraging within the context of a sequence of increasing challenging simulated conditions of competition,resource depletion, sociality, and predation. The instructional unit is designed to develop understandings of thefactors that foraging animals use to guide their decisions in selecting food patches, as well as the ways in whichpopulations of animals distribute themselves among available resources. Students' (individual and aggregate)behaviors during enactment of the foraging simulations serve as objects of inquiry for reflective activities.Early in the design of Hunger Games we made the decision to stage foraging as an embodied activity.We were inspired by a longstanding practitioner tradition of using embodied activities with physical materials(e.g., chickpeas, M&Ms) to introduce foraging concepts, and felt that an embodied approach had severalpotential advantages over a distributed screen-based approach (Goldstone & Ashpole, 2004). First, it moreclosely models the locomotive and visual demands on foraging animals. Second, it affords an unconstrainedsocial context for activity, allowing students to share strategies spontaneously within the action space. Third, itallows for the emergence of deceptive and despotic behaviors (e.g., misinforming others about patch yields,physically blocking access to food patches) with parallels in the animal world. Finally, we felt that using anembodied simulation had strong motivational potential for upper elementary school learners.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1276© ISLSIn Hunger Games, each student in the classroom is provided with a small stuffed animal ("squirrel")that serves as his or her "avatar" during the activity (Figure 5). Students forage by moving their squirrels amonga set of "food patches" of varying quality distributed around the classroom, gaining energy as a function of theelapsed time in the patch, patch quality, and competition within the patch (i.e., the presence of other squirrels)(Figure 6). Food items (e.g., acorns) are not explicitly represented, avoiding the demands on teachers for bothFigure 5. RFID tags are embedded in plushtoys serving as "avatars" for student foragers.Figure 6. Students foraging at food patches. HiddenRFID readers detect tags embedded in stuffed animals.preparation (e.g., counting out large numbers of small items representing food) and data management(aggregating individual performances into representations of group performance). Students falling victim topredation (signaled on smaller displays adjacent to each food patch) are considered "injured," and given a short"time out" period in which their squirrel cannot gain calories even if located in a patch; this allows us tointroduce predation without forcing children "out of the game" prematurely.Figure 7. Public ambient displays used during foraging bouts. From left to right, the Harvest Graph(distribution of individual caloric gain), the Patch Popularity map (aggregate whole-class time spentin patches), and the Marauder's Map (the current location of all squirrels currently foraging).Hunger Games is designed to support both reflection-in-action (during foraging) and reflection-onaction. During foraging bouts, participants have access to large animated public displays depicting the numberof calories each squirrel has gained, the cumulative patch utilization, and the current locations of all of thesquirrels (Figure 7). These representations are designed to support students' in-the-moment decision-making, butalso to help learners develop understandings of how their actions impact the public representations (bar graphs,maps), setting the stage for post-activity reflection on their performances. Reflection on action is supportedthrough the use of a community knowledge-building application (Figure 8). In that application, students areprovided with representations of both individual and aggregate data reflecting their performance during foragingbouts. At the aggregate level, they have access to an interactive version of the Harvest Graph that allows them tosort the distribution of individual caloric gains according to various strategies surrounding patch quality,competition, frequency of moves, etc. At an individual level, students are provided with a "move tracker" thatallows them to replay the step-by-step patch switches that they made within the context of the state of thesystem at the time of their decisions; this tool is used to support learner reflection on the effectiveness of theirmoves and to prepare for subsequent foraging bouts. Finally, the application provides a threaded discussion toolto support development of community knowledge around a series of structured discussions.Following a pilot study in Fall 2013 (Gnoli, et al., 2014), we are currently enacting a four-week Hunger Gamesunit with three classrooms of grade 5 (10-11 years of age) students, focusing on learners' appropriation ofICLS 2014 Proceedings1277© ISLSresources during foraging and knowledge construction. Our presentation will review our experiences in thoseclassroom enactments.Figure 8. Tablet-based application to support individual reflection on action and community knowledgeconstruction. From left to right, the sortable Harvest Graph, move tracker, and threaded discussion tool.Distributed Acts of Reflection: Embodied Acts to Focus and Filter a JointlyProduced ReflectionNoel Enyedy, University of California Los Angeles and Joshua Danish, Indiana UniversityDewey (1933) defined reflection as “active, persistent, and careful consideration of any belief or supposed formof knowledge in the light of the grounds that support it and the further conclusions to which it tends” (p. 91. ascited in Spalding and Wilson, 2002). In this paper we explore the potential for supporting this kind of reflectionin mixed-reality environments that combine embodied activity with augmented reality to support groups of earlyelementary students in reflecting upon and thus revising their developing ideas about the physics concepts offorce and motion. Using data from the Learning Physics through Play (LPP) project (Enyedy et al., 2013), ouranalysis highlights the co-constructed nature of reflection in an embodied learning environment. Our analysissuggests that this form of mixed-reality environment provides unique opportunities for reflection.The LPP environment is designed around the assumption that play, particularly embodied sociodramatic play, can provide a unique opportunity for children to explore complex ideas. Specifically, we build onVygotsky’s (1978) definition of play which notes that play always includes both an imaginary situation and a setof rules. In this framework, the imaginary situation supports students in reflecting about the rules of the situationeven when those rules might otherwise be beyond students’ ability to engage with. LPP was designed to supportthis reflective play using two key components: 1) an augmented reality system that uses computer vision torecord students’ physical actions and locations, and 2) software that translates this motion into a physics engineand generates a display and a response based on the sensing data. The LPP system uses commercially available,open source motion tracking and pattern recognition technologies (Kato, 2007) to create an inexpensivealternative to virtual reality within the physical classroom (a 12’ x 12’ carpet at the front of the classroom).Tracked motion is instantly imported into the new LPP computer microworld that allows students to model theirunderstanding of force and motion and compare their predictions to simulated results. Thus their embodied playis enhanced with physics symbols in an effort to provide unique opportunities for reflection about how their playrelates to the underlying science.Our data come from the first LPP study (Enyedy, et al., 2013) in which 43 students (aged 6-8 years)engaged with the LPP learning environment to learn about force and motion. Our findings indicated that 91% ofthe students (39) demonstrated a significant pre- to post-test learning gain over the course of the 15 weekcurriculum. In the present analysis our goal is to further explore how the LPP Environment supported students’efforts at reflecting upon the science content in a manner that ultimately led to these gains. To examine students’process of reflection, we combine Piaget’s (1983) taxonomy of reflection with that of Davis (2003) to categorizethe process through which students talk, gesture, and positioning reveal their reflection upon the underlyingcontent. Piaget suggested three forms of reflection which attend to the physical properties of objects, one’s ownactions in the world, and one’s own thinking (metacognition in more recent theories). This can be synthesizedwith Davis’ (2003) framework, which attends not only to the focus of reflection, but the content of reflectionand distinguishes between actions (appropriate ways of behaving, a focus on goals); reflection on activities (thespecific tasks assigned to students); reflection on the actual content being studied; and reflection on knowledge(monitoring or improving one’s understanding). The combination of frameworks will support us in examininghow students move between these different foci, and how the combination of embodied play and symbolizationin the LPP environment supports the process.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1278© ISLSOur presentation will include several case studies that demonstrate how students move fluidly betweenreflecting upon the physical environment, the simulated environment, and their hypotheses about the rules thatunderlie both. Further, they use both the simulated world, and their embodied action as a method for supportingtheir ongoing reflection. For example, in one activity students were asked to model what they thought wouldhappen if a ball that was already moving in a straight horizontal line received a force in the vertical direction (akick) (Figure 9). A common misconception is that the ball will now move in the vertical direction rather thanmoving diagonally. While several students indicated their predictions, it is particularly illustrative to considerDavid who indicated his prediction by pretending to be the ball that has received the kick and walking across thespace while placing a piece of string upon the ground to indicate his hypothesized pathway. Thus David uses hisbody and the string to reflect upon the rules he assumes will drive a ball in this situation, suggesting a blurringof the lines between a reflection on the physical world and one’s actions. The teacher then runs the computersimulation, which does not trace the same path as David, a point that Sara is quick to point out. She reflectsupon the contrast between the two and then indicates her own prediction by walking the same space with adifferent point in mind. Thus her reflection is made visible to the group through her embodied activity. Davidpauses while considering both before appearing to realize that the problem was not in his general model, but inhis placement of the string that indicated his hypothesis—he had placed it at the edge of where the force wasapplied to the ball rather than the middle. Thus David’s reflection appears to take into account his own thinking,the activity of the computer, the activity of his peers’, and his own body in addition to the rules of what it meansfor a ball to be kicked! This combination ultimately allows him to produce this more accurate depiction, whichhis peers can then take up and reflect upon in turn.Figure 9. The LPP window on the left depicting 2-dimensional motion. The dashed linedepicts the path of the ball's motion once the simulation was begun. The ball was initiallyplaced at point A, on top of a vertical force of 2. Once it began moving, the ballencountered the force of 3 at point B, which altered its trajectory. On the right is the mixedreality version that the students see based on the view of a camera mounted on the ceiling.In this example, students’ reflection in an environment such as LPP appears to move between taking multipleaspects of the environment as the object of reflection (the movement of a ball, the simulation of a ball by acomputer, and one’s peers’ embodied predictions) and using these as tools to foster reflection. While at firstblush confusing, it appears that it is exactly this synthesis of opportunities that leads students reflections andhelps them to develop more normative accounts of the physics concepts. In this short segment we can see thenew complexities and affordances that mixed reality provides for reflection. Empirical abstraction is augmentedwith new virtual objects (e.g., the quantifiable forces that float above the path of the ball) that fuse with the realworld to afford new inferences and calculations. Pseudo-empirical abstraction is enhanced both by allowingnew actions such as running the simulation and changing the parameters, but more importantly by allowingstudents to interact with each other and the traces that other people’s previous actions have left on the system.Exhibiting Performances for Data Literacy and Climate Change EducationLeilah Lyons, Priscilla Jimenez, Brenda Lopez, and Brian Slattery, University of Illinois at ChicagoInformal learning institutions are increasingly incorporating full-body interactive experiences in their exhibits.Full-body interaction makes use of the motion and/or position of users’ bodies as input to a digital experience,with the output typically presented on large displays mounted on a wall or floor as a projected image. Full-bodyinteraction exhibits are known to be highly engaging for visitors who are directly involved in the interactions(especially younger visitors). Engagement alone does not necessarily translate into learning, however—visitorsneed opportunities for reflection (Allen, 2004). This is especially true for the many visitors who onlyICLS 2014 Proceedings1279© ISLSperipherally engage in the activity as spectators. They lack the firsthand experience of the interaction, and thusmay struggle with understanding the performing visitor’s actions (Reeves et al, 2005). In this presentation, wedetail the design strategies we employed as we made visitor performances the cornerstone of an educationalexhibit for a zoo. This setting allows us to leverage the power of using many visitors’ performances to surfacedata literacy issues, but also introduces reflection challenges.The Climate Literacy Zoo Education Network (CliZEN), a nationwide group of zoos and aquaria,developed a whole-body interaction exhibit, A Mile in My Paws, to address the worrisome trend that despiteincreasing evidence of climate change, the public has expressed less concern for its impacts. An APA reportexamining this issue recommends that in addition to exposure to data, learners need a personal or affectiveconnection to the effects of climate change to begin building an understanding of the magnitude of thephenomenon (APA, 2010). One recommendation was that in addition to exposure to data, learners need apersonal or affective connection to the effects of climate change to begin building an understanding of thephenomenon (APA, 2010). In our exhibit, a zoo visitor is put in control of a polar bear avatar that must traversea simulated arctic environment in past, present, and future time periods in search of food. Users control the bearby “swimming” with motion-sensitive gloves (fashioned as plush polar bear paws) and walking in place on apressure sensitive plate (Figure 10). As polar bears must work harder to swim given the shrinking of sea ice, sotoo must Paws users work harder by swimming more frequently as they play through the maps of 1975, 2010,and a projected 2045 maps (created using satellite data and model, Figure 10).Figure 10. On the left, Paws in use in the Brookfield Zoo. Middle left, a player wears plush gloves containingmotion sensors, and stands on a pressure-sensitive plate, to swim and walk, respectively, through three differentdecades of a simulated arctic environment (maps, middle right). The right image depicts the graphicalrepresentation of visitors’ performances across the decade, with the most recent two visitors’ data highlighted.Kinesiology research has shown that people are remarkably reliable at judging the relative effort theyexperience with different physical exertions; we exploited this perception-of-effort as a means of affectively(and hopefully effectively) communicating the magnitude of climate change’s impact on polar bears (Lyons etal., 2012). A controlled experiment helped us tune the glove weights (Lyons et al., 2013) so we could inducevisitors to perceive later decades (more episodes of swimming) as more effortful for bears than earlier decades.Users, especially young users, would notice but not realize the import of the increased effort unless it ispointed out to them. For this reason, the users’ motions were logged by the system, and the calories they burnedestimated and plotted on a graphical representation that zoo interpreters could use to emphasize the exhibit'seducational message (Figure 10). This representation was displayed on either an iPad or a large monitor near theexhibit. The graphical representation of performance illustrates the magnitude of climate change impact on polarbears over time, and it helps demonstrate that variability in data does not invalidate trends. (Climate changeskeptics often use variability in climate change data representations, like disagreements between tree ring andice core temperature estimates, to dismiss the validity of warming). Visitors see their own data juxtaposedagainst the recorded performances of other, allowing interpreters to directly address the issue of variability-indata. We leverage the large numbers of zoo visitors to make connections between the easily understoodperformance data variability and the variability in large climate change data sets. With this reflection-on-action(Schön, 1983), we expose visitors to the “core of statistics”: “the task of understanding the world fromincomplete or imperfect data,” often missing from more traditional data literacy approaches (Rubin, 2005).The post-performance reflection activity clearly offers potential educational benefits to both performersand spectators, but there was still the question of what educational benefit spectators would get during theperformances (which last around 2 minutes). Moreover, spectators arrive and leave sporadically – there is noguarantee that they would stay for the post-performance debriefing. We were interested in making theperformance more than just a shared anchor for discussion (Diamond et al., 1995) or a means of attractingvisitors (Meisner et al., 2007) – because the performance itself is the subject of the exhibit, there was a need tosupport reflection-in-action (during performances) for spectators (Schön, 1983). The link between user actionsand the effects these actions produce should be maximally “expressive, to enable the spectator to fullyappreciate the performer’s interaction” (Reeves et al., 2005). User actions in Paws were intentionally designedICLS 2014 Proceedings1280© ISLSto be as obvious and expressive to spectators as possible – to draw spectator attention to the swimming andwalking motions performing visitors wear large plush gloves and slippers that look like polar bear paws (seeFigure 10). Nonetheless, a special challenge comes with exhibiting effort – kinesiology research shows thatspectators are notoriously bad at judging the effort (Lyons, 2012). Therefore, we needed to create a liverepresentation of the performer’s exertion (Figure 11) that depicts both the player’s path across the arctic mapand a running graph of how many calories they have burned.A pilot study performed in situ at the zoo showed that interpreters could and did make use of the liveperformance data to engage spectators in reflection-in-action (Figure 11), as illustrated by this transcript:[01:03:03.07] Visitor-Child: So where is he trying to go?[01:03:04.15] Interpreter: He’s trying to … go to this red star which is a seal, so if the polarbear were to smell a seal, like up to like three feet of ice they can smell a seal underneath,they’d have to chase and follow it to where they could actually get it, so that’s what he’ssimulating here[01:03:23.03] Interpreter: And as he goes we can kind of watch based on how far he’s going,how many calories he’s burning, and you’re gonna see this go way up, especially when he getsto these swimming areas, 'cuz its a lot harder for the polar bear to swim than it is to walk.Figure 11. Left, screen shot of live performance data, with a depiction of where on the map the performeris currently located and a graph of how many calories the player has burned over time (note the steeperslopes for periods where the player was swimming). Right, photograph of an interpreter (in green shirt,far left) using an iPad to engage spectators in reflection-in-action while another visitor performs.During this exchange the interpreter gestured to the higher-slope regions of the graph, shown on the iPad device,corresponding to times when the performer had been swimming. We found that gesture was critical to theinterpreters’ ability to engage spectators in reflection-in-action. Other trials, where the live graph was shownprimarily on a large shared display, drew the attention of more spectators, but interpreters seldom highlightedany components of the data representations. By contrast, interpreters using the iPad used gestures to explicitlyconnect regions of the evolving graph to the live performance, and to the map. Ongoing work extends the“reach” of mediation to more spectators by supporting finger-based annotation and mirroring of the annotatediPad screen on large displays. A separate paper in this volume contains details on the iPads’ mediative roles.ReferencesAbrahamson, D., Petrick, C., DeLiema, D., Johnson–Glenberg, M., Birchfield, D., Koziupa, T. Savio-Ramos,C., Cruse, J., Lindgren, R., Fadjo, C., Black, J., & Eisenberg, M. (2012). You're it! Body, action, andobject in STEM learning. Proceedings International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2012),Vol. 2, 99-109.Allen, S. (2004). Designs for learning: Studying science museum exhibits that do more than entertain. ScienceEducation, 88(S1), S17-S33.American Psychological Association. (2010). Psychology and Global Climate Change: Addressing aMultifaceted Phenomenon and Set of Challenges. American Psychological Association.Calzada, P. J., & Anderson-Worts, P. A. (2009). The obesity epidemic: Are minority individuals equallyaffected? Primary Care: Clinics in Office Practice, 36(2), 307-317.Davis, E. A. (2003). Prompting middle school science students for productive reflection: Generic and directedprompts. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(1), 91-142.Dewey, J. (1933). How we think: A restatement of the relation of reflective thinking to the educativeprocess. New York: D.C. Heath and Company.Diamond, J., Bond, A., Schenker, B., Meier, D., and Twersky, D. (1995). Collaborative multimedia. Curator38(3), 137-149.Enyedy, N., Danish, J. A., Delacruz, G., & Kumar, M. (2012) Learning physics through play in an augmentedreality environment. International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 7(3).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1281© ISLSGoldstone, R. & Ashpole, B. (2004). Human foraging behavior in a virtual environment. Psychonomic Bulletin& Review 11(3), 508-514.Gnoli, A., Moher, T., Perritano, A., Guerra, P., & Lopez-Silva, B. (2014). Back to the future: Embodiedclassroom simulations of animal foraging. Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference onTangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction, to appear.Konold, C. (2007). Designing a data analysis tool for learners. In M. C. Lovett & P. Shah (Eds.), Thinking withdata (pp. 267-292). New York: Lawrence Erlbaum.Konold, C., & Miller, C. (2005). TinkerPlots. Dynamic Data Exploration. Statistics software for middle schoolcurricula. Emeryville, CA: Key Curriculum Press.Lee, V. R. (2013). The Quantified Self (QS) movement and some emerging opportunities for the educationaltechnology field. Educational Technology, 53(6), 39-42.Lee, V. R., & Drake, J. (2013). Digital physical activity data collection and use by endurance runners anddistance cyclists. Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 18(1-2), 39-63.Lee, V. R., & Sherin, B. (2006). Beyond transparency: How students make representations meaningful. In S. A.Barab, K. E. Hay & D. T. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of The Seventh International Conference of theLearning Sciences (Vol. 1, pp. 397-403).Lee, V. R., & Thomas, J. M. (2011). Integrating physical activity data technologies into elementary schoolclassrooms. Educational Technology Research and Development, 59(6), 865-884.Lehrer, R., Kim, M., & Schauble, L. (2007). Supporting the development of conceptions of statistics byengaging students in measuring and modeling variability. International Journal of Computers forMathematical Learning, 12, 195-216.Linn, M. C., Clark, D. & Slotta, J. (2003). WISE design for science education. Science Education, 87, 517-538.Lyons, L., Lopez, B. S., Moher, T., Jimenez, P. J., & Slattery, B. (2013). Feel the burn: Verifying designparameters for effortful embodied interaction. In Proceedings of the Interaction Design and ChildrenConference (IDC 2013), 400-403.Lyons, L., Slattery, B., Jimenez Pazmino, P., Lopez Silva, B., & Moher, T. (2012). Don't forget about the sweat:Effortful Embodied interaction in support of learning. In Proceedings of the Sixth InternationalConference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI 2012), 77-84.Meisner, R., Lehn, D.V., Heath, C., Burch, A., Gammon, B., and Reisman, M. (2007). Exhibiting performance:Co-participation in science centres and museums. International Journal of Science Education 29(12),1531 - 1555.Nemirovsky, R. (2011). Episodic feelings and transfer of learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(2), 308337.Nemirovsky, R., Tierney, C., & Wright, T. (1998). Body motion and graphing. Cognition and Instruction, 16(2),119-172.Ogden, C. L., Carroll, M. D., Kit, B. K., & Flegal, K.M. (2012). Prevalence of obesity and trends in body massindex among US children and adolescents, 1999-2010. Journal of the American Medical Association,307(5), 483-490.Pea, R. & Maldonado, H. (2006). WILD for learning: Interacting through new computer devices anytime,anywhere. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, pp. 852-886.Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Quintana, C., Reiser, B., Davis, E., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Golan Duncan, R., Kyza, E., Edelson, D., & Solloway,E. (2004). A scaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. Journal of theLearning Sciences 13, 337-386.Reeves, S., Benford, S., O'Malley, C., and Fraser, M. Designing the spectator experience. ProceedingsConference on Human factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2005), 741-750.Rubin, A. (2005). Math that matters. Hands On: A Journal for Mathematics and Science Educators, 28(1), 3–7.Scardemalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge building communities. Journal of theLearning Sciences 3, 256-283.Schön, D. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner, How Professionals Think In Action, Basic Books.Songer, N. B. (2007). Digital resources versus cognitive tools: A discussion of learning. In S. K. Abell & N. G.Lederman (Eds.), Handbook of research on science education, 471-491.White, T., Booker, A., Ching, C. C., & Martin, L. (2012). Integrating digital and mathematical practices acrosscontexts: A manifesto for mobile learning. International Journal of Learning and Media, 3 (3), 7-13.AcknowledgmentsThe projects described here were supported by the following grants: NSF IIS-1217317 (Ching), NSF DRL1054280 (Lee), NSF DRL-0733218 (Enyedy), NSF CCEP-I-1043284 (Lyons), and NSF IIS-1065275 and IIS1124495 (Moher).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1282© ISLS