Towards a Complex Systems Meta-Theory of Learning as anEmergent Phenomenon: Beyond the Cognitive Versus SituativeDebateMichael J. Jacobson, The University of Sydney, Australia, michael.jacobson@sydney.edu.auManu Kapur, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, manu.kapur@nie.edu.sgPeter Reimann, The University of Sydney, Australia, peter.reimann@sydney.edu.auAbstract. This paper proposes a meta-theory of learning based on conceptual perspectivesand methodologies being employed in the study of complex physical and social systems toinform research in the learning sciences and education. The contexts in which learning occursare in fact complex systems with elements or agents at different levels—from neuronal,cognitive, intrapersonal, interpersonal, cultural—in which there are feedback interactionswithin and across levels of the systems so that collective properties arise (i.e., emerge) fromthe behaviors of the parts, often with properties that are not exhibited by those parts. Weanalyze the long running cognitive versus situative learning debate and propose that a complexsystems meta-theory of learning (CSMTL) provides a principled way to achieve a theoreticalrapprochement. We close by considering other theoretical and methodological implications ofthe CSMTL for research in the learning sciences.There are various perspectives from which to ground systematic inquiry into learning, which, of course, is thecentral enterprise of educational research. Discussions of these perspectives tend to argue for the primacy of aspecific locus of theory and philosophy that in turn grounds various research agendas that generally intend tovalidate, enhance, or challenge particular perspectives. As a field that studies learning and education, there haveimportant debates or “fault lines” (diSessa, 2006) about theory and methods. For example, there has been avigorous debate of theoretical import about the primacy of cognitive (i.e., individual) versus situative (i.e.,socio-cultural) perspectives about learning (Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 1996, 1997; Greeno, 1997; Norman,1993). We are perhaps on the verge of a third distinct theoretical and empirical perspective about learning that isemerging the neurosciences, and there are already appeals to assigning primacy for theory and research aboutlearning from this field over cognitive and socio-cultural perspectives (for a critical discussion, see Bruer(2006)). As another example, there have been the so called “methodology wars” between proponents ofquantitative and qualitative methods, with mixed methods employing elements of both representing perhaps anuneasy truce between these camps (e.g., Firestone, 1987; House, 1991).Unfortunately, these debates related to theory and methodologies in the study of learning andeducational research have been persisting for decades. This inability of the field to reconcile or vindicate onecamp or another is a serious issue. For researchers, this has meant a “community of practice” in educationalresearch that has fractured into “cognitive,” “socio-cultural,” and neuro-science” silos that are theoretically andmethodologically isolated from each other, or perhaps worse, that simply ignore each other.Given such debates seem to involve a “clash of cultures” (Norman, 1993, p. 3), how might arapprochement be made? We argue in this paper that conceptual perspectives and methodologies beingemployed in the study of complex physical and social systems may help reconcile certain existing debates in thefield and to help provide an enhanced foundation to use in educational research more generally. The paper isorganized into four main sections. First, we provide a brief overview of the cognitive versus situative theoriesdebate. In the second section, we propose an initial set of components for a complex systems meta-theory oflearning (CSMTL). In the third section we discuss ways in which the CSMTL provides a principledreconceptualization and rapprochement of the cognitive-situative debate and related issues in the field. Weclose the paper with suggestions for future research involving the CSMTL and implications for the field ofeducational research more generally.Cognitive Versus Situative Theories: An Overview of the DebateIn the seminal paper advocating a situated perspective of learning, Brown, Collins, and Duguid (1989) arguedthat knowledge should be viewed as situated, as being a “product of the activity, context, and culture in which itis developed and used” (p. 32). Such a perspective had important implications for schooling, which they believehad been narrowly concerned with the transfer of abstract and decontextualized formal concepts. However, thecognitive science research upon which many of the key arguments for situated learning by Brown, Collins, andDuguid was itself generating considerable debate. In 1993, a special issue of Cognitive Science pulled togethernine papers that debated two perspectives about the study of human cognition. In the introductory paper byNorman (1993), he framed these two perspectives—the traditional symbolic approach for studying humancognition that focused on the processing structures and symbolic representations of the brain and the “newICLS 2014 Proceedings362© ISLSupstart, the study of situated cognition” (also referred to as “situated action” or “situativity” by other authors)that focuses on the structures of the world constraining and shaping human behavior. The primacy of a cognitivelevel of analysis was clearly championed by Vera and Simon (1993), who argued that symbolic models ofindividual cognitive processes and representations have been quite successful in providing principled accountsof humans and their interactions with the world. In contrast, in arguing for the primacy of the situative level ofanalysis, Greeno and Moore (1993) propose the term “situative” to describe cognitive processes as interactionsbetween a person and other people and physical systems. Similarly, Suchman’s (1993) notion of situated actionemphasizes "constructing accounts of relations among people, and between people and the historically andculturally constituted worlds that they inhabit together'' (p. 71).This debate broadens and deepens in many ways as reflected in a series of papers in EducationalResearcher in the middle to late 1990s in which the focus shifts from considerations of how people think and actto implications of cognitive versus situative perspectives for teaching and learning. The paper of Anderson,Reder, and Simon (1996) characterized situated learning as a view that much of what students learn is specific(“situated”) to the context in which it was learned, which implies knowledge does not transfer between tasks andthat learning abstractions is of little value. They go on to provide a critique of the application of situatedlearning in mathematics education in particular, and propose that educational approaches based on cognitiveresearch into learning processes may be more efficacious than those based on situated perspectives.The following year, Greeno (1997) provided a response in which he argued that the main differencesbetween situative and cognitive perspectives discussed by Anderson, Reder, and Simon were primarily due tounderlying framing assumptions of these two perspectives. In particular, Greeno (1997) maintained:The cognitive perspective takes the theory of individual cognition [italics added] as its basisand builds toward a broader theory by incrementally developing analyses of additionalcomponents that are considered as contexts. The situative perspective takes the theory ofsocial and ecological interaction [italics added] as its basis and builds towards a morecomprehensive theory by developing increasingly detailed analyses of information structuresin the contents of people's interactions. (p. 5)In the same issue of Educational Researcher, Anderson, Reder, and Simon (1997) provide a rejoinderto Greeno in which they found a degree of agreement between the cognitive and situative positions on evidencefor findings and a consensus on certain educational issues. They also agreed that Greeno raised a substantiveissue as to “whether the more profitable research path is one that takes individual or social activity as theprincipal unit of theoretical focus” (p. 20). Not surprisingly, Anderson et al. end their rejoinder with a robustassertion of the superiority of the cognitive information processing approach over a situative theoreticalapproach.This debate broadens in a paper by Cobb and Bowers (1999) in which they criticized the conflictsbetween cognitive and situative learning theories as being of primary interest to educational psychologists andnot to educators involved with classroom-based learning design and research. Still, the detailed discussion oftheir research for studying the learning of mathematics in classrooms primarily employed a situative analysisapproach as they found little theoretical utility in the cognitive perspective of Anderson, Reder, and Simon forunderstanding the “essence of individual and collective human activity” (Cobb & Bowers, 1999, p. 13).In 2003, Derry and Steinkuehler provided a critical review of the literature related to cognitive andsituative theories. They proposed that cognitive theory regards cognition as symbolic computation, and broadlyincludes perspectives of socio-cognitive theoreticians such as Piaget as well as others summarized by Anderson,Reder, and Simon (1996). The situative perspective according to Derry and Steinkuehler embraces a family ofsocial science theories including situated cognition, sociocultural theory, distributed cognition, and activitytheory. Derry and Steinkuehler propose what might be called a “pragmatist view” of the cognitive-situativedebate, as they comment that many researchers and designers working in classroom environments were fusingpoints of view from the cognitive and situative perspectives. However, they also note that a well-definedtheory between these two communities of educational practice had not been proposed, which webelieve is still true today. They speculate that what may emerge is a:complex systems theory [italics added] of cognition understood in its broadestecological sense, and that the resulting methodological approach will be superior toeither theoretical viewpoint standing alone, capable of providing more completeunderstanding of learning and education. (Derry & Steinkuehler, 2003, p. 805)We next describe our initial efforts in this area, which we regard as a meta-theory of learning based oncomplexity.ICLS 2014 Proceedings363© ISLSTowards a Complex Systems Meta-theory of LearningIn this section we outline a complex systems meta-theory of learning that may provide a principled basis for arapprochement between cognitive and situative perspectives, as well as to inform other issues in the field.However, what do we mean by a meta-theory? As the name suggests, a meta-theory is a theory about theories.While a theory is concerned with specifying concepts and relations that can provide accounts for aspects of thenatural or social world, a meta-theory provides concepts for describing what form theories should take, and foridentifying requirements of what they should achieve. We also note that at this time there is not a general“theory” of complex systems. Rather, the study of complex physical, biological, and social systems bymultidisciplinary fields has been providing a framework of conceptual perspectives, principles, and methods(e.g., emergence, sensitivity to initial conditions, dynamical attractors, agent-based modeling, scale-freenetworks) that we believe can function to generate and evaluate specific theories of relevance to particular typesof systems (Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006).We conceive of learning not as something that is, but rather, as something that emerges in the contextof formal and informal systems of education. We concur with Clancey (2008) that environments in whichhuman cognitive processes—and therefore learning—occur are in fact complex systems that are “inherentlysocial, interactive, personal, biological, and neurological, which is to say that a variety of systems develop anddepend on one another in complex ways” (p. 11). As we discuss in more detail below, the construct ofemergence is a central one in the study of complex systems, which encompasses several new theoreticalperspectives (e.g., general systems theory, complexity theory, system dynamics, complex adaptive systems,chaos theory) as well as attendant approaches for modeling these systems (Bar-Yam, 2003; Gell-Mann, 1994;Gleick, 1987; Holland, 1995; Mitchell, 2009; Prigogine & Stengers, 1984) that represent importantmethodological innovations (also of relevance to learning sciences research). As background, we next providean overview of perspectives about complex systems and complexity and then rejoin our consideration of themain components of a complex systems meta-theory of learning.What is Complexity?Scientific study of complex systems—sometimes referred to as complexity—over the past three decades has leadto insights about the world that classical approaches tended to over simplify or to ignore (Bar-Yam, 2003).Briefly, complex systems consist of elements or agents that interact with each other and their environment oftenbased on simple rules. Feedback interactions within and across levels of the system result in self-organization,with emergent patterns forming at mezzo and macro levels of the system. There is also a dialectical co-existenceof linearity and nonlinearity in the behavior of complex systems, such as the linear predictability of seasons thatemerges out of the nonlinear and probabilistic nature of day-to-day weather. Another key characteristic ofcomplex systems is that collective properties arise (i.e., emerge) from the behaviors of the parts, often withproperties that are not exhibited by those parts. Examples of complex systems include adaptation of white bloodcells to invading bacteria, emotional and cognitive brain behaviors out of the interaction of individual neurons,the flocking formation of individual birds, dynamic equilibrium in ecosystems out of individual predator-preyinteractions, segregation patterns in cities out of individual choices in places to live, and so on.However, before we can advance our argument for a complex systems meta-theory of learning, thequestion may be asked if the study of complex systems has yielded findings or insights that are different thanthose from theoretical, research, and disciplinary perspectives of more traditional scientific fields such asphysics, biology, chemistry, and so on. This is an issue discussed in the recent book by Mitchel (2009). Onesignificant contribution is the conceptualization of complex problems in ways that challenge long-term scientificassumptions. As examples, chaos has demonstrated that intrinsic randomness of a system may not be necessaryfor the overall behaviors of the system to look random; recent findings in genetics challenge the centrality of therole of genetic change in evolution; and chance and self-organization are being viewed as dynamics thatchallenge the primacy of natural selection in evolution. Mitchel also notes the importance in both scientificcommunities and the general population of ways of thinking that include nonlinearity, decentralized control,networks, hierarchical levels in systems, statistical representations of information, and so on. We next considerhow selected complexity ideas such as these are now being incorporated into educational research.Research on Learning and Complex SystemsThere has been a shift in the learning sciences and related fields of educational research over the past decadefrom earlier work on students learning concepts about complex systems to the application of perspectives aboutcomplex physical and social systems to understanding learning processes and environments (for an overview,see Jacobson and Wilensky (2006)). One indication of this latter trend is reflected in the use of complexityconcepts by researchers who are studying learning environments. For example, Bereiter and Scardamalia (2005)have argued that:As complex systems concepts such as self-organization and emergence make their way intoICLS 2014 Proceedings364© ISLSmainstream educational psychology, it becomes increasingly apparent that there are no simplecausal explanations for anything in this field. In general, what comes out of a sociocognitiveprocess cannot be explained or fully predicted by what goes into it. Creative works,understanding, and cognitive development are all examples of complex structures emerging[italics added] from the interaction of simpler components (Sawyer, 1999, 2004). Learningitself, at both neural and knowledge levels, has emergent properties (p. 707) (Pribram & King,1996).The critique of simple causal explanations made by Bereiter and Scardamalia centers on the construct ofemergence, that is, properties emerging from the interaction of simpler components. We believe that theconstruct of emergence is centrally important for the study of learning that has important theoretical andmethodological implications. Before considering these implications, we next “unpack” emergence as well asrelated perspectives of linearity and nonlinearity, more fully.Emergence and the Dialectics of Linearity and Nonlinearity (1)Interest in emergence is a recent area for learning and cognitive scientists (Clancey, 2008; Goldstone, 2006;McClelland, 2010). For example, inter-subjective processes at the local (individual) level yield cognitions—such as opinions (Isenberg, 1986), generation of abstract representations (Schwartz, 1995), representation andschema learning (Rumelhart, Smolensky, McClelland, & Hinton, 1986), group dynamics (Kapur, Voiklis, &Kinzer, 2008), knowledge building (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2005), among others—that differ both incomplexity and kind from those produced by any collaborating agent or those expected from the centraltendency among collaborators (Vallabha & McClelland, 2007). Moreover, these cognitions emergespontaneously, without forethought or awareness among collaborating agents (Goldstone, 2006). Apparently,both the individual and the group learn. Complexity theory posits that learning is at once distinct andemergent—which is consistent with the critique of simple causal mechanisms by Bereiter and Scardamaliaabove.However, the concept of emergent behavior is paradoxical. On the one hand, it arises from theinteractions between agents in a system (e.g., individuals in a collective). On the other hand, once such abehavior emerges in a system, it influences and/or constrains subsequent interactions between the micro levelactions of agents. Thus an emergent pattern or behavior can seem to have a life of its own independent of thelocal interactions (Kauffman, 1995) and therefore, cannot be reduced to the individual agents (or parts) of thesystem (Lemke, 2000). For example, a traffic jam emerges from the local interactions between individualdrivers; at the same time, it constrains the subsequent local interactions between these individuals. Onceunderway, traffic jams do seem to have a life of their own—such as the backwards propagation of a traffic jam(i.e., a clump of cars)—and this emergent pattern cannot be reduced to the behavior of the individual cars thatgenerally move forward. Similarly, structures (norms, values, beliefs, lexicons, and so on) within socialnetworks emerge from the local interactions between individual actors, and then, once emerged, these structuresconstrain the subsequent local interactions between these actors (Lemke, 2000; Watts & Strogatz, 1998).Understanding how properties such as opinions, representations, group dynamics, indeed, learningactually emerge requires, in our view, a careful consideration of how macro-level behaviors emerge from andconstrain micro-level interactions. This critical dynamic relates to another important complexity perspective—the co-existence of linearity and nonlinearity in complex systems, which we illustrate with an example. Considerthe brain as a collection of neurons (agents). These neurons are complex chemical systems themselves, but theyexhibit simple binary behavior in their synaptic interactions that are often modeled as linear, probabilisticfunctions (or rules). This type of emergent behavior, which demonstrates the complexity at the individual microlevel resulting in simplicity at the collective mezzo level, is called emergent simplicity (Bar-Yam, 2003). Putanother way, nonlinear chemical reactions can result in a linear, global behavior.Linearity may be broadly conceived both as a mathematical operator as well as a functionalrelationship. A linear operator is essentially an additive operator (Bertuglia & Vaio, 2005). For example,traditional analytical methodologies such as linear differential equations and statistical modeling, regardless oftheir mathematical sophistication, are essentially linear operators. They work well for closed, linear systems (orapproximations thereof) where the whole is equal to the sum of its parts, thus allowing one to break a systeminto its components or parts, study the parts individually, and then add the parts together to form the whole.However, applying the linear operator and its associated quantitative methodologies to the study of emergentbehavior in open systems is fundamentally problematic because, by definition, emergent properties haveproperties that are different than the parts, not additively composed of the parts.Linearity may also be conceived as a functional relationship, such as constant proportionality or astraight line. When applied to model a causal relationship, linearity restricts one to phenomena in which theeffects are proportional to their causes. This is because linearity tends to treat small changes or perturbations astemporally transient without any long-term effects. However, emergent behavior often exhibits nonlinear globalICLS 2014 Proceedings365© ISLSeffects even if the local action is linear. As we demonstrated above, linearity and nonlinearity can co-exist in asystem, and thus one cannot assume that global effects are proportional to their local causes. In fact, small linearchanges or perturbations such as El Nino can and often do have large, nonlinear effects. Nonlinearity in climatesystems has been metaphorically referred to as the so called “butterfly effect” in the seminal research of Lorenz(1963) a half a century ago. Unfortunately, important nonlinear relationships among variables across scales andhierarchies may be missed entirely, or worse, be inappropriately and inaccurately modeled linearly since that isonly what the linear method can handle (Holland, 1995).However, it is not the case that understanding emergent behavior requires that we make a “conceptualshift” from linearity to nonlinearity. Rather than characterizing the distinction between simple and complexsystems in terms of dichotomies such as linear versus nonlinear, we propose a more productive characterizationof complexity, and of emergent behavior, lies not in emphasizing these dichotomies, but in collapsing them. Weargue that complexity is better characterized as a dialectical co-existence of linearity and nonlinearity. Thecomplexity of emergent behavior comes from the co-existence of linearity and nonlinearity across and withinmultiple levels or scales of an open system. Indeed, because of this, complex systems exhibit seeminglyopposing properties and behaviors: randomness and order, predictability (e.g., attractors, highly connectednodes or hubs) and unpredictability, coherence and incoherence, stability and instability, centralization anddecentralization, and so on. Complexity is not one or the other, it is both (Kauffman, 1995).There are important general implications of emergence, linearity, and nonlinearity for understandingthe dynamics of learning and cognition in complex social systems. Perhaps the most important implication hasbeen well summarized by Gureckis and Goldstone (2006): “Rules that govern behavior at one level of analysis(the individual) can cause qualitatively different behavior at higher levels (the group)” (p. 1). We revisit thiscritical point in our discussions of debates such as cognitive versus situative perspectives and quantitative versusqualitative methodologies for educational research.The CSMTL and Re-conceptualizing the Cognitive Versus Situative DebateRecall that the central argument of this paper is that there are key long standing educational research debatesthat we believe may be re-conceptualized through the use of a complex systems meta-theory of learning(CSMTL) that is based conceptual perspectives and methodologies employed in the study of complex physical,biological, and social systems. To illustrate this thesis, we focus on the debate about the theoretical primacy ofcognitive versus situative perspectives on human cognition and learning. In our review of the cognitive-situativedebate, there are two main aspects of contention in the literature: (a) level of theoretical primacy and theoreticalmechanisms, and (b) methodologies for research. We also believe there is third issue implicit in this debate: (c)epistemic challenge of simple explanations for complexities of learning. Given space limitations, we nextconsider (a) and (c) here; please see Jacobson and Kapur (2012) for a discussion of (b).Level of Theoretical Primacy and Theoretical MechanismsIn the cognitive-situative debate in the 1990s, there was a clear advocacy of theoretical primacy for oneperspective or the other that then relegated the other perspective to secondary importance. For cognitiveadvocates, individual cognition was the fundamental level and the social context was viewed as a secondaryadditional component (Vera & Simon, 1993), whereas situative advocates regarded the level of social andecological interactions as being theoretically primary and individual cognition as secondary (Greeno, 1997).A metaphor for this facet of the debate is that advocates of cognitive and symbolic representations viewa system of learning as “trees” whereas advocates of situative perspectives view such a system as a “forest.”Regarding a learning system in terms of its micro-level "trees"—i.e., individuals as cognitive symbolicprocessing agents or neurons as agents—provides essential details but will miss patterns that arise when treesare contextualized at a macro-level "forest"—i.e., classroom community or socio-cultural milieu. Conversely,focus on "forests" of situated social and cultural contexts will fail to see the details of the micro-levels of alearning system. Thus for this critical facet of cognitive-situative debate it follows, in our view, that there is nota sufficient argument for the theoretical primacy of either perspective.But how might the CSMTL resolve this issue? As Bar-Yam (2002) has pointed out, scientists whostudy complex systems do not conceptualize such systems as either “trees” or “forest” but rather as “treesforest.” In terms of the CSMTL, this dynamic relationship between micro- and macro-levels of a learningsystem is the study of learning as an emergent phenomenon. The agents in a learning system, whether neuronsor symbolic cognitive constructs, interact with each other and their environments based on rules and typicallyself-organize through within-level feedback processes. These micro-level agent interactions yield emergentpatterns such as thoughts and feelings or social norms and practices at hierarchically higher levels of thelearning system. Critically, once higher system level patterns emerge, these may influence, shape, or constrainagent behaviors at lower levels through across-level feedback processes. For example, a student who cognitivelymakes sense (i.e., constructs a mental model with components similar to a scientific expert) of a predator-preyecosystem and a chemical reaction as being at equilibrium will likely be better able to engage in science inquiryICLS 2014 Proceedings366© ISLSactivities with other students and in turn come to gain greater insights into other scientific knowledge and tocome to enjoy engaging in other authentic types of scientific practices. The “trees-forest” metaphor also appliesto the dialectical co-existence of linearity and non-linearity as one leads to the other and vice versa, just asmicro-level actions lead to macro-level actions that in turn may constrain micro-level dynamics.We argue that the CSMTL provides a way to resolve which theoretical level of a system to employ—neither cognitive nor situative—but rather both. Related, the CSMTL provides theoretically principledmechanisms (e.g., self organization, feedback, emergence) from which to understand how patterns in learningthat situative perspectives are interested in emerge from the micro-level cognitive processes, as well as howsituated and cultural contexts can influence the cognitive and symbolic aspects of learning. Although ourdiscussion here is of necessity brief, we believe the CSMTL is superior to either theoretical perspectives aloneand thus should be explored further in future learning research as well as to analyze existing learning researchfrom its meta-theoretical perspective.Epistemic Challenge: Simple Explanations for Complexities of Learning?We have thus far considered conceptual implications of CSMTL for educational research, primarily using thecognitive versus situative debate as a crucible for these considerations. In this section we consider another issue,which is the epistemic implications of complex systems meta-theory and methods. A key, and perhapscounterintuitive, epistemic aspect of complex systems views is that the apparent complexity in the behavior ofmany complex systems may be described in terms of the interaction of system elements based on relativelysimple rules (see also our discussion of emergent complexity and emergent simplicity above). This issue seemsimplicit in views of Simon (1996): “The central task of a natural science is to make the wonderfulcommonplace: to show that complexity, correctly viewed, is only a mask for simplicity; to find pattern hidden inapparent chaos (p. 1).” We call this the simplicity-complexity epistemic view.The CSMTL represents an epistemic challenge to what we believe is a reasonably common epistemicview of complexity-complexity, which is that complex systems such as the ones educational researchers studymust have “complex” explanations whereas simple systems would, of course, have simple explanations. Indeed,a complexity-complexity epistemic bias—and its corollary, a simplicity-simplicity epistemic bias—would seemto be obvious characteristics of “common sense.” For example, a simple machine such as a pulley may beexplained as a rope wrapped around a wheel to raise or lower something, whereas the behavior and operation ofa complex machine such as a modern jet airliner could only be explained with complex concepts from physics(i.e., Bernoulli effect), engineering and materials science, business models to finance and maintain, and so on.In our reading of the cognitive-situative debate literature, there have been two main ways in whichwhat we characterize as an epistemic commitment to complex theories for human learning may be foundreflected in perspectives of both cognitive and situative educational researchers (see especially Anderson et al.(1996), Cobb (1999), and Greeno (1997)). First, whether viewed from cognitive or social perspectives, humanaction and learning are complex, and second, sophisticated (i.e., complex) theory—whether cognitive orsituative—is required to explain the complexity of human actions. We regard these views as being influenced bythe complexity-complexity epistemic bias.It is an important epistemic challenge of the CSMTL that we do not necessarily have to seek complexexplanations for complex behavior; such behavior may very well be explained from the “bottom up” via simple,minimal information, such as utility function, decision rule, or heuristics contained in local interactions (Nowak,2004). Of course, we recognize that future learning theory development may or may not align with a simplicitycomplexity epistemic view, indeed, the authors of this paper debate this point amongst ourselves. Still, beingaware of epistemic assumptions such as these has value to learning researchers, rather than an implicitacceptance of a position that might bias theory development or interpretation of data.Still, we stress that the CSMTL does not hold that the rules of agents in complex systems aredeterministic, depriving humans of any form of agency or deliberate, goal-directed activity. In fact, it is quitethe opposite; these rules are context-sensitive, probabilistic, and sensitive to initial conditions (chaotic), andshould be seen as explanatory constructs and relations developed by researchers to explain complexphenomenon. Once cognitive structures emerge through across level feedback mechanisms, these structuresconstrain the very linear, synaptic interactions between neurons that they emerged from (Epstein & Axtell,1996; Kauffman, 1995). Further, a host of other co-evolving factors—social, cultural, and environmental—arealso critical for behaviors such as cognition to emerge. Indeed, McClelland (2010, p. 753) argues:I don’t think that anyone who emphasizes the importance of emergent processes would denythat planful, explicitly goal-directed thought plays a role in the greatest human intellectualachievements. However, such modes of thought themselves might be viewed as emergentconsequences of a lifetime of thought-structuring practice supported by culture and education.ICLS 2014 Proceedings367© ISLSConclusionBefore concluding our advocacy for a complex systems meta-theory of learning, we reflect on the oft referred tostory of an individual who stops to ask a drunk at night prowling around on his hands and knees underneath astreet light “What are you doing?” The drunk replies: “I’m hunting for my glasses.” “But sir, they are not here;where did you lose them?” the stranger asks. “Over in the dark alley,” says the drunk,” but I can only see here.”In educational and learning sciences research, our “street lights” are our theories and methodologies, sothat the cognitive versus situative debate might be metaphorically regarded as two different streetlights. Weargue in this paper that viewing learning as emergence locates this phenomenon, at least partly, in the dark alley,hence our interests in new complexity-grounded theoretical constructs and methodologies that are being used tostudy complex physical and social systems (Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006; Goldstone, 2006). It is to be expected,of course, that new theoretical and methodological perspectives will invariably tend to generate more questionsthan answers. We both encourage and welcome this process, with hope that perspectives we suggest from theCSMTL might answer at least some claims for right questionsIn the history of the physical sciences, new theories, such as Einstein’s general theory of relativity thataccounted for the precession of the perihelion of the orbit of Mercury, helped direct empirical research inphysics to make an important new discovery that was inconsistent with earlier Newtonian theory. Likewise,new instrumentation and enabled research methods, such as the telescope for Galileo or particle accelerators formodern high-energy physics, invariably led to new theoretical breakthroughs. We hope our nascent CSMTLmight provide conceptual perspectives that re-conceptualize issues such as the long-standing cognitive-situativedebate in educational research, and that methodologies such as computational modeling techniques (e.g., agentbased modeling) might provide new instrumentation for researchers in the learning sciences.Overall, we hope that principled considerations of learning as an emergent phenomenon in complexneural, cognitive, situative, social, and cultural systems will yield critically important insights of centralrelevance to our field that might not otherwise be possible with current perspectives and approaches. Inaddition, we believe viewing the environments in which learning occurs as complex systems providesresearchers with powerful conceptual and methodological tools that are also being used by scientists in otherareas of research. That there may be synergies of theory and methods between researchers in our field withscientists in other fields has the potential to enable more cross-disciplinary research as well as opportunities tomore directly link findings from other fields to issues being explored by educational researchers and vise versa.We conclude humble and mindful of Einstein’s famous admonition—“everything must be made as simple aspossible, but not simpler”—as we articulate these first steps of a complex systems meta-theory of learning.Endnotes(1) For a fuller discussion of these and related issues, please see Jacobson and Kapur (2012).ReferencesAnderson, J. R., Reder, L. M., & Simon, H. A. (1996). Situated learning and education. EducationalResearcher, 25(4), 5-11.Anderson, J. R., Reder, L. M., & Simon, H. A. (1997). Situative versus cognitive perspectives: Form versussubstance. Educational Researcher, 26(1), 18-21.Bar-Yam, Y. (2002). General features of complex systems Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems. Oxford, UK:EOLSS UNESCO Publishers.Bar-Yam, Y. (2003). Dynamics of complex systems. New York: Perseus Publishing.Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2005). Technology and literacies: From print literacy to dialogic literacy. In N.Bascia, A. Cumming, A. Datnow, K. Leithwood & D. Livingstone (Eds.), International handbook ofeducational policy (pp. 749-761). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.Bertuglia, C. S., & Vaio, F. (2005). Nonlinearity, chaos, and complexity: The dynamics of natural and socialsystems. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18, 32-42.Bruer, J. T. (2006). On the implications of neuroscience research for science teaching and learning: Are thereany? A skeptical theme and variations: The primacy of psychology in the science of learning. CBE—Life Sciences Education, 5, 104–110. doi: 10.1187/cbe.06–03–0153Clancey, W. J. (2008). Scientific antecedents of situated cognition. In P. Robbins & M. Aydede (Eds.),Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition (pp. 11-34). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge UniversityPress.Cobb, P., & Bowers, J. (1999). Cognitive and situated learning prespectives in theory and practice. EducationalResearcher, 28(2), 4-15.Derry, S. J., & Steinkuehler, C. A. (2003). Cognitive and situative theories of learning and instruction. In L.Nadel (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science (pp. 800-805). England: Nature Publishing Group.ICLS 2014 Proceedings368© ISLSdiSessa, A. A. (2006). A history of conceptual change research: Threads and fault lines. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.),The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 265-281). Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUniversity Press.Epstein, J. M., & Axtell, R. (1996). Growing artificial societies: Social science from the bottom up.Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press/MIT Press.Firestone, W. A. (1987). Meaning in method: The rhetoric of quantitative and qualitative research. EducationalResearcher, 16(7), 16-21.Gell-Mann, M. (1994). The quark and the jaguar: Adventures in the simple and the complex. New York:Freeman and Company.Gleick, J. (1987). Chaos: Making a new science. New York: Viking Penguin.Goldstone, R. L. (2006). The complex systems see-change in education. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,15(1), 35-43.Greeno, J. G. (1997). On claims that answer the wrong questions. Educational Researcher, 26(1), 5-17.Greeno, J. G., & Moore, J. L. (1993). Situativity and symbols: Response to Vera and Simon. Cognitive Science,17, 49-59.Gureckis, T. M., & Goldstone, R. L. (2006). Thinking in groups. Pragmatics and Cognition, 14(2), 293-311.Holland, J. H. (1995). Hidden order: How adaptation builds complexity. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.House, E. R. (1991). Realism in research. Educational Researcher, 28(6), 2-9, 25.Isenberg, D. (1986). Group polarization: A critical review and meta-analysis. Journal of Personality and SocialPsychology, 50, 1141-1151.Jacobson, M. J., & Kapur, M. (2012). Learning environments as emergent phenomena: Theoretical andmethodological implications of complexity. In D. Jonassen & S. Land (Eds.), Theoretical Foundationsof Learning Environments (Second ed., pp. 303-334). New York: Routledge.Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importanceand implications for the learning sciences. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 11-34.Kapur, M., Voiklis, J., & Kinzer, C. K. (2008). Sensitivities to early exchange in synchronous computersupported collaborative learning (CSCL) groups. Computers and Education, 51, 54–66.Kauffman, S. (1995). At home in the universe: The search for laws of self-organization and complexity. NewYork: Oxford University Press.Lemke, J. J. (2000). Across the scales of time: Artifacts, activities, and meanings in ecosocial systems. Mind,Culture, and Activity, 7(4), 273-290.Lorenz, E. N. (1963). Deterministic nonperiodic flow. Journal of Atmospheric Science, 20, 130-141.McClelland, J. L. (2010). Emergence in cognitive science. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2(4), 751-770.Mitchell, M. (2009). Complexity: A guided tour. New York: Oxford University Press.Norman, D. A. (1993). Cognition in the head and in the world: An introduction to the special issue on situatedaction. Cognitive Science, 17(1), 1-6.Nowak, A. (2004). Dynamical minimalism: Why less is more in psychology. Personality and Social PsychologyReview, 8(2), 183-192.Pribram, K., & King, J. (Eds.). (1996). Learning as self organization. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence ErlbaumAssociate.Prigogine, I., & Stengers, I. (1984). Order out of chaos: Man's new dialogue with nature. New York: BantamBooks.Rumelhart, D. E., Smolensky, P., McClelland, J. L., & Hinton, G. E. (1986). Parallel distributed processingmodels of schemata and sequential thought processes. In J. L. McClelland & D. E. Rumelhart (Eds.),Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition (Vol. II, pp. 7–57).Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Sawyer, R. K. (1999). The emergence of creativity. Philosophical Psychology, 12(4), 447–469.Sawyer, R. K. (2004). The mechanisms of emergence. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 34, 260–282.Schwartz, D. L. (1995). The emergence of abstract dyad representations in dyad problem solving. The Journalof the Learning Sciences, 4(3), 321-354.Simon, H. A. (1996). The Sciences of the Artificial. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Suchman, L. (1993). Response to Vera and Simon's situated action: A symbolic interpretation. CognitiveScience, 17, 71-75.Vallabha, G. K., & McClelland, J. L. (2007). Success and failure of new speech category learning in adulthood:Consequences of learned Hebbian attractors in topographic maps. Cognitive, Affective and BehavioralNeuroscience, 7, 53–73.Vera, A. H., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Situated action: A symbolic interpretation. Cognitive Science, 17, 7-48.Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics of “small-world” networks. Nature(393), 440–442.ICLS 2014 Proceedings369© ISLS