Learning and Becoming Through Art-Making: Relationships amongTools, Phenomena, People, and Communities in Shaping YouthIdentity DevelopmentNoel Enyedy (Chair), University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, enyedy@gseis.ucla.eduJoseph L. Polman, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder CO, Joseph.polman@Colorado.eduCynthia Graville Smith, Saint Louis University, Saint Louis MO, cgravill@slu.eduMegan Bang, University of Washington, Seattle WA, mbang3@uw.eduBeth Warren and Ann S. Rosebery, Chèche Konnen Center, TERC, Boston MAbeth_warren@terc.edu, ann_rosebery@terc.eduNoel Enyedy, Jeff Burke, Fabian Wagmister, Amy Bolling, and Taylor Fitz-Gibbon, University of California,Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CAjburke@remap.ucla.edu, Fabian fabian@remap.ucla.edu, amy.bolling@gmail.com, tfitzgibbon@ucla.eduErica Rosenfeld Halverson, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WINa’ilah Nasir (Discussant), University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley CA, nailahs@berkeley.eduAbstract: The making of art creates possibilities for youth to simultaneously learn about whatis being represented and develop their own identity in relation to the representation and how itis accepted or reacted to by others. Each paper will present a different case of students makingart, how the process that they engaged in afforded different learning opportunities, and theoutcomes of their participation.IntroductionThere is growing concern in the Learning Sciences about the ways in which formal education is cut off fromreality. Schools, even classrooms that adopt inquiry methods and ambitious pedagogies, often abstractdisciplinary content away from the contexts and purposes of that knowledge—to solve complex, real worldproblems that are relevant to today’s youth now and into projected futures. One consequence of hermeticallysealing off schooling from real life by teaching the disciplinary content in abstract ways, with the hope that theconcepts can be connected to students’ passions and purposes at some later time, is to alienate students fromdisciplinary learning. Further, this formal education approach flies in the face of contemporary theories thatrecognize learning as intimately tied up with developing a sense of self and community through meaningfulparticipation in the practices of the communities of which they are becoming a part.The making of art—whether the medium is sculpture, film, performance, visual graphics, or newmedia—creates possibilities for youth to simultaneously learn about what is being represented and develop theirown identity in relation to the representation and how it is accepted or reacted to by others. In fact, it is not clearif these aspects are separable at all. We see developing one’s identity at the core of what it means to learn, andconstructing representations at the core of the process of becoming and re-envisioning oneself in relation to theworld.Why Focus on Art as a Means for Academic Identity Development?Art is deeply personal, but at the same time is always a comment on the world as well. The genre of artisticexpression that we focus on is the construction of art with a message. While any painting may evoke anemotion and reflect the artist’s perspective on the world, we focus on cases where students are explicitly andconsciously aware of creating art to critique, comment on, explore, convince others of a particular idea or createa narrative with a message embedded within the story. Art with a message provides an opportunity for studentsto start from where they are and what they know, but to direct their artwork outwards, towards an audience anda community concerned with the very subject the students are exploring. Thus, it provides youth a pathway forparticipation in a community that extends beyond the classroom and a pathway for the community to begin tointeract with youth in ways that serve varied interests.Additionally, art with a message provides a productive tension between individualistic expression andcompetent community participation that helps us as analysts to uncover some of the pathways and tools foridentity development that remain invisible in other contexts. For example, Halverson (2013) points out that artis often treated as the ultimate personal expression, and yet there are historical conventions for art making thatcommunity members expect the artist or maker to follow or selectively break. This contradiction creates adilemma for adults who wish to work with and develop youth identities as film-makers or artists. InHalverson’s study the professional communities of film-makers that worked with youth, they resolved thiscontradiction in different ways—creating very different pathways for students as a result. In summary, artICLS 2014 Proceedings1436© ISLSmaking has some unique affordances to involve both students and community members in new and interestingways as well as being a revealing context to explore identity development more generally.Theoretical FrameworkThere are many different theories of identity and identity development. Each scholar in the symposium hasadopted a theory of identity best suited to explaining their data and context, in-line with their own intellectualhistory. However, our presentations will be unified by our attention to practice-based theories of identity—discursive practices, tools of the trade, and roles within a community that people use to guide and understandparticipation (e.g. Nasir, 2002; Wortham, 2006). Further, the presentations will attempt to theorize therelationship between practice based identity and narrative identity—theories that focus on the stories we tellourselves that create a stable narrative of who we are (Sfard & Prusak, 2005)—in new ways. Understandingpractice-based identities provide us pragmatic ways to think about the opportunities to create new pathways tobecome someone and support the day-to-day work of identity development.At a broad level identity development can be examined in terms of the ontological development of thesubject in relation to the goals and tools of the community (Nasir, 2002). There are often established pathwaysfor people to move along this trajectory. Existing community members play a vital role in inviting newcomersin, modeling the practices and tools, and helping the newcomers to understand and appropriate the values andpurposes of the community. These invitations mark out the long term trajectory and the ways that morecompetent members work with newcomers to achieve smaller milestones of competent participation. Polman(2010) argues that these negotiations between adults and youth are analogous to Vygotsky’s notion of the Zoneof Proximal Development calling them Zones of Proximal Identity Development to highlight that the focus is onidentity rather than conceptual understanding.At a more fine grained level of detail, our collection of papers offers a coherent look at the diversity ofways that adults work with youth in these ZPIDs. Halverson’s earlier work (2013) is particularly importanthere. Her work documented how four different afterschool programs structured youth’s production ofdocumentary films. Her analysis focused on the various professional filmmaking tools (e.g., pitches, scripts,artist statements etc.) that fundamentally shaped students participation and products. All of the papers in thesymposium will highlight the tools that students were mentored in using and how the tools contributed to andhelped shape their developing identities and learning.Summary of PapersEach paper will present a different case of students making art, how the process that they engaged in affordeddifferent learning opportunities, and the outcomes of their participation. Polman and Graville Smith describehow the combination of aesthetic and information design in infographics authoring within an authentic datajournalism internship contributes to identity development and learning. Bang, Warren and Rosebery describetheir evolving research to design an artscience approach to learning focused on engaging underrepresentedmiddle and high school youth in exploring and appropriating to their own expressive and communicativepurposes practices of cultivating attention, making, critique and exhibition in relation to climate change and thehuman microbiome. Halverson outlines four frames that used within educational research to study of identityand details four corresponding design principals for art-making projects that help lead to the development ofpositive self. Enyedy et al. describe how producing an interactive mural became a site for learning about theirneighborhood and urban planning concepts and becoming activists who wished to inform and persuade theircommunity about urban planning decisions.Format of the SessionThe symposia will begin with short 10-minute talks by each presenter. If space permits, we would like to givethe audience 15 minutes to explore more closely the artwork generated by the participants of the variousprojects. This would be structured like a museum walk or a poster session, where the audience could moreclosely examine cases of student work and ask questions of the presenters. We would then reconvene for a 10minute commentary by our discussant Na’ilah Nasir. Estimating 5 minutes for transition time, this would leaveapproximately 20 minutes for moderated discussion among members of the symposium and with the audience.Becoming Data Journalists: Developing Authoritative Self-Expression throughInfographics Creation for PublishingJoseph L. Polman, University of Colorado Boulder and Cynthia Graville Smith, Saint Louis University"Infographics" are visually dense representations of data and information, which are increasingly relevant tomass media and social media communication. Infographics are used in both print and electronic media as ameans of visualizing data and as a medium of organizing and communicating science information andarguments. A number of websites such as Visual.ly and good.is distribute infographics, and they are used inICLS 2014 Proceedings1437© ISLSestablished outlets like The New York Times, The Guardian, and Wired. Infographics are more than chartscreated from quantitative data for they involve qualitative or visual cues which their authors use to illustrate ordifferentiate ideas (Lankow, Ritchie, & Crooks, 2012; Smiciklas, 2012). As such, infographics are an art formwith a message, combining information design with aesthetic design.As part of a broader project on developing young adults' science literacy through collaborativeinfographics, this presentation will focus on how the combination of aesthetic and information design ininfographics authoring within an authentic data journalism internship contributes to development and learning.We take a sociocultural perspective on human action and learning, using the notions of mediated action(Wertsch, 1998) and identification (Wortham, 2006) over time to interpret development as a combination oftrajectories of participation and identification (Polman, 2012). We are concerned with the verbal andrepresentational discourse of participants, as evidencing changes in scientifically literate ways of thinking(Polman, Newman, Saul, and Farrar, under review). In addition, we are concerned with the zones of proximalidentity development (Polman, 2010) created by hybrid activity spaces where brokering and boundary objectspresent opportunities for young people to engage with disciplinary content and practices of professional groupsin ways that allow them to develop new identifications (Gutiérrez, 2008; Polman & Hope, under review; Starand Griesemer, 1989).The context of this research study is a year-round out-of-school data journalism internship for highschool aged youth sponsored by the Communication Department at Saint Louis University, with support from aNational Science Foundation Cyberlearning grant. The internship program was established by Graville Smith inJanuary 2013, and has included 6 to 10 youth through three cycles of infographic authoring. Youth participantsare recruited from community programs and high schools in the region, with an emphasis on recruiting AfricanAmerican and Latino students, as well as students with an interest in art (from a nearby arts-based charterschool). For this presentation, we will focus on four teens: Areli, an African-American young woman whoattends a private, all-girls Catholic school; Amy, a Latina who attends a public suburban school; Moriah, anAfrican-American young woman who attended an urban public high school with competitive admissions, andnow attends a 4-year state college; and Brian a European-American who attends an arts-based urban charterschool.Our methods are case studies focusing on the trajectories of identification and participation of thesefour youth in the data journalism internship. We focus on the discursive accomplishment of their making ofinfographics in the nascent data journalism community of practice. We conceptualize infographics as a genre of"art with a message," and relate authoring work to youth's development of authoritative voices expressing theirideas about science and its importance to the lives of potential readers, and to their development ofidentifications. All four of these participants entered the program with trajectories aimed at arts-related careers:Areli intended to pursue a career in animation by way of studies in computer science, Amy intended to pursue acareer in animation in a context similar to Pixar, Moriah intended to pursue a career in graphic design (she isnow majoring in that field at college), and Brian intended to pursue a career in the visual arts.Our preliminary findings include the following. The development of youth identifications waspositively influenced by (1) the structuring of activity in the internship, (2) the authentic expressive practices,tools, and role as journalism practitioners taken on by youth; and (3) the status of data journalism withinfographics as an emerging and shifting professional arena, and the specific youth internship as a nascent effortat participatory action research. Table 1 below shows the main stages of a graphic "project diagram" created byan adult staff member at the internship; the full graphic included specific actions and tools used at the variousstages of an infographic design project. It shows how the chronological flow of activity is generally from top tobottom (ideation to data analysis to design) and from left to right (making choices, exploring andcommunicating), but arrows based on various contingencies lead to different stages non-linearly. Youthparticipants use the digital note-taking tool Evernote heavily, and identify what they are doing based on thisframework.Table 1: Stages of a graphic projectIdeasDataDesignMake ChoicesIdentify IdeaDetermine DataDraft DesignExploreResearch IdeaVisualize DataModify DesignCommunicatePitch IdeaPresent DataSubmit DesignThe activity framework above, with on the fly support from two adult supervisors, enables these youthto carry out a complex set of practices, all aimed at designing infographics which compellingly and clearlyconvey the youth's understanding of science that they see as relevant and interesting to their audience (youthreaders of an online and print publication). Areli's infographic about zombie bees engaged her in communicatingwith a scientist doing emergent research in this arena, and she applied her skills as an illustrator to the task ofICLS 2014 Proceedings1438© ISLSscientific illustration using the professional tool Adobe Illustrator, in order to create an eye-catching andinformation-rich diagram for readers (see Figure 1). Amy's infographic about when people really pay fortobacco use, in terms of incidence of mouth, lung, and esophagus cancer, challenged her to find a way to conveya large amount of data on diagnosis and mortality in a way that readers could understand quickly; she used acombination of Excel and Illustrator to visualize and organize representations. Moriah struggled to balanceaesthetic and informational goals in her infographic on hair relaxers, which was exacerbated by the fact that shestruggled to understand and therefore represent the complex whole-to-part magnification of a relaxed hairstrand. Brian’s infographic about tracing the evolution of the T. Rex to modern chickens challenged his selfpositioning as a "dinosaur expert" and "great artist," when he struggled with the boundaries/gaps/depth of hisknowledge to translate his lifelong interest in the topic into a coherent and concise representation of theemergent science topic.Figure 1. Detail from three science news infographics published by teen internsThese efforts benefitted from reference to authentic standards of good journalism, aimed atauthoritatively conveying the current science, combined with support for aesthetic visual expression. Finally, theparticipants in this activity were readily able to engage in consideration of what it meant to position oneself inrelation to possible selves, in part because data journalism in today's participatory, web-based media is such amoving target, and in part because their contributions to participatory action research had obvious affects onpractices and tools in their own internship workplace.We will discuss the implications of this research and development for learning environments aiming toincorporate artistic and design cultures.Expansive Meanings and Makings in ArtScienceMegan Bang, University of Washington, Beth Warren and Ann S. Rosebery Chèche, Konnen Center, TERCExpansive Meanings and Makings in ArtScience (EMMAS) is a collaborative design research project focusedon exploring the untapped potential of an artscience approach to learning and teaching for youth fromcommunities historically underrepresented in science, including Native American, African American, HaitianAmerican and Latino youth. In Seattle and Boston, two teams of learning scientists, educators, artists, andscientists are engaged in designing artscience inquiries for middle and high school youth in the domains ofclimate change and the human microbiome, both critically important in 21st c life. In these inquiries,participating youth directly investigate complex scientific phenomena, interpret related artistic and scientificvisualizations, and develop creative responses for community engagement that integrate scientific and artisticconcerns, materials and processes.As an emerging creative movement, artscience takes many forms, all of which highlight thecommonalities in thinking and making practices used by artists and scientists (Brown et al., 2011; Edwards,2008; Heath, 1986; Jones & Galison, 1998; Root-Bernstein & Root-Bernstein, 1999; Siler, 1996). In thisresearch, we conceptualize an artscience repertoire to include multifaceted practices of cultivating attention,making, critique and exhibition. These practices interestingly connect with those specified in NGSS but moreinterestingly expand them into open and varied forms of experimentation and expression that integrate acrossembodied and represented experience. Further, they place strong emphasis on coming to know phenomenadeeply as an open process of relational understanding grounded in heterogeneity (Bakhtin, 1981) or multiplicity(Massey, 2005). Thus, as conceptualized in this project, an artscience repertoire involves youth and adults,ICLS 2014 Proceedings1439© ISLSworking together, in making and re-making relationships with phenomena, tools, materials, histories, and eachother as a creative, emergent process of growth (Ingold, 2013; Nasir, 2012; Wenger, 1998). In this sense, weapproach identity development as the ongoing generation and negotiation of relations within a multiplicity ofpossible trajectories—what Doreen Massey (2005) calls “a simultaneity of stories-so-far” (p. 12).Broadly speaking, in EMMAS we are exploring the possibility that artscience inquiries—in theiropenness to boundary-crossing thinking, diverse ways of seeing, and hybrid modes of creative expression—willexpand opportunities for youth from communities historically underrepresented in STEM to a) engagemeaningfully in complex science and art, b) develop depth of understanding and craft in domains of significanceto them and their communities, and c) erase boundaries between learning in school and thinking-acting in thelarger community.••In Seattle, Native youth, working with Red Eagle Soaring Native Youth Theater and withoceanographers and marine ecologists, are creating and performing an original play that aims at renarrating relationships between the salmon life cycle and ocean processes beyond the dominantdiscourses of adaptation and mitigation in climate change.In Boston, students at Boston Arts Academy (a public high school) from diverse communities areworking together with science and art teachers, Broad Institute microbiologists, and local artists (a datasculptor, a painter, a computational artist) to re-envision the human body ecologically as an assemblageof life forms living together—a microbiome—with major implications for health and disease.In both sites, students’ art-making will undergo rounds of critique focused on forward-looking analysis ofevolving work and work processes. Their work will be performed or exhibited in public spaces with the goal ofengaged community learning and co-production of possible futures in relation to climate change, health anddisease. In these ways, artscience practices potentially make available to youth multifaceted identities that crossboundaries of art and science, school and community, nature and culture.EMMAS is in its initial design phase. Therefore, in this paper we will share preliminary analyses ofartscience design activity at the two sites. We will focus on examining interactions between educators, artistsand scientists as they a) engage in sustained, close looking at scientific and artistic sources in the domains ofclimate change and the human microbiome, and b) experiment with art-making practices in response to thesources. Through interaction analysis and discourse analysis of key events, we will address the followingquestions: What insights, tensions, and questions arise as the designers—educators, artists and scientists—collectively cultivate their attention to these sources? What kinds of relationships to sources and materials aregenerated and negotiated as they experiment with art-making? What commonalities and differences emergebetween the two sites? How do these inform design possibilities for artscience inquiries in climate change andthe human microbiome for youth?Cybermural: Becoming Artist Activists and Learning Urban PlanningNoel Enyedy, Jeff Burke, Fabian Wagmister, Amy Bolling, and Taylor Fitz-Gibbon, UCLAPublic spaces play an integral role in human life. To investigate how learning and becoming can be reconceptualized to help youth become involved and informed citizens, we linked formal education to activism bylocating learning and becoming in both an after school program and in the public spaces of the youth’s ownneighborhoods. The students produced public art to comment on the past present and future of theirneighborhood.Given the goals of our project we developed a set of non-traditional learning objectives. Civicengagement can be seen to have a developmental trajectory that begins with awareness and personalresponsibility, grows into participation, and culminates with a critical perspective and a set of practices toconstructively engage in activism and our democratic process (Westheimer & Kahne, 2004). We see digitallyenhanced public spaces as an opportunity to invite new members—in particular, youth—into existingcommunity groups, sustain their interest and scaffold their participation, and support the development of acritical understanding of community issues and relate them to larger political and institutional arrangements.Our model for promoting civic identity development, adopted from Learning Science work in youthactivism (Kirshner, 2007) and digital media production (Halverson, 2008), centered on working with an existingcommunity group that worked with 8 high school students in an afterschool program. To study the students’learning and identity development, we used qualitative research methods including interviews and observations.For this presentation we will present the data from the interviews, which focused on students’ self-narratives oftheir own identities. Pre and post interviews were compared to explore students’ changed perceptions of selfand issues impacting the community.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1440© ISLSThe CyberMural Authoring System and ProcessThe “cybermural” itself is a digital collage of photographs, drawings, and text produced by students thatchanges in response to an observer’s motion through a motion-based interaction camera system. However, fromthe standpoint of identity development and learning it is the authoring process, and not just the end-product, thatis important. Below we outline the six phases of the authoring process where by students create art,understanding, and themselves in relation to their neighborhood.1.2.3.Students’ explore their community and their own prior knowledge.Create media. Students then create media assets (images, sound, etc.) that encapsulate some idearelated to the broader themes that emerge from their exploration.Assign folksonomy keywords and weights. The media that is gathered is uploaded in an online galleryby the students. The group revisits the conceptual discussions of step #1, and enumerates keywords(e.g., gentrification, social connectedness, income) that embody important concepts. Selected imagesare assigned tags that are “weighted” on a consistent scale (e.g., income on a scale of 1 to 100).Figure 2. Building a scene from 5 different students ideograms4.5.Build “scenes” or “collections” from media. To prepare an interactive mural, these tagged and codedmedia assets are now assembled into a traditional looking mural. However, the mural changes whichimages are displayed depending on the values of the concepts involved. For example in the muraldepicted below the values are income 29 and social connectedness 82. As those values change theimages such as the baseball diamond and swimming pool might disappear, while other images notpresent in this state appear for the first time.Map interaction to media responses via folksonomy concepts. The concept values change based onhow the audience member moves his body in front of the mural. For example, if an audience membergot physically closer to the mural it might increase the “income” value, and thus change what imagesare displayed.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1441© ISLSFigure 3. Constructing scenes fro five student folksonomies6.Present the mural. The final phase of the project involves students presenting their mural to the publicand explain what they intend the mural to show.We began this project with a Community of Practice (CoP) perspective. We expected the mural project wouldbe an entry point into community of practice — a site of learning and action in which people come togetheraround a joint enterprise and in the process develop a common, historically constituted repertoire of activities,set of stories, and way of speaking and acting (Wenger, 1998). However, we came to see our project more as anexample of expansive learning (Engestrom & Sannino, 2010), where students themselves contested the activity,and used the mural and the authoring process to develop a new hybrid practice that redefined the nature andpurpose of their activity in the afterschool program and in their neighborhood.Identity, Art-making, and the Design of Learning EnvironmentsErica Rosenfeld Halverson, University of Wisconsin-MadisonIn this paper, I wrestle with the myriad constructions of “identity” that exist in education research, describe howthese constructions have been used in the design of learning environments, and unpack what we can learn aboutidentity and design through studies of art-making. There are four primary frames that are leveraged with respectto the study of identity within educational contexts:• Identity as a psychological construct that describes individuals’ internal, lifelong sensemaking process;•Identity as understood within the context of the sociological processes of our everyday lives;• Identity as defined by a series of social categories that help individuals and communities to identifyindividuals and the cultural contexts to which they ascribe;• Identity as constructed in and through the narratives that people tell formally, informally, and over thecourse of their lives.While these frames are not mutually exclusive, each one offers a window into how we use identity ineducational research, especially as we design interventions, curricula, and community settings that attendexplicitly to issues of identity in learning.Identity as Psychological ConstructHere, I am referring to the psychological tradition popularized by Erikson (1968) that frames identity as aninternal mechanism by which we make sense of ourselves and how we fit into the world around us. Thismechanism exists regardless of context, time, and interaction, but is activated by times of “crisis” whenindividuals experience a disconnect between their internal sensemaking and their actions in the world.Educational psychologists have favored this frame for identity and measure successful and unsuccessfuldevelopment using validated measures (Marcia, 1994). Examples of designs that reflect a psychological stanceon identity and development include Bers’ (2001) identity construction environments and Stern’s (2008) reviewof teens’ use of personal social media for identity development. I have considered the role of art-making in thestudy of psychological identity and I have found that the process of creating, adapting, and sharing original artfacilitates psychological processes including exploring possible selves and creating a viable social identity(Halverson, 2005, 2009).Identity within Sociological Processes.The sociological frame for understanding identity competes with the psychological, theorizing identity asconstructed in the social world through interaction (Mead, 1934). From a sociological perspective there is noICLS 2014 Proceedings1442© ISLSidentity absent presentation; identity is historically rooted but constructed anew in every interaction. Mostprogressive educators resonate with a more sociological view of identity and study identity-in-action usingframes including individuals’ “figured worlds” (Holland & Lachicotte, 2007) or the “identity kits” that areconstructed through discourse (e.g. Gee, 1989). Much of the work on communities of practice as learningenvironments draws on sociological understandings of identity to design spaces that afford the construction andpresentation of identities-in-practice (Wenger, 1998). It is perhaps obvious that the sharing or performance oforiginal art in the context of learning environment offers opportunities for the construction of sociologicallysituated identities (Halverson, 2005). Less apparent but equally as powerful is the role that the adaptation ofwork for public performance plays in young peoples’ socio-cognitive understanding of how representationcreates (and is created by) identity (Halverson, 2010a, 2010b).Identity in Social CategoriesWhile identity as sociological process refers to the how of identity, we also think of identity in educationalresearch in terms of the apriori social categories we assign to individuals (and that individuals assignthemselves) as markers of identity. Social identity categories include race, ethnicity, gender, and social class(e.g. Kao, 2000; Phinney & Ong, 2007) but can also refer to “clique” categories defined by social groupidentification (Eckert, 1989). As research that evaluates individuals based on their categorical affiliation, thisframe for identity is often constraining and deficit-based. However, design-based research that aims to debunksocial categorization as a valid measure of positive identity development has proven a powerful method toovercome identity as stereotype (see, for example, Fleetwood, 2005; Lee, Spencer, & Harpalani, 2003; Nasir &Hand, 2008). Art-making experiences offer particular opportunities to “detypify” social categories throughspecific representational choices. In fact, youth art-makers often express and explore identity at the intersectionamong representational modes (Halverson, 2010b). It is important to remember that in art-making processes,representational choices are purposeful and that the designed learning environment serves to help youth makethese choices and to reflect on them as a core part of what it means to understand the relationship betweenidentity and art.Identity as NarrativeNarratives as constituting and constituitive of identities can be found across psychological, sociological, andsocial categories’ perspectives on identity in education. Learning environments from Alcoholics Anonymous(Cain, 1991) to the math classroom (Sfard & Prusak, 2005) draw on the narrativization of experience as crucialto learners’ positive identity construction and affiliation. Art-making is a natural match for narrative conceptionsof identity – it is easy to see how if we think about identity as instantiated in narrative why creating art isnecessary for young peoples’ development. I have found that for young people who feel marginalized frommainstream institutions, narrative opportunities to create, adapt, and express identity are crucial to thedevelopment of positive conceptions of self (e.g. Halverson, 2005, 2010a, 2010b).Design Implications for Art-making and IdentityRegardless of which frame for considering identity we bring to bear in the design of learning environments, it isclear that art-making supports the development of positive self, especially for young people who regularlyexperience marginalization. For learning environments that value art-making, I consider the following principlesfor design:• Draw on local community conceptions of identity as the basis for design; art-making supports bothindividualistic and collectivistic ways of thinking about identity;• Engage learners in cycles of creating, representing, and sharing art so that learners can experience whateach component of the cycle affords. Public sharing is especially important and is often left out of thedesign of learning experiences because they are difficult to organize and manage;• Provide many opportunities for critique, feedback, and reflection. It is in these moments that youngpeople come to articulate the relationship between their understanding of identity and how art-makingsupports identity construction and representation;• Evaluate learning as both process and product, looking for the development of metarepresentationalcompetence, an understanding of when to draw on which tools for what purposes in the expression ofideas about self (Halverson, 2013).It is my hope that these design principles spark conversations around art-making learning environments but alsohelp the learning sciences to think about identity as a theoretical construct more broadly in research.ReferencesBakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination. Austin: Texas University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1443© ISLSBers, M. U. (2001). Identity construction environments: Developing personal and moral values through thedesign of a virtual city. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(4), 365-415.Brown, A., Snelson, K., Root-Bernstein, R. & Siler, T. (2011). An ArtScience Manifesto. Leonardo Journal ofArt, Science, Technology, June 2011.Cain, C. (1991). Personal stories: Identity acquisition and self-understanding in Alcoholics Anonymous. Ethos,19(2), 210-253.Eckert, P. (1989). Jocks and burnouts: Social categories and identity in the high school (Chapter 1, pp. 1-24).New York: TC Press.Edwards, D. (2008). Artscience: Creativity in the post-Google generation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UniversityPress.Engeström, Y., and Sannino, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and futurechallenges. Educational Research Review 5.1 1-24.Erikson, E. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis (Prologue, Chapter 3, Chapter 6). New York: WW Norton & Co.Fleetwood, N. R. (2005). Authenticating practices: Producing realness, performing youth. In S. Maira and E.Soep (Eds.), Youthscapes: The popular, the national, the global (pp. 155-172). Philadelphia, PA:University of Pennsylvania Press.Halverson, E. R. (2005). InsideOut: Facilitating gay youth identity development through a performance-basedyouth organization. Identity: An International Journal of Theory & Research, 5(1), 67-90.Halverson, E. R. (2010a). Film as identity exploration: A multimodal analysis of youth-produced films.Teachers College Record, 112(9), 2352-2378.Halverson, E. R. (2010b). Detypification as identity development: The dramaturgical process and LGBTQyouth. Journal of Adolescent Research, 25(5), 635-668.Halverson, E. R. (2013). Digital art-making as a representational process. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,22(1), 121-162.Heath, S.B. (1986). Good science or bad art? Or both? In D. Baker, J. Clay and C. Fox (Eds.), Challengingways of knowing: In English, mathematics and science, pp. 13-18. London: The Falmer Press.Holland, D. & Lachicotte, W. (2007). Vygotsky, Mead, and the new sociocultural studies of identity. In H.Daniels, M. Cole, & J. Wertsch (Eds.), The Cambridge companion to Vygotsky. London: Cambridge.Ingold, T. (2013). Making: Anthropology, archaeology, art and architecture. New York: Routledge.Jones, C. & Galison, P. (Eds.). (1998). Picturing science, producing art. New York: Routledge.Kao, G. (2000). Group images and possible selves among adolescents: Linking stereotypes to expectations byrace and ethnicity. Sociological Forum, 15(3), 407-430.Kirshner, B. (Ed.). (2007). Special issue: Youth activism as a context for learning and development. AmericanBehavioral Scientist, 51(3).Lankow, J., Ritchie, J., & Crooks, R. (2012). Infographics: The power of visual storytelling. Hoboken: NJ: JohnWiley & Sons, Inc.Lee, C. D., Spencer, M. B., & Harpalani, V. (2003). “Every shut eye ain’t sleep”: Studying how people liveculturally. Educational Researcher, 32(5), 6-13.Marcia, J. E. (1994). The empirical study of ego identity. In H. A. Bosma, T. L. Graafsma, H. D. Grotevant, &D. J. Delevita (Eds.), Identity and development: An interdisciplinary approach (pp. 67-80). ThousandOaks, CA: Sage.Massey, D. (2005). For space. Los Angeles: Sage.Mead, G. H. (1934). Mind, self, and society (Part III, pp. 135-200). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Nasir, N. (2002). Identity, goals, and learning: Mathematics in cultural practice. Mathematical thinking andlearning 4.2-3 213-247.Nasir, N.S. (2012). Racialized identities: Race and achievement among African American youth. Stanford:Stanford University Press.Nasir, N. & Hand, V. (2008). From the court to the classroom: Opportunities for engagement, learning, andidentity in basketball and classroom mathematics. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17, 143-179.Phinney, J. S. & Ong, A. D. (2007). Conceptualization and measurement of ethnic identity: Current status andfuture directions. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 54(3), 271-281.Polman, J. L. (2010). The zone of proximal identity development in apprenticeship learning. Revista deEducación, 353(September-December), 129-155.Polman, J. L. (2012). Trajectories of participation and identification in learning communities involvingdisciplinary practices. In D. Yun Dai (Ed.), Design research on learning and thinking in educationalsettings: Enhancing intellectual growth and functioning (pp. 225-242). New York: Routledge.Polman, J. L., and Hope, J. (under review). Science news stories as boundary objects affecting engagement withscience.Polman, J. L., Newman, A., Saul, E. W., & Farrar, C. (under review). Adapting practices of science journalismto foster science literacy.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1444© ISLSRoot-Bernstein, R.S. & Root-Bernstein, M. (1999). Sparks of genius. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin Company.Sfard, A. & Prusak, A. (2005). Telling identities: In search of an analytic tool for investigating learning as aculturally shaped activity. Educational Researcher, 34(4), 14-22.Siler, T. (1996). Think like a genius. New York: Bantam Books.Smiciklas, M. (2012). The Power of Infographics: Using Pictures to Communicate and Connect with YourAudiences. Indianapolis, IN: Que Publishing.Star, S. L, & Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology, 'translations,' and boundary objects: Amateurs andprofessionals in Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology. Social Studies of Science, 19(3), 387-420.Stern, S. (2008). Producing sites, exploring identities: Youth online authorship. In D. Buckingham (Ed.), Youth,identity, and digital media (pp. 95-117). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Westheimer, Joel, and Joseph Kahne. (2004). What kind of citizen? The politics of educating fordemocracy. American educational research journal 41.2: 237-269.Wortham, S. (2006).Learning identity: The joint emergence of social identification and academic learning. NewYork: Cambridge University Press.AcknowledgmentsThis material is in part based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. IIS1217052 (Polman & Smith) and NSF 1256227 (Enyedy et al.).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1445© ISLS