Learning in Low-Performing School Districts: Conceptual andMethodological Challenges Resulting from Network ChurnKara S. Finnigan, Warner School of Education, University of Rochester, kfinnigan@warner.rochester.eduAlan J. Daly, Education Studies, University of California-San Diego, ajdaly@ucsd.eduAbstract: Turning around low-performing schools and districts has become a primary focusof educational policy across the country as a result of state and federal accountability policiesimplemented over the last decade. Our study uses theories of organizational learning andsocial network analysis to examine the structure and types of ‘ties,’ or relationships, amongeducators across an entire low-performing district. Our paper uncovers critical aspects of thecontext, some of which are directly related to the accountability policies that are meant tobring about improvement, which limit ‘learning’ in these schools and districtwide. Our studyhas important implications for both the understanding of learning processes in districtwideimprovement, as well as methodological strategies for examining these.Focus and SignificanceA national push for higher levels of performance and accountability through federal policies and programs hasincreased the pressure on the schools and districts in the most challenging circumstances. Recent federalpolicies like NCLB and Race to the Top rely heavily on local school districts and their low-performing schoolsto engage in reform efforts to bring about improvement. However, most schools have struggled rather thanimproved. U.S. Secretary of Education Arne Duncan brought attention to this in his testimony to Congress whenhe noted that NCLB, “has created a thousand ways for schools to fail and very few ways to help them succeed”(Duncan, 2011).Improving underperforming schools is challenging work that requires close attention to internalconditions in these schools, including the social relationships that facilitate improvement. Underperformingschools tend to be turbulent organizations with high staff turnover, multiple and changing reforms, andchallenges related to leadership (Daly, 2009; Daly & Finnigan, 2011, 2012; Finnigan, 2010, 2012; Finnigan &Stewart, 2009), teacher quality (Sunderman, Kim & Orfield, 2005), and teacher motivation (Finnigan & Gross,2007). Research in other fields has found that system-wide improvement is closely linked to the quality andstructure of organizational relationships (McGrath & Krackhardt, 2003; Tenkasi & Chesmore, 2003) withfrequent interactions supporting the transfer of tacit, non-routine, and complex knowledge, thereby allowing forcollaborative problem solving and systemic change (Hansen, 1999; Reagans & McEvily, 2003; Uzzi, 1997).Within the field of education, research has found that schools with collaborative or trusting cultures are morelikely to show signs of improvement and innovation (Bryk & Schneider, 2002; Mintrop, 2004; Mintrop &Trujillo, 2005; Moolenaar, 2010; O’Day, 2004). Beyond the importance of internal processes and relationships,much recent literature has found that greater attention must be paid to the larger district in which lowperforming schools reside given the key role of the central office and the importance of a systemwide approachto improvement (Burch & Spillane, 2004; Datnow & Castellano, 2003; Honig 2006; Marsh et al, 2005; Smylie,Wenzel, & Fendt, 2003).Building upon this prior work, drawing on the theoretical lens of organizational learning, and utilizingthe methodological approach of social network analysis, our exploratory study examines schools and their largerdistrict context as they attempt to improve under accountability policy sanctions. We sought to answer thefollowing questions: What are the structure of relationships for leaders in low-performing districts and do thesechange over time? What are the structure of relationships within low-performing schools and how do thesefacilitate or hinder learning? To what extent do leaders in low-performing districts have the cross-sectorconnectedness and reciprocal ties necessary for large-scale learning and improvement?Our study makes a unique contribution to the research because it involves longitudinal network data ofleaders in low-performing districts. In addition, it focuses specifically on the relationships among and betweenboth school and central office leaders to understand the district as a larger organizational unit. Finally, the paperexamines the structure and types of relationships necessary for organizational learning. In our prior work wefocus on specific aspects of organizational learning processes; here, instead, we pull together theories of socialnetworks and organizational learning to examine not only the existence and types of relationships of educationalleaders, but also how these change over time, to understand organizational learning and improvement in lowperforming districts.ICLS 2014 Proceedings426© ISLSTheoretical FrameworkOrganizational LearningLearning in education is often used to describe the process through which individual students gain knowledge orskills in school settings. However, ‘learning’ is also important at the school and district organizational levels,particularly in the context of reform. As schools and districts, “continue to face a steady stream of novelproblems and ambitious demands” (Leithwood, Jantzi, & Steinbach, 1995, pp. 3-4), a deeper understanding oflearning process in schools and districts that are under tremendous pressure to perform may be useful especiallygiven the growing numbers of these systems. Our research builds upon the work of organizational learningtheorists (see, for example, Argyris & Schön, 1996; Huber, 1991; Levitt & March, 1988; March, 1991) in betterunderstanding these processes.Organizational learning is the process of detecting and correcting problems to improve organizationaleffectiveness (Argyris & Schön, 1996). The process of accurately diagnosing the underlying issues facing anorganization is one of the first and most crucial steps in an organizations ability to ‘learn’ and improve (Argyris& Schön, 1996; Collinson & Cook, 2007). This suggests that the process of organizational learning involvesunderstanding the important elements of practice, as well developing the underlying beliefs that supportpractice. Learning in an organizational sense leads members to change both behaviors (Levitt & March, 1988)and norms (Collinson & Cook, 2007) through a deliberate, rather than haphazard, process (Fiol & Lyles, 1985).Recent research suggests that this learning orientation toward reform and change can have significant impact onimproving organizational performance (Hubbard, Mehan & Stein, 2006; Knapp, 2008). However, this work isstill very much in its infancy.Learning involves refining theories through “single loop” learning or through “double loop” learning,which requires a more careful examination of underlying assumptions, values, and beliefs that result in theemergence of new Theories in Use. Single-loop learning is conceptualized as learning that remains within thecurrent organizational paradigm. In other words, “how best to achieve existing goals and objectives and how tokeep organizational performance within the range specified by existing norms [emphasis added]” (Argyris &Schön, 1978, p. 21). Double-loop learning involves examining, “incompatible organizational norms by settingnew priorities and weightings of norms, or by restructuring the norms themselves together with associatedstrategies and assumptions” (Argyris & Schön, 1978, p. 24). This type of learning requires examination ofunderlying values or assumptions that at one time may have been supportive of organizational goals, but nowinhibit the organization’s ability to learn. A key distinction is that single loop learning refers to incremental orroutine changes, while double loop learning refers to transformational or more radical change and innovation(Easterby-Smith, Crossan, & Nicolini, 2000).While the level of learning has been a long-standing debate in the literature, many theorists believe thatorganizational learning is more than just the sum of individual learning and results in institutional memory at theorganizational level (Easterby-Smith, Crossan, & Nicolini, 2000, p. 785). As Stoll (2009) points out, learningprocesses involve dialogue, allowing members of the community to connect, discuss, and debate. In essence,organizational learning is “embedded in the deeply held beliefs and shared conceptualizations that developamong members of the organization over time as particular understandings and practices evolve throughunconscious and regular interactions” (Supovitz, 2009, p. 709). Organizational learning, thus, involves socialactivities or the social processing of knowledge (Bransford et al, 2009; Hubbard, Mehan, & Stein, 2006; Marks& Louis, 1999), as individuals within the organization develop and share new knowledge and tools that resultsin commonly held ideas or practices or collective learning.A final important aspect of organizational learning relates to the way in which ideas or practices enterthe organization or evolve. March (1991) argues that organizations require a balance between exploration(exploration of new knowledge or experimentation) and exploitation (refinement or utilization of existingknowledge). Furthermore, double loop learning would suggest that some degree of exploration (or search fornew ideas and practices outside of the organization) occurs as the organization moves beyond current norms andpractices. Building upon the work of Levitt and March (1988), Honig (2008) expands upon these ideas, arguingthat the search or exploration process may involve scanning the external environment for ideas or bringingindividuals with expertise into the organization. In fact, this flow of information into and throughout theorganization is critical to organizational learning (Huber, 1991). Organizational actors ‘incorporate’ these ideasor approaches into practice, either formally or informally, and through a ‘retrieval’ process adopt these practicesover time when faced with new situations.Social Networks and Social CapitalAs Lin (2001) points out, the common denominator across theories of social capital is the understanding that itconsists of, “The resources embedded in social relations and social structure which can be mobilized when anactor wishes to increase the likelihood of success in purposive action” (p. 24). Social capital is concerned withthe resources that exist in social relations (referred to as ‘ties’) between individuals as opposed to the resourcesICLS 2014 Proceedings427© ISLSof a specific individual. It is the structure and quality of those ties that ultimately determines opportunities forsocial capital transactions and access to resources (Burt, 1992; Granovetter, 1973, 1982; Lin, 2001; Putnam,1993, 1995). Two aspects of social capital, networks and trust, frequently appear in the social capital literature(e.g., Bourdieu 1986; Halpern 2005; Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998).The first element, networks, is primarily focused on how an actor is embedded in social relations,which forms a patterned structure of relationships (Nahapiet & Ghoshal 1998). In a social network, individualsare embedded within relationships, and these relationships are embedded in larger subgroups that eventuallyform a social network. The role of networks has been implicated as both supports and constraints in the processof organizational change, learning, and improvement (Balkundi & Kilduff, 2005; Bartol & Zhang, 2007; Leana& Van Buren 1999; Mehra et al., 2006; Penuel et al., 2009; Weinbaum Cole, Weiss, & Supovitz, 2008). Thisliterature suggests that the structure of social networks can support organizational goals by facilitating the flowof information between individuals and overcoming problems of coordination (Lazega & Pattison, 2001; Tsai &Ghoshal, 1998). Many scholars have identified densely connected networks as a critical source oforganizational advantage (e.g., Adler & Kwon, 2002; Leana & Van Buren, 1999; Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998;Walker et al., 1997), as those social interactions provide opportunities to build trust and as such significantlyadd to an organization’s ability to innovate through supporting risk tolerant climates (Tsai & Ghoshal, 1998).The second element, trust, has been identified as one of the most important affective normscharacterizing a community (Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998). Trust is based on interpersonal interdependence(Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer, 1998) and involves an individual’s or group’s willingness to be vulnerableto another party based on the confidence that the latter party is benevolent, reliable, competent, honest and open(Cummings & Bromiley, 1996; Hoy & Tschannen-Moran, 2003). Trust, as a social capital resource, has beenassociated with cooperation (Hoy & Tschannen-Moran, 2003) and group cohesiveness (Zand, 1997). Highlevels of trust have also been associated with a variety of efforts that require collaboration, learning, complexinformation sharing and problem solving, shared decision-making, and coordinated action (Bryk & Schnieder,2002; Cosner, 2009; Tschannen-Moran, 2004; Tschannen-Moran & Hoy, 2000; Lin, 2001). Bryk and Schneider(2002) suggest that trust is especially important for organizations that operate in turbulent environments, whichis certainly the case in underperforming urban schools and districts. In essence, a predictability of relationsgained through reciprocal interactions decreases the vulnerability between individuals as well as potentiallyincreases the depth of exchange due to a willingness to engage in risk taking (Larson, 1992; Uzzi, 1997). Insupport of this claim, research suggests reciprocal as opposed to asymmetric relations provide mutual benefit tothe relationship in effect creating a reinforcing effect (Lin, 2001). Reciprocated relations are, therefore,important in providing opportunities to build and deepen the norms of trust necessary for the exchange ofreform related resources. Reciprocated relations provide opportunities for individuals to interact and learntogether, which is important in educational systems oriented toward learning (Honig, 2008; Lave & Wenger,1991; Wenger, 1998).Through these two theoretical lenses, our study seeks to examine the ways in which underlying socialnetworks of leaders facilitate or hinder organizational learning processes. It is the interaction between theactivities and conditions of learning that that provide both a lens and process for organizational renewal,opportunities for learning, and better outcomes.Methods and Data SourcesThe study involves case study design (Yin, 2003) focusing on one urban district, which is a district ‘in need ofimprovement’ under NCLB, serving approximately 32,000 students. The district is 90 percent nonwhite, with88 percent of students receiving free and reduced price lunches. Within the district, nearly all of the highschools and many elementary schools are identified as ‘underperforming’ based on state and federalaccountability guidelines. We also include embedded cases of two high schools within this district. Thisdistrict is an important case as it typifies many of the urban districts across the country that serve primarilystudents of color from low socio-economic communities, have a pattern of underperformance, and are engagedin district-wide improvement efforts to move off of sanctions.The quantitative data collection occurred between 2010 and 2013 and involved a survey instrumentadministered to both school and district staff with both fixed-response items relating to organizational climateand technical aspects of organizational learning, as well as social network items. The organizational learningand climate items were developed based upon our theoretical framework, as well as incorporated items used inother contexts that were adapted to the school and district setting (see, for example, Garvin, Edmondson, andGino, 2008) or used in schools (e.g., Tschannen-Moran and Hoy’s (2000) trust scale. For example, ourinstrument involved questions relating to technical aspects of organizational learning, e.g., single/double looplearning and exploration/exploitation, as well as to the overall climate of the school. In addition, the surveyinstrument involved social network questions based upon prior network studies (Cross & Parker, 2004; Cross,Borgatti & Parker, 2002; Hite Williams, & Baugh, 2005) and targeted both instrumental (expertise) andexpressive (vent) relationships. Respondents were asked to quantitatively assess a particular relationship withICLS 2014 Proceedings428© ISLSeach individual on a 4-point frequency scale ranging from 0 (not at all) to 4 (1-2 times a week). For example,regarding expertise ties respondents were asked the following: “Please select the frequency of interaction foreach school/district staff who you consider a reliable source of expertise related to your work.” The ventnetwork was created based on the prompt, “Please select the frequency of interaction with members of theschool/district who you turn to when you need to vent.”Each year, we administered the survey to the district’s leadership team, which included 181 individualsover the 4-year period. We surveyed those in formal leadership positions in the district, including theSuperintendent, Chiefs and Directors from the central office and principals at the school sites. During a threeyear period we also collected data within two high schools that we use in this paper, surveying all educators inthese schools including classroom and non-classroom staff. For both the school and district leadership teamonline surveys we used a bounded/saturated approach (Lin, 1999; Scott, 2000), meaning we listed all membersof the particular group (school or leadership team) and respondents were not able to list any “outside” peoplethat they connected to for example, teachers from other schools or clerical staff. The benefit of using thisstrategy is that it, coupled with high response rates, provides a more complete picture and more valid resultscompared with an unbounded approach (Lin, 1999; Scott, 2000). Response rates for the school and district levelsurveys range from 80 to 88%, thereby meeting the threshold for social network analysis (Scott, 2000).We used SPSS to conduct the analysis of the survey items that related to organizational learning andclimate and used UCINET software (Borgatti, Everett & Freeman, 2002), including Netdraw (Borgatti, 2002),for the social network analyses. Given that respondents tend to be more accurate at identifying ongoing patternsthan determining occasional interactions (Carley & Krackhardt, 1999) and that we were interested in stablestructural patterns (Krackhardt, 2001), we dichotomized the data for our analysis to include only the mostfrequent ties between actors, i.e., data indicating individuals interacted at least once every two weeks.Based upon the different theoretical areas discussed above relating to tie structure and quality, weconducted a series of analyses to examine distinct network measures, such as density, the number of social tiesbetween actors divided by the number of total possible connections, as a dense network is thought to be able tomove resources more quickly than a network with sparse ties (Scott, 2000). We also examined fragmentation,the ratio of the number of disconnected pairs to the possible number of fully connected pairs within a network(Wasserman & Faust, 1994), and centralization, as a highly central structures allow a few membersdisproportionate influence over the flow of resources (Raider & Krackhardt, 2001). Finally, we examinedreciprocity, or the proportion of mutual connections. We also examined differences relating to type of tie(instrumental versus expressive).Major FindingsOur study uncovered three important findings that we discuss briefly. While we have four years of data that wecan include in our presentation and final paper, due to space constraints for this proposal, we only include twoyears of network data in Figures 1-4 below.Network Instability Undermines LearningOne of our main findings from the study relates to the conceptual and methodological challenges of networkinstability as school and district leaders leave their positions voluntarily or involuntarily from year to year. Forexample, from Time 1 to Time 2 only 55% of the same leaders were in these roles (we retained them in thesample even if they had moved positions within school and central office) across these two time periods. Giventhe critical importance of trust and the strong and collaborative relationships that result, this is extremelyproblematic for organizational learning, generally. In addition, the realities of the low-performing urban districtare extremely challenging for using rigorous social network strategies. In essence, the ability to accuratelyexamine changes in network structures and types of relationships over time is difficult when you have such alarge degree of turnover from year to year – across a 4-year period it is nearly impossible. In the current study,we used matched comparisons across years to see the extent to which relationships changed in our other work.However, in some ways this misrepresents reality by only considering the relationships of those who stay andnot representing all individuals in these networks. Here, instead, we show each year as a point time (not as amatched comparison) using one of our expressive or emotional network areas – who do you go to get the‘scoop’ on the district. In the Figure, the black nodes are central office staff and gray are principals. As canseen across the two time periods, each year leaders in this district are having to re-establish underlyingrelationships, and some degree of connectedness among and between schools and central office at Time 1 isgone by Time 2, with a large proportion of leaders not connected to any other principal or central office staff asdesignated by the dots on the left hand side of the network map.ICLS 2014 Proceedings429© ISLSFigure 1. Instability of district-level leadership networks over timeVoluntary and Involuntary Movement of School Leaders Limits ExploitationOur school-level network data indicates that administrators including both principals and assistant principalsplay and important role in the exploitation or search for new ideas through the sharing of research-basedpractices in schools. Given the low-performing nature of these schools having these administrators involved inexploitation, meaning bringing ideas from the external environment into the school, is critical to the learningprocesses. However, our data from these schools suggest that the larger challenging context along with theimprovement strategies embedded in NCLB and more recent reform policies result in high levels of movementof these administrators. To illustrate this point we provide network maps from one of our schools at Time 1 andTime 2 as seen in Figure 2. In this case, the gray nodes are classroom teachers and black nodes are nonclassroom teachers meaning administrators in the school, instructional coaches, counselors, etc. The nodes aresized by centrality so you can see the bigger nodes are the ones that most people go to for research-based ideas.The large central node in Time 1 is the principal of the school, who by Time 2 was moved out of the schoolinvoluntarily and into central office as part of the policy response to replace the principals of low-performingschools. The result of this move severely disrupted the sharing of research-based practices schoolwide as can beseen in the Time 2 map, with fewer ties and educators, particularly classroom-teachers relying on a differenteducator in the school with much lower centrality and far fewer ties. We found a similar result in our other highschool although the assistant principal who was the source of research-based ideas in this school left voluntarilyto move to principal position in another district.Figure 2. School level ties around research at Time 1 and Time 2Lack of Reciprocal Relationships Necessary to Develop Trust and Exchange IdeasA final area of importance is related to collaborative relationships, or reciprocal ties. Across both our schooland district levels we found very few reciprocal ties when examining, in this case, the matched network mapsover time. For example, although the number of ties for the same group of individuals increased from Time 1 toTime 2 for the instrumental or work-related tie relating to whom leaders turn to for expertise relating to theirpractice as seen in Figure 3, the proportion of reciprocal ties of all the ties that exist remained very low (under20%). Furthermore, the expressive ties or more trust-related ties during the same time period decreasingsuggesting that the conditions for reciprocal exchange were not sufficient in this district. Figure 4 illustrates thedecreasing expressive ties from Time 1 to Time 2 and, as is evident in these maps given the scarcity of ties, fewof these expressive ties are reciprocated.ICLS 2014 Proceedings430© ISLSFigure 3. Increased but non-reciprocal instrumental ties over timeFigure 4. Decreased and non-reciprocal expressive ties over timeConclusions and ImplicationsUsing social network analyses techniques, we find that the network churn of school and district leaders createsan instability of relationships that undermines the potential for organizational learning. Perhaps connected tothis network churn, we find few reciprocal relationships which are the cornerstone of communities of practice.Our study has implications for both the accountability policies that are driving reforms and improvement yetincreasing the network churn at both the school and district level. First, the policies are implicated as they haveincreased levels of stress in these systems as the stakes become so high, resulting in high levels of movement inand out of the leadership team (including principal and central office). Second, they have directly caused someof this network churn through the school turnaround strategy requiring replacement of the principal based uponthe number of years on sanction. While our findings have important implications for policy they also haveimplications for practice and research. At the district level, these data indicate that strengthening the trustwithin the system may need to be placed on the forefront of activities which can be difficult given the heavyemphasis on technical aspects of reform (e.g., around curriculum or testing). Finally, our study has implicationsfor research given the changing and dynamic nature of these networks over time and strategies that arenecessary to capture the underlying relationships, including structure of ties, given this network churn.Relevance to Conference ThemeThis paper contributes directly to the 11th Annual ICLS Conference theme, Learning and Becoming in Practice,in two ways. First, it focuses on how learning processes are situated within the practices of educators in lowperforming school districts through an empirical study of the connectedness of these educators across the largerorganizational context as well as within low-performing high schools. Second, it focuses on the practices foranalyzing and modeling learning over time, paying specific attention to the conceptual and methodologicalissues that arise in these turbulent contexts that have not received sufficient attention in the theoretical orempirical research on organizational learning, school improvement, and accountability policies.EndnotesBoth authors contributed equally to this paper.ReferencesAdler, P. S., & Kwon, S. (2002). Social capital: Prospects for a new concept. Academy of Management Review,27(1), 17-40.Argyris, C., & Schön, D. A. (1996). Organizational learning II: Theory, method, and practice. Reading, MA:Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.ICLS 2014 Proceedings431© ISLSBalkundi, P., & Kilduff, M. (2005). The ties that lead: A social network approach to leadership. The LeadershipQuarterly, 16, 941-961.Bartol, K. M., & Zhang, X. M. (2007), Networks and leadership development: Building linkages for capacityacquisition and capital accrual. Human Resource Management Review, 17, 388-401.Bourdieu, P. (1986). The forms of social capital. In J. G. Richardson (Ed.), Handbook of theory and researchfor the sociology of education (pp. 241– 258). New York: Greenwood.Bransford, J., Mosberg, S., Copland, M. A., Honig, M. A., Nelson, H. G., Gawel, D. Phillips, R. S., & Vye, N.(2009). Adaptive people and adaptive systems: Issues of learning and design. In A. Hargreaves, A.Lieberman, M. Fullan, & D. Hopkins (Eds.), Second International Handbook of Educational Change(pp. 825-856).. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer International.Bryk, A. S., & Schneider, B. (2002). Trust in schools: A core resource for improvement. New York: RussellSage Foundation.Burt, R. S. (2000). The network structure of social capital. In R.I. Sutton & B.M. Staw (Eds.), Research inorganizational behavior (pp. 1-83). Greenwich, CT: JAI press.Collinson, V., & Cook, T. F. (2007). Organizational learning: Improving learning, teaching, and leading inschool systems. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.Cosner, S. (2009). Building organizational capacity through trust. Educational Administration Quarterly, 45(2),248-291.Cummings, L., & Bromiley, P. (1996). Organizational trust inventory. In R. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trustin organizations (pp. 302-330). Thousand Oakes CA: Sage.Daly, A. J. (2009). Rigid Response in an Age of Accountability. Educational Administration Quarterly,Volume, 45(2), 168-216.Daly, A. J. & Finnigan, K. (2012). Exploring the Space Between: Social Networks, Trust, and Urban SchoolDistrict Leaders. Journal of School Leadership.Daly, A. J., & Finnigan, K. (2011). The ebb and flow of social network ties between district leaders under highstakes accountability. American Education Research Journal. 48, 39-79.Easterby-Smith, M., Crossan, M., & Nicolini, D. (2000). Organizational learning: Debates past, present, andfuture. Journal of Management Studies, 37(6), 783-796.Finnigan, K. S. (2012). Principal leadership in low-performing schools: A closer look through the eyes ofteachers. Education and Urban Society, 44(2), 183-202.Finnigan, K.S. (2010). Principal leadership and teacher motivation under high-stakes accountability policies,Leadership and Policy in Schools, 9(2), 161-189.Finnigan, K. S., & Gross, B. (2007). Do accountability policy sanctions influence teacher motivation?: Lessonsfrom Chicago’s low-performing schools. American Educational Research Journal, 44(3), 594–629.Finnigan, K.S., & Stewart, T. (2009). Leading change under pressure: An examination of principal leadership inlow-performing schools. The Journal of School Leadership, 19(5), 586-618.Fiol, C. M., & Lyles, M. A. (1985). Organizational learning. The Academy of Management Review, 10(4), 803813.Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78, 1360-1380.Granovetter, M. S. (1982). The strength of weak ties: A network theory revisited. In P. V. Marsden & N. Lin(Eds.), Social structure and network analysis (pp. 105-130). Beverly Hills: Sage.Halpern, D. (2005). Social capital. Cambridge: Polity Press.Honig, M. I. (2008). District central offices as learning organizations: How sociocultural and organizationallearning theories elaborate district central office administrators' participation in teaching and learningimprovement efforts. American Journal of Education. 114(4), 627-664.Honig, M. (2009). What works in defining ‘what works’ in educational improvement. In G. Sykes, B.Schneider & D. Plank (Eds.), Handbook of educational policy research (pp. 333-347). New York, NY:Routledge.Hoy, W. K., & Tschannen-Moran, M. (2003). The conceptualization and measurement of faculty trust inschools: The omnibus T-Scale. In W.K. Hoy & C.G. Miskel, Studies in leading and organizing schools(pp. 181-208). Information Age Publishing: Greenwich: CT.Hubbard, L., Mehan, H., & Stein, M. K. (2006). Reform as learning: School reform, organizational culture,and community politics in San Diego. New York: Routledge.Huber, G. P. (1991). Organizational learning: The contributing processes and the literatures. OrganizationScience, 2(1), 88-115.Knapp, M. S. (2008). District reform as organizational and sociocultural learning: How multiple theories shedlight on a central leadership problem. American Journal of Education 114, 521-539.Larson, A. (1992). Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: A study of the governance of exchange relations.Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, 76-104.ICLS 2014 Proceedings432© ISLSLave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Lazega, E., & Pattison, P. (2001). Social capital and social mechanisms and collective assets: The example ofstatus auctions among colleagues. In N. Lin, K. Cook, & R. Burt (Eds.), Social capital: Theory andresearch (pp. 185-208). New York: Aldine-de Gruyter.Leana, C. R., & Van Buren, H. J., III. (1999). Organizational social capital and employment practices. Academyof Management Review, 24(3), 538-555.Leithwood, K., Jantzi, D., & Steinbach, R. (1998). Leadership and other conditions which foster organizationallearning in schools. In K. Leithwood & K. S. Louis (Eds.), Organizational learning in schools (pp. 6790). Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.Leithwood, K., Leonard, L., & Sharratt, L. (1998). Conditions fostering organizational learning in schools.Educational Administration Quarterly, 34(2), 243-276.Levitt, B., & March, J. G. (1988). Organizational learning. American Review of Sociology, 14, 319-40.Lin, N. (2001). Social capital: A theory of social structure and action. New York: Cambridge University Press.March, J. (1991). Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organization Science, 2(1), 71-87.Marks, H.M., & Louis, K.S. (1999). Teacher empowerment and the capacity for organizational learning.Educational Administration Quarterly, 35, 707-750.Mehra, A., Dixon, A., Brass, D.J., & Robertson, B. (2006). The social networks of leaders: Implications forgroup performance and leader reputation. Organization Science, 17, 64-79.Mintrop, H. & Trujillo, T. (2005).Corrective action in low-performing schools: Lessons for NCLBimplementation from first-generation accountability systems. Education Policy Analysis Archives,13(48), 1-27. Retrieved June 29, 2007 from http://epaa.asu.edu/epaa/v13n48/.Mohrman, S., Tenkasi, R. & Mohrman, A. (2003). The role of networks in fundamental organizational change.Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 39(3), 301-323.Nahapiet, J., & Ghoshal, S. (1998). Social capital, intellectual capital, and the organizational advantages.Academy of Management Review, 23(2), 242-266.O’Day, J. (2002). Complexity, accountability, and school improvement. Harvard Educational Review, 72(3),1-31.Penuel, W. R., Riel, M. R., Krause, A., & Frank, K. A. (2009). Analyzing teachers’ professional interactions ina school as social capital: A social network approach. Teachers College Record. 111(1), 124-163.Putnam, R. D. (1995). Bowling alone: America’s declining social capital. Journal of Democracy, 6, 65-78.Putnam, R. D. (1993). Making democracy work. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Rousseau, D., Sitkin, S., Burt, R., & Camerer, C. (1998). Not so different after all: A cross-discipline view oftrust. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 393-404.Scribner, J.P., Cockrell, K.S., Cockrell, D.H., & Valentine, J.W. (1999). Creating professional communities inschools through organizational learning: An evaluation of a school improvement process. EducationalAdministration Quarterly, 35(1), 130-160.Stoll, L. (2009). Connecting learning communities: Capacity building for systemic change. In A. Hargreaves,A. Lieberman, M. Fullan, & D. Hopkins (Eds.), Second International Handbook of EducationalChange (pp. 469-484). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer International.Supovitz, J. (2009). Knowledge-based organizational learning for instructional improvement. In A.Hargreaves, A. Lieberman, M. Fullan, & D. Hopkins (Eds.), Second International Handbook ofEducational Change (pp. 707-723). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer International.Tsai, W., & Ghoshal, S. (1998). Social capital and value creation: The role of intrafirm networks. Academy ofManagement Journal, 41(4), 464-476.Tschannen-Moran, M. (2004). Trust matters: Leadership for successful schools. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Tschannen-Moran, M., & Hoy, W. K. (2000). A multidisciplinary analysis of the nature, meaning, andmeasurement of trust. Review of Educational Research, 71, 547-593.Uzzi, B. (1997). Social structure and competition in interfirm networks: The paradox of embeddedness.Administrative Science Quarterly, 42(1), 35-67.Weinbaum, E. H., Cole, R. P., Weiss, M. J., & Supovitz, J. A. (2008). Going with the flow: Communication andreform in high schools. In J.A. Supovitz, & E.H. Weinbaum (Eds.), The implementation gap:Understanding reform in high schools (pp. 68-102). New York: Teachers College Press.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge, MA: CambridgeUniversity Press.Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research, design and methods (3rd Ed.). Newbury Park: Sage Publications.Zand, D. E. (1997). The leadership triad: Knowledge, trust, and power. New York, NY: Oxford UniversityPress.ICLS 2014 Proceedings433© ISLS