Students’ Resources for the Construction of Scales for GraphingCesar Delgado, University of Texas at Austin, 1912 Speedway Stop D5500, Austin, TX 78712, USA,cesar_delgado@austin.utexas.eduMargaret Lucero, Santa Clara University, 500 El Camino Real, Santa Clara, CA 95053, USA, mlucero@scu.eduAbstract: Graphing is fundamental in the scientific process. Scales are key but little-studiedcomponents of graphs. Using a “fine-grained constructivist” perspective, we investigated theresources undergraduate students activate in constructing a scale for difficult data sets rangingover 10 or more orders of magnitude. Following a constant comparison method, we identifiedresources including: show all elements, zoom in, ratio, halving, and conversion. Students alsoused their knowledge of bar graphs, histograms, and logarithmic, powers of ten, and linearscales as resources, at times inappropriately. Implications for instruction are outlined.Student Resources for Scale ConstructionGraphing is a fundamental part of the scientific process. Scales are key but little-researched components ofgraphs. We investigate the resources that undergraduate students activate in constructing a scale for difficultdata sets, adopting a “fine-grained constructivist” perspective (Elby, 2000). We use difficult tasks to precludestudents’ simply following well-known procedures. Identifying students’ resources for representation andbuilding upon them in the classroom should lead to deeper understanding of conventional graphing practices.Graphs and ScalesNatural phenomena can often be modeled mathematically; graphs can portray experimental data or the modeledrelationship between variables. Graphs effectively describe continuous variation (Lemke, 1998) and succinctlysummarize large amounts of data (Latour, 1987). US science standards note a role for graphing in scientific andengineering practices such as “Analyzing and interpreting data” (National Research Council, 2012).Scales are essential components of graphs, and play an important role in graph interpretation(Leinhardt, Zaslavsky, & Stein, 1990). Scales permit the graphical representation of the magnitude of physicalor mathematical quantities, or of the different values of a qualitative variable. Common scales consist of evenlyspaced intervals portraying constant additive differences (linear scale), multiplicative differences (logarithmic orpowers of ten scale), different values of a nominal- or ordinal-level variable (qualitative scale), or “bins” withranges of data (histogram scale). In linear and logarithmic scales, the magnitude of data points is representedsolely by their location along the scale; such scales are “homogeneous”, and they allow the relative magnitudeof data points to be directly compared from the graph (Nemirovsky & Tierney, 2001). Homogenous scalesfollow the convention that equal lengths along the scale represent an equal number of units (Leinhardt et al.,1990). The powers of ten scale is to be taught in high school, and linear, qualitative, and histogram scales insixth grade or earlier, according to the US Common Core State Standards (NGACBP & CCSSO, 2010).Research shows that students have difficulty in producing or interpreting conventional graphs (seereview by Leinhardt et al., 1990). Difficulties constructing scales include placing quantitative data points onsuccessive, evenly spaced tick marks regardless of values (e.g., Brasell, 1990), or taking a scale as discrete, i.e.,considering that there are no points between the labeled points (Leinhardt et al., 1990).Theoretical Framework: Fine-Grained ConstructivismRecent research has explored the resources students possess that enable them to understand and engage inrepresentation (e.g., diSessa, Hammer, Sherin, & Kolpakowski, 1991; Elby, 2000; Hammer, Elby, Scherr, &Redish, 2005; Sherin, 2000). This research stresses the importance of building on and reorganizing priorknowledge. It conceives of learners as holding multiple, fine-grained understandings to be called into service asneeded, rather than holding coherent but naïve theories that are consistently applied (Elby, 2000; Smith, diSessa,& Roschelle, 1993). Learning, in this “fine-grained constructivist” view (Elby, 2000), consists of knowing whento apply what resource, and of connecting multiple resources into more complete, coherent, and scientificallynormative theories. Student ideas are thus seen as potentially productive steps on the way to matureunderstanding, rather than as “misconceptions” to be replaced. In this view, resources are not intrinsicallycorrect or incorrect, but are activated for an appropriate or inappropriate context (Hammer et al., 2005). Someresources for graphing include what you see is what you get (WYSIWYG – an overly literal interpretation of agraph), stillness (the lack of motion suggested by a horizontal line on a graph), constancy (the idea thatsomething does not change, prompted by a straight line on a graph), and sudden change (suggested by inclinedsegments on a graph) (Elby, 2000). Not yet studied is how students approach constructing scales, and how theresources they employ can then point to instructional strategies that support deeper learning. The followingresearch question guides our study: What resources do undergraduates employ in constructing scales?ICLS 2014 Proceedings262© ISLSMethodsOur participants are 64 undergraduates at a major public research university in the Midwestern USA, enrolled inan interdisciplinary Geoscience/History course. The students were a cross sample of the university both by year(10% freshmen, 29% sophomores, 25% juniors, 35% seniors) and by major (19% STEM, 52% social sciences,13% other, 15% undeclared)(Delgado, 2014). All enrolled students participated in the study. We expected thatthe diversity by year and major would provide insight into a broad array of students’ resources.Students completed identical paper-and-pencil instruments during the first and next-to-last discussionsections. The tasks analyzed here involved constructing one scale for the age of six events and one for the sizeof six objects, along a 25-cm horizontal line, so that their positions represented their magnitude. The 20 minutesallotted allowed all students to finish the assessment. The time data points were given as years ago (ya), andincluded: Big Bang (14 billion ya), emergence of life on Earth (3.8 billion ya), emergence of hominids (7million ya), emergence of Homo Sapiens (600,000 ya), origins of writing (6000 ya), and first human moonlanding (at the time, 39 ya). The size data points were given in nanometers (nm) and meters (m) and included:diameter of an atom (0.1 nm), diameter of an adenovirus (100 nm), width of a human hair (0.0001 m), diameterof a dime (0.018 m), height of an elephant (3 m), and length of a football field (100 m). The large range ofvalues was intended to preclude the routine construction of a linear scale, in order to better reveal studentresources. Six students were interviewed after completing the tasks for the second time; they were shown theirscales and asked to discuss them. The students interviewed were a convenience sample - those who volunteered.Coding for identification of resources was done using a constant comparison method (Strauss &Corbin, 1998). The data were analyzed in a series of iterative stages. After student interviews were transcribed,both authors independently analyzed them using open coding to identify emergent themes in each student’sstated approach to the scale construction task, while also scrutinizing the interviewed students’ scales. Weidentified many common themes among the transcripts and respective scales and came to a consensus bydiscussion. The interviews and scales then went through another round of coding to refine the resourcecategories. Both authors discussed any differences among the categories and reached consensus as to theirdefinition and classification. In the final analytic stage, one author developed narrative descriptions for eachparticipant’s use of resources, while the other author searched for representative quotations from the transcripts.We then studied the scales of the students who were not interviewed in order to infer other potential resources,using an iterative coding process similar to the one for the student interviews. The findings from scales alone(without interview data) are more inferential and will require additional research to confirm or refine them.Results and DiscussionStudent #11: Show All ElementsThis student’s four scales were similar. She said they were linear scales, but she did not follow the convention ofmarking evenly-spaced tick marks and labeling them with numerical values. On a conventional linear scale, thefour smallest data points should be indistinguishably close to the origin. She instead spaced the four data pointsout (see Fig. 1). She said, “So I realized that I probably might have been spacing it out just for space forwriting”, because “you can only go so small”, even though she knew that the data points “should all be at thatpoint right there”. She felt the need to clearly portray all data points, even at the cost of accuracy. We call thisthe show all elements resource. It may stem from drawing, where one portrays every important element andusually avoids drawing one object on top of another. This resource is problematic in this case but useful inothers. For instance, selecting a range for a scale that just encompasses the data (e.g., 0-25 for data ranging from2-24) permits the visualization of finer differences between data points than a larger range (e.g., 0-100 or 01000). The appropriateness of the show all elements resource thus depends on context.Figure 1. Student #11’s scale for size, beginning of course.Student #46: Linear Scale, Zoom In, Ratio, ConversionThis student activated different resources for time and size. He explicitly stated that his scale for time waslinear. His scale conformed to the convention of using evenly-spaced intervals to show equal numbers of units(Leinhardt et al., 1990) - see Figure 2. The conventional linear scale can become a resource in and of itself,composed initially of simpler resources that are coherent and useful for a given context. Over time and throughrepeated successful use, they become coordinated and constitute a resource as a whole (Hammer et al., 2005).The linear scale resource is neither correct nor incorrect per se (Hammer et al., 2005). The student realized thelimitation of the linear scale for this data set: “I realized I would never be able to cram…”. He created a second,ICLS 2014 Proceedings263© ISLScoordinated scale, explaining, “This is me trying to compensate for the fact that I didn’t have any space for onebillion years”. Yet, the extra scale did not solve the problem: “I realized I needed to zoom in much, much furtherbecause I still needed to get to 7 million years… If I wanted to do it on a linear scale, yeah, I would have had tokeep zooming and zooming and zooming”. We term this resource zoom in. It may stem from experiences withmicroscopes, cameras, and adjusting the view in navigation, word processing, and multimedia presentationsoftware. Zooming in is useful for this data set, but would be superfluous with small ranges of data.Figure 2. Student #46’s scale for time, beginning of course.The student instead used a ratio resource for the size data, focusing on relative size differences betweenadjacent data points. This approach should in principle result in a scale with spacing identical to a logarithmicscale, although in this student’s scale the hair-dime difference is overly large (see Fig. 3). He said:I think when I was doing this, I was thinking this [atom-virus] is 1,000 times bigger and this[virus-hair] is another 1,000 times bigger. I left a bigger gap here [hair-dime] trying tocompensate the bigger gap. See this jump here [elephant-football field]? This is only 30 times.In reality it should be much much smaller, but I was having trouble illustrating that.Figure 3. Student #46’s scale for size, beginning of course (bottom), and conventional logarithmic scale (top).This student used nanometers for the smaller objects and meters for the larger ones (see Fig. 3). Henoted that “It was probably easier for me to grasp this as 100 nanometers than… 0.0001 [sic] meters… It’s allabout putting it in terms, for me, that are easy to understand.” We identified this as a conversion resource. Thisresource may stem from academic experiences with unit conversions within or across systems, from everydayexperiences purchasing food (e.g., ounce to pound conversions) or thinking about time (e.g., changing 120minutes to 2 hours), or both. This resource is useful for large ranges, but not for small ranges of data.A striking feature about student #46’s scales is his activation of a linear resource for the time data but aratio resource for size, despite the fact that both data sets had similar ranges and posed similar difficulties: “Iwasn’t thinking of time as an idea of relative scale. I was thinking of time specifically as a linear, like you wouldsee on a graph… or a time plot…I never would have considered doing time as a relative thing.”Student #17: Powers of Ten, RatioThis student drew a conventional powers-of-ten scale for size, at the beginning of the course (see Figure 4). Justlike with the conventional linear scale, a powers-of-ten scale can be a resource in and of itself. However, thestudent had serious misgivings about his graph: “I remember when I did this it didn’t fully represent how… It’sjust misleading. I mean, the numbers are right, it just makes it that if someone who doesn’t understand theICLS 2014 Proceedings264© ISLSlogarithmic of it… Its just going to look like these are, I don’t know, the same.” He instead drew a proportionalscale drawing on the ratio resource on the end-of-course scale. This student’s unease with a scale that followedconventions for a power of ten scale suggests that some students who learn to draw these may not fullyunderstand them. Supporting the use of a ratio resource – which some students activated spontaneously – mayimprove instruction of power of ten scales so that deeper understanding is engendered.Figure 4. Student #17’s scale for size, beginning of courseStudent #34: Powers of Ten, ConversionThis student produced conventional powers-of-ten scales explicitly labeled as logarithmic for all four tasks. Onthe end-of-course scale for size, he used the SI prefixes nano-, micro-, milli-, and kilo-, in combination with thenumbers 1, 10, and 100 only (and 0.1 nm, at the smallest end of the scale). Thus, this student used theconversion and powers of ten resources. Unlike student #17, he had few misgivings about the logarithmic scale.However, like student #17, he also noted that size was easier to think about in terms of proportion than time.Swarat and colleagues (Swarat, Light, Park, & Drane, 2011) consider that the use of different units forthe large and small ends of a scale are indicative of a “fragmented” scale, the least advanced type of scale theycharacterized. However, thinking of a large range of size data in terms of various units, or even inventing newunits – “unitizing” - may be a powerful and appropriate strategy, one used by experts (Tretter, Jones, Andre,Negishi, & Minogue, 2006). The resources of conversion and powers of ten are useful in this context but wouldbe cumbersome and of little value for small data ranges, which can easily be represented with a linear scale.Student #48: Halving, Show all ElementsStudent #48 produced linear scales for all four tasks. However, he did not use evenly-spaced tick marks todefine intervals (see Figure 5). On the first scales, he had no tick marks at all (and yet the spacing of datacorresponded closely to a linear scale). On the end of course scales, he used halving iteratively to construct hisscale: “I tried to put zero at one end and the biggest thing that we had… and just tried to divide it up into similarunits. … I’d go down the middle and go like ‘that’s half, so that’s 50, 25, 12.5, 6.’” According to Confrey et al.,halving and doubling are “operation primitives”, or fundamental understandings (Confrey, Maloney, Nguyen,Mojica, & Myers, 2009). The scale was homogeneous even though the tick marks were unevenly spaced. Thisstudent also felt the need to show all elements: “I tried to distinguish which ones I thought were bigger andwhich ones smaller. I don’t know if their actual position is represented.”Figure 5. Student #48’s scale for size, end of course.Student #63: Ratio, Logarithmic Scale, WYSIWYGThis student created all four scales employing a logarithmic resource but using “ballpark” estimations withrounded numbers. However, she found the logarithmic scale troubling despite having used it in a physics class:Student: Oh for some reason I thought you had to make it what do you call it… Spatiallyaccurate, like to scale. So you’d have this one actually be 100 times longer than this one.Interviewer: That would be a linear scale.Student: So you’re saying a logarithmic scale doesn’t even take in to account whether or notit’s like, spatially accurate? ... Yeah that’s how the physics graph worked ‘cause we got rid ofthe ten and just used the exponents. But then you get a really distorted graph.ICLS 2014 Proceedings265© ISLSShe expected that length along the scale would be proportional to the size represented, which is a characteristicof linear scales and also of drawings. In interpreting her own scale, she activated the WYSIWYG resource andwas dissatisfied when her scale did not display the transparency she desired. The tendency to represent space asspace is a “boundary” that students need to cross in order to produce novel representations and to understandconventional ones (Sherin, 2000). The logarithmic scale does not represent space in a straightforward manner.The teaching of logarithmic graphs in school will need to acknowledge students’ preference for and experiencewith more naturalistic linear representations, and help students contextualize when each is more useful.Resources Inferred From Scales of Other StudentsIn this section, we present other possible resources that we infer from scales alone. These are more inferentialthan the ones identified from interviews and will require additional research to confirm and better understand.Qualitative Scales or OrderingPrior research has reported students placing data points at successive evenly-spaced tick marks without regardsto the values (e.g., Brasell, 1990), and we encountered some – see Figure 6. This may stem from a qualitativescale resource (as learned from bar graphs) for quantitative data. The qualitative scale resource is appropriate forordinal- or nominal-level data in a bar graph, but sacrifices the relative size information of the quantitative data.It may be that ordering is the resource activated here, rather than resources related to bar graphs.Figure 6. Qualitative scale (Student #1, beginning of course)BinsOne student created a scale with bins or intervals (e.g., 100-1000 years ago). This scale is appropriate forhistograms; however, the actual value of quantitative data points is lost. See Figure 7.Figure 7. A scale using bins (intervals) (Student #18, end of course)Scale BreakSome students used scale break symbols to indicate that their scales did not include the full range of values. SeeFigure 8. While the tick marks were evenly spaced in this scale, it is not a qualitative scale because the scalebreaks imply a break in the values, which are quantitative. While this resource does not actually solve theproblem of representing a wide range of values, it does signal that problem explicitly.Figure 8. A scale with scale breaks (Student #10, beginning of course).WritingOne student created a scale with no tick marks. The scale included the name of each event followed by its age,in a sequential manner. See Figure 9. We speculate that the resource he activated was writing. This resourcewould be appropriate (with added punctuation) in a prose account of the data, but not to construct a scale.Figure 9. A scale that may reflect the use of a writing resource (Student #29, beginning of course).ICLS 2014 Proceedings266© ISLSGroupingSome students had an idiosyncratic placement of the data points, with the elephant alone in the middle of thegraph. See Figure 10. This “fragmented” scale (Swarat et al., 2011) may stem from a grouping resource. Thegroups might correspond to objects many times smaller than a human, many times larger, and roughly humansize, as the human body is a fundamental landmark for size (Tretter et al., 2006). Grouping or classifying is animportant conceptual resource, but results in the loss of much information when building a quantitative scale.Figure 10. A scale that may reflect a grouping resource (Student #7, beginning of course).General DiscussionWe can conceptually divide the resources we identified into several classes. Drawing has already been shown tobe an important source of resources (diSessa, 2004); the WYSIWYG (Elby, 2000) resource identified here forscales, and the show all elements resources likely derive from drawing. Experiences with graphing also provideresources, some appropriate for this data (logarithmic, powers of ten), and some less appropriate or useful (bins,qualitative scales, linear scales). The next class of consists of resources that are appropriate for making sense ofthe wide range of data, but that would be cumbersome and superfluous with smaller ranges of data: zoom in,ratio, conversion, and scale breaks. Additionally, some resources employed fundamental knowledge: theoperation primitive of halving (Confrey et al., 2009), writing, grouping, and possibly ordering.The resources students employ, even if they lead to unconventional or suboptimal scales, are ideas onwhich to build. Additionally, the approximations to conventional representations that students invent, based ontheir resources, reveal potential pathways of learning. In the next section we discuss specific educationalimplications of our findings, which extend as far back as elementary school. Further research will be required tostudy the impact of these suggestions. Limitations of this study include the small number of studentsinterviewed, the reduced racial or ethnic diversity (most students are non-Hispanic Whites), and the fact that thesample was filtered by ability (as these were students at a highly selective university).ImplicationsDrawing, Measuring, and Homogeneous SpacesEven among undergraduates, creating a homogeneous scale was far from universal. Instruction thus needs tocreate a greater awareness of homogeneous spaces. Drawing might be a useful resource because drawings of aplane orthogonal to the viewer (e.g., a bird’s eye view) are homogeneous (if one disregards perspective). Theidea that equal lengths represent an equal number of units is used in an implicit manner in drawing; instructionalactivities could make it explicit through the use of scale factors, beginning with simple ones such as a 12:1 scalewhere a distance of one foot in the real world is portrayed as one inch on the drawing. Such activities might alsobuild understanding of conversion and ratios. Another early experience with homogeneous scales is the use ofrulers. Activities have been developed in which students use collaborative exploration to reinvent measurement,in the elementary grades; these involve reflecting about the constancy of unit size, the need to place units endto-end without gaps or overlaps, and the idea that measurements do not always consist of a whole number ofunits (Lehrer, 2003). Such activities may provide resources for graphing quantitative data.Different Types of Scales and Meta-Level Knowledge of GraphingStudents need to learn to construct and interpret linear, logarithmic, powers of ten, histogram, and qualitativescales, but they also need to acquire the meta-level knowledge surrounding each scale. Instruction may nottypically be building this type of knowledge. Students may learn how to graph without linking to their“metarepresentational competence” - their existing understandings of what representations are for, how to createthem, and how to evaluate them critically (diSessa & Sherin, 2000). They may be able to produce a fairlyconventional scale, yet not truly understand what they have produced. One meta-level understanding is that thechoice of representation is impacted by the use it will be given (diSessa et al., 1991). For our data sets, a linearrepresentation might be effective in showing that the Big Bang occurred an extremely long time ago relative tohuman experience, but is less effective in showing the large relative differences among the more recent events.Logarithmic scales have pros and cons as well: they allow all six data points to be effectively represented, butplacing data points that are not exact powers of ten is difficult, there is no way to place zero on the scale, etc.Scales produced using bins, grouping, ordering, or a qualitative approach likewise have advantages anddisadvantages. When each type of graph is introduced, meta-level discussion about its idiosyncrasies,conventions, affordances, and constraints is essential so that students can consider when each is appropriate.ICLS 2014 Proceedings267© ISLSResources for Large Ranges of DataStudents tapped many resources to work with the vast ranges of time and space: through analogy withinstruments and software (zoom in), by using proportional reasoning (ratio), by using more familiar numerals(conversion), or by sidestepping the complications of constructing a homogenous scale (scale breaks). The useof similar open-ended tasks with younger students may reveal additional resources that help them make sense ofconventional scales and thus graphing. The use of more than one unit on a single scale is unconventional butmight scaffold understanding when using large ranges of values. Units can serve as a powerful cognitive tool(Delgado, 2010). However, it would be important to then advance to normative, single-unit scales.Show all Elements, Ratio, and Halving to Scaffold Learning of Logarithmic ScalesFor students to deeply engage in thinking about complex and counterintuitive logarithmic scales, a need to knowmust be established. The show all elements resource, along with a data set that spans many orders of magnitude,can establish a need to know, since a linear scale fails to distinguish among smaller data points. Instruction oflogarithmic scales that builds on students’ resources may lead to better understanding than students #17 and #63displayed. Several students spontaneously used iterative halving to generate unconventional but homogeneouslinear scales. This suggests the possibility of systematically using this resource for both linear and logarithmicscales. Linear halving (see figure 5) could be paired with multiplicative halving in which evenly-spaced tickmarks are labeled with iteratively halved data. This would invite discussion of the nature of additive andmultiplicative reasoning, scaffolding an understanding of linear vs. logarithmic scales. Since halving is thoughtto be an operation primitive (Confrey et al., 2009), base-2 logarithmic scales might provide an intuitive way tobuild conceptual understanding of base-ten logarithms. Other students used a ratio resource. Activities wherestudents develop their own scales based on ratios between adjacent data points (as students #17, 46, and 63 did)could build conceptual understanding of the logarithmic scale. Spatial scale is better suited to ratio reasoningthan temporal scale, according to our participants, so size data could be used before time data. A data set withdata points that are exact powers of ten and differ by either one or two powers of ten might be useful. Oncestudents realize that 100-fold steps should all be represented by the same length, as should 10-fold steps by asingle (different) length, they can explore the size of the two steps. The crucial insight that a 100-fold differenceshould occupy twice the length as a 10-fold difference could be catalyzed by adding a data point at thegeometric midpoint of points with a 100-fold difference. Another potentially powerful insight about thelogarithmic scale is that every successive tick mark covers 90% of the remaining range. This idea could bescaffolded by iterative halving, where each tick mark covers half of the remaining range.Zooming and Logarithmic ScalesStudent #46 zoomed into the last billion years of his time scale, but realized he needed to zoom in again andagain. Repeatedly zooming in to the smallest 10% of each scale, and making each scale the same length, couldlay the foundations for understanding the logarithmic scale, where each smaller interval covers 10% of theprevious. The course textbook (Christian, 2005) featured a series of scales, but they appeared at the beginning ofeach section rather than together. Juxtaposing successive magnifications may be more effective.Powers of Ten, Logarithmic Scales, and Homogeneous SpacesPowers-of-ten scales are not homogeneous. For instance, between 1 and 10 there is a difference of 9 andbetween 10 and 100 a difference of 90, but each difference is represented by the same distance along the scale.A logarithmic scale transforms those values to 0, 1, and 2, constituting a homogenous space. However, theplacement of data points is identical in both. Comparing and contrasting logarithmic and powers of ten scales inhigh school science or mathematics classes would allow an opportunity to reflect on homogeneous spaces.ConclusionThis study identifies some resources that are activated when students are tasked with constructing a scale. Theseresources are cued according to context – for instance, the time data was less likely to activate the ratio resourcethan size data. The power of the fine-grained constructivist perspective is that unconventional student ideas arenot seen as “misconceptions” to be replaced, but as the application of a resource that is useful to students in adifferent setting. How teachers respond to student ideas is essential. Rather than dismissing them as wrong orseeing them as manifestations of a naïve theory, teachers can use students’ ideas to help them build betterorganized, more broadly-applicable ideas. As teachers become more aware of these resources, they can betterplan instructional activities that allow students to construct more sophisticated understandings and explanations.If we first acknowledge students’ resources for representation and build upon them in the classroom, they shoulddevelop a deeper understanding of the powerful and diverse standardized representations scientists andmathematicians have developed to represent magnitude and relationships between variables.ICLS 2014 Proceedings268© ISLSReferencesBrasell, H. M. (1990). Graphs, graphing, and graphers. In M. B. Rowe (Ed.), The process of knowing.Washington, DC: National Science Teachers Association.Christian, D. (2005). Maps of time: An introduction to big history. Berkeley: University of California Press.Confrey, J., Maloney, A., Nguyen, K., Mojica, G., & Myers, M. (2009). Equipartitioning/splitting as afoundation of rational number reasoning using learning trajectories. In PME Conference Proceedings(Vol. 2, pp. 345–352). Thessaloniki, Greece.Delgado, C. (2014). Collective landmarks for deep time: A new tool for evolution. Journal of BiologicalEducation. Advance online publication. doi: 10.1080/00219266.2013.849280.Delgado, C. (2010). Units of length: a notational system for conceptual understanding of size and scale. InProceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences - Volume 2 (pp. 362–363).Chicago, Illinois: International Society of the Learning Sciences.diSessa, A. A. (2004). Metarepresentation: Native competence and targets for instruction. Cognition &Instruction, 22(3), 293–331.diSessa, A. A., Hammer, D., Sherin, B., & Kolpakowski, T. (1991). Inventing graphing: Meta-representationalexpertise in children. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10(2), 117–160.diSessa, A. A., & Sherin, B. (2000). Meta-representation: An introduction. Journal of Mathematical Behavior,19(4), 385–398.Elby, A. (2000). What students’ learning of representations tells us about constructivism. Journal ofMathematical Behavior, 19(4), 481–502.Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. A., & Redish, E. F. (2005). Resources, framing , and transfer. In J. Mestre(Ed.), Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective (pp. 89–119). Greenwich, CT:Information Age Publishing.Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Lehrer, R. (2003). Developing understanding of measurement. In J. Kilpatrick, W. G. Martin, & D. Schrifter(Eds.), A research companion to Principles and Standards for School Mathematics (pp. 179–192).Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.Leinhardt, G., Zaslavsky, O., & Stein, M. K. (1990). Functions, graphs, and graphing: Tasks, learning, andteaching. Review of Educational Research, 60(1), 1–64.Lemke, J. L. (1998). Multiplying meaning: Visual and verbal semiotics in scientific text. In J. R. Martin & R.Veel (Eds.), Reading science: Critical and functional perspectives on discourses of science (pp. 87–113). London: Routledge.National Governors Association Center for Best Practices, & Council of Chief State School Officers. (2010).Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. Washington, DC: National Governors AssociationCenter for Best Practices and Council of Chief State School Officers.Nemirovsky, R., & Tierney, C. (2001). Children creating ways to represent changing situations: On thedevelopment of homogeneous spaces. Education Studies in Mathematics, 45(1), 67–102.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Sherin, B. (2000). How students invent representations of motion: A genetic account. Journal of MathematicalBehavior, 19(4), 399–441.Smith, J. P., diSessa, A. A., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist analysis ofknowledge in transition. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115–163.Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Procedures and techniques for developinggrounded theory. (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Swarat, S., Light, G., Park, E. J., & Drane, D. (2011). A typology of undergraduate students’ conceptions of sizeand scale: Identifying and characterizing conceptual variation. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 48(5), 512–533. doi:10.1002/tea.20403Tretter, T. R., Jones, M. G., Andre, T., Negishi, A., & Minogue, J. (2006). Conceptual boundaries and distances:Students’ and experts’ concepts of the scale of scientific phenomena. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 43(3), 282–319. doi:10.1002/tea.20123AcknowledgmentsThis study was supported by University of Michigan Rackham Merit and School of Education Scholar’s Awardfellowships to the first author. We wish to express our thanks to the instructor and students of the course. Ourappreciation to Leema Berland, Jill Marshall, Brian Fortney, and anonymous reviewers for very helpfulcomments on this and earlier drafts of this paper.ICLS 2014 Proceedings269© ISLS