Supporting Pre-Service Science Teachers’ Planning of Task-BasedClassroom DiscussionsDanielle Ross, Aaron M. Kessler and Jennifer Cartier, University of Pittsburgh, 5500 Wesley W. Posvar HallEmail: dross1225@gmail.com, aaronmkessler@gmail.com, jcartier@pitt.eduAbstract:This study focuses on a set of core, or high-leverage, practices in teachereducation in order to allow pre-service teachers to begin to develop a set of necessary skills tosuccessfully support student learning through inquiry (Grossman et al., 2009b). Specifically,in the secondary science teacher preparation program teacher educators adopted a practicebased focus in which secondary pre-service science teachers participated in the high-leveragepractice of engaging students in task-based science discussions and the planning of thosediscussions. The results suggest that pre-service teachers are able to incorporate aspects ofthese instructional models in their discussion planning practices. The results also suggest ashift in focus on different aspects of planning over time and across science disciplines thatopen the possibilities for future work.Background and Significance of WorkTeachers will face many challenges as we move forward into the age of the Next Generation Science Standards(NGSS) (Achieve, 2013). The NGSS aim to develop a population of scientifically literate and talented studentswho can participate in the “innovation-driven economy” (p. 1). In order to meet these goals, teachers mustprovide students with opportunities to engage in science and engineering practices (SEPs), e.g., interpretingdata, engaging in argument, and learning core ideas of these disciplines.In classrooms where students are engaged in the practices of scientists and engineers, teachers face theadditional challenge of designing instruction so that students have opportunities to wrestle with the underlyingscience ideas at a high level (Engle, 2011; Engle & Conant, 2002; Smith & Stein, 2011). To design instructionin this way, a teacher must first identify key learning goals to focus the lesson and then choose a task that isrobust enough to support students’ thinking and learning in the discipline. After selecting (or designing) a task,the teacher must then imagine in detail the ways in which her students might engage with the task, designappropriate tools and scaffolds to support and direct that engagement, and plan for ways to monitor students’work during the task, also know as the Five Practices model (Cartier, Smith, Stein, & Ross, 2013). We assertthat this type of planning is both sophisticated and teachable. In this study, we describe our approach to helpingpre-service secondary science teachers (PSTs) adopt effective (high-leverage) planning practices. Weinvestigate the impact of engaging PSTs in a series of carefully scaffolded exercises focused on helping them tolearn how to anticipate and support students’ engagement in challenging science tasks and subsequentdiscussions about those tasks. Specifically we examined:(1) To what extent do PSTs use the Five Practices instructional model in their planning?(2) In what ways do PSTs’ use of the Five Practices instructional model change over time?Importance of Classroom Discourse in ScienceStudents in today’s science classrooms must have opportunities to develop the practices and skills used inscience and engineering professions in order to be productive members of our technologically advanced society(Achieve, Inc., 2013; Duschl, 2008). Discourse – or students engaging in talk with one another arounddisciplinary concepts – is a key component of classrooms where students are engaged productively in scienceand engineering practices (SEPs). While discourse is necessary to achieve the NGSS goals, it is also a challengefor teachers to orchestrate (Grossman et al., 2009a; Stein, Engle, Smith, & Hughes, 2008).As teacher educators, our goal is to provide novice teachers with conceptual and practical tools tosupport their learning and teaching (Grossman, Hammerness, & McDonald, 2009b), and we are particularlyinterested in supporting the practices related to orchestrating productive classroom discussion. Researchers haveidentified many different pedagogical strategies designed to aide teachers in supporting robust discussions andsupporting students in the types of discourse that increase deep understanding. Pedagogical frameworks, suchas Investigating and Questioning our World Through Science and Technology (IQWST) (Berland & Reiser2008; McNeill, Lizotte, Krajcik, & Marx, 2006), the evaluate-alternatives model (Sampson & Grooms, 2009),the Accountable Talk framework (Michaels, O’Connor, & Resnick, 2008), and the Five Practices model(Cartier, Smith, Stein & Ross, 2013; Smith & Stein, 2011; Stein et al., 2008) present teachers with micropractices that support student learning through discussion. These frameworks have several features in common.Specifically, each emphasizes the need for teachers to (1) choose appropriate instructional content that promotesdiscourse, (2) guide and support students through scaffolding, and (3) hold students accountable to classroomand scientific norms.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  599© ISLSExpert teachers have established routines and plans that help to support such ambitious instruction.Many of their moves have been developed and practiced over time and are often not taught to beginningteachers (Leinhardt & Steele, 2005). However, we assert that because novice teachers struggle to supportproductive student engagement in science discussion, and because this type of instruction shows so muchpromise for enabling learners to engage in SEPs and master core content, teacher educators should provide preservice teachers with conceptual and practical tools to support this practice (Grossman, Hammerness, &McDonald, 2009). Consequently, we have designed pedagogy courses for PSTs that include explicitopportunities to learn about and practice elements of the Five Practices instructional model (Cartier et al., 2013;Smith & Stein, 2011). By supporting teachers in learning how to anticipate student thinking, monitor studentresponses to tasks, select students to present their work, purposefully sequence these presentations, and connectthe ideas through discussion, this model guides teachers through the processes of preparing for and supportingwhole class discussions (Cartier et al., 2013; Smith & Stein, 2011). We leveraged these five practices in thedesign of the secondary science methods course.Theoretical and Methodological ApproachesIn order to make PSTs more comfortable with enacting discussions in their classrooms, we chose to attend tospecific aspects of this practice and designed learning experiences to help them develop the skills to enactproductive discussions in their own 7th-12th grade classrooms. We utilized the framework developed byGrossman and colleagues (2009a), to design cycles of decomposition, representation, and approximation ofplanning practices related to task-based discussions. By separating complex practices in subsets, or micropractices, such as the critique and analysis of lesson planning and discussion facilitation, into its componentparts, we reasoned that PSTs would feel more comfortable enacting the practices in their own classrooms,leading to consistent implementation of these practices over time (Grossman et al., 2009a; Stein et al., 2008).What follows is a detailed example of how we utilized this framework within the context of the pedagogycourses for secondary science PSTs at the Midwestern university where this study occurred (see Table 1).We divided the fall semester into lessons in which the PSTs engage in science as learners and aspractitioners through iterative cycles of decompositions, representations, and approximations of practice(Grossman et al., 2009a). More specifically, in addition to other practices, the PSTs observed teacher educatorsdecompose and represent the practice of the Five Practices model by having the PSTs approximate componentsof this model by planning discussion-based lessons using this model, and rehearsing and formally teachinginstructional episodes with peers. Through varying levels of authenticity the teacher educators guided the PSTsto examine specific planning and instructional practices and certain teacher moves that help to supportdiscussion orchestration. Once the PSTs had the opportunity to unpack these instructional micro-practices, theywere better able to use them in their own planning and teaching (Grossman et al., 2009a).DecompositionEnacting productive task-based discussions in any discipline is a complex practice in which teachers employ avariety of moves, micro-practices, and routines during instruction (Leinhardt & Steele, 2005). In order for PSTsto begin to engage in this or any practice, Grossman et al (2009b) posit that PSTs may need varyingopportunities to recognize and then enact small components of professional practice after which they can thenbegin to integrate each micro-practice completely.By decomposing the Five Practices model into its distinct practices, we provided PSTs with anopportunity to focus on certain fundamental skills, e.g. anticipating student thinking, that will help them toprepare for and facilitate productive science discussions (Grossman et al., 2009a). This decomposition allowedthe instructor to call attention to as well as provide immediate feedback to students as they analyzed andreflected upon these components. Through this feedback, the PSTs attend to particular teacher moves andaspects of the instructional model that help support their discussion planning and facilitation. By focusedattention on certain aspects of student thinking, student work, and important teacher moves, these aspects ofdiscussion typically viewed as improvisational by many beginning teachers seem less so (Smith & Stein, 2011;Stein et al., 2008). By giving the PSTs this instructional planning tool and facilitating a discussion, our goal wasto help them feel more comfortable standing to the side of the dialogue and allowing students’ opportunities toengage with each other.In order to support the development of the PSTs’ planning for lessons where students engage in sciencediscussions, we selected particular practices based on past research (Smith & Stein, 2011), namely: writingspecific learning goals, anticipating student thinking, planning for monitoring, selecting and sequencing studentapproaches, and connecting student ideas and disciplinary ideas. We believe that the development of thesepractices in PSTs’ repertoires will best support the development of their capacity to design task-based sciencediscussions.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  600© ISLSRepresentationThe PSTs observed expert teachers utilizing the model, read written cases, as well as analyzed evidence ofstudent work. Through varying levels of authenticity we guided the PSTs to examine specific practices orcertain teacher moves that help to support the instructional dialogue that might otherwise go unnoticed. Bydrawing attention to particular details, the PSTs began to notice and learn ways in which they might begin tobuild their own teaching repertoire.Once the PSTs analyzed these micro-practices related to planning science discussions, they have amodel, or representation, by which to analyze this complex practice (Stein et al., 2008). For example, byproviding PSTs with examples of student work and a case study of how a classroom teacher implements herclassroom discussion, we foregrounded salient aspects of anticipation, monitoring, selecting, sequencing, orconnecting the teacher used. Through these various representations, we supported the PSTs in visualizing waysin which they can begin to use and develop their own identity as a classroom teacher (Grossman et al., 2009a).ApproximationBy simulating and role-playing a Five Practices discussion in the methods classroom, the PSTs engaged inapproximations of practice similar to those identified by Grossman et al (2009a). As they gained experience,they engaged in varying levels and iterations of authentic and complex discussion practices, thereby developingthe knowledge and skills necessary to begin to integrate the decomposed pieces of the model. Through thispublic practice and feedback provided to the PSTs, we highlight particular aspects of the model, while other,less important, aspects of discussion facilitation are ignored. By drawing PSTs’ attention to these importantaspects and allowing them to engage in opportunities to practice, they can begin to develop their PDC to designtasks necessary to facilitate productive, engaging science discussions with students.In designing the secondary science methods courses, we adopted Ball and Forzani’s (2009) practicebased focus to design a Teaching Laboratory course for secondary science pre-service teachers in which theyparticipate in the high-level practice of supporting productive classroom discourse. We designed role-playscenarios that enabled our PSTs to engage in approximations (Grossman et al., 2009a) of these Five Practices inthe context of the Teaching Laboratory course. Here, we provide examples of our approximation scenarios anddescribed the principles underlying the design (see Figure 1).Figure 1. Description of the Approximation Scenarios From the Teaching Laboratory Course (Ross, Cartier,Forman, & Walker, 2011).ParticipantsA total of 18 teachers enrolled in the 2011-2012 secondary science Master of Arts in Teaching and professionalyear teacher certificate year program. The 14 subjects (5 males and 9 females) of this study were a sample ofconvenience because they were all enrolled in the science methods course and required to participate in thecoursework.The majority were 22-26 years old and Caucasian. Two instructors taught the TeachingICLS 2014 Proceedings	  601© ISLSLaboratory during this time using a common syllabus and identical classroom learning tasks and courseassignments.Data Corpus and CodingOver the course of 10 weeks during the fall 2011 term, the PSTs completed two instructional planning (IP)assignments in which they planned and designed their own lessons focusing on whole class discussion arounddata (see Figure 2). Each PST implemented their lesson at the secondary science placement in which they wereassigned. Upon completion of the lesson, PSTs completed a reflection on the lesson and posted all relevantmaterials (e.g. lesson plan, tasks, reflection, etc.) to a shared online planning tool that the research group hadaccess. In service of this study’s goals we focused the analysis specifically on the PSTs planning documents.Figure 2. Intervention and instructional planning timeline.Recall that the purpose of this study is to understand what features of the Five Practices (Stein &Smith, 2011) the PSTs, who had participated in the role-play scenarios around these practices, utilize whenplanning for a discussion lesson. We coded each lesson plan for instances of anticipating, monitoring, selecting,sequencing, and connecting as defined by Stein and Smith (2011). Twenty-five percent of the data set wasdouble coded with an interrater reliability of 85%. In areas where there was disagreement, we discussed thedisagreements and reached consensus.Major FindingsUse of the Five Practices Model in PlanningIn both lesson plans, PSTs showed evidence of using the Five Practices in their lesson planning. Coding for useof the Five Practices included a variety of different ways that the PSTs used this instructional model. PSTsanticipated, monitored, selected, sequenced, and connected in their planning. Exemplars of each of thesepractices are below (Table 2).Table 2. Examples of Use of the Five Practices in the PSTs’ Lesson Planning.Anticipating"Based on the surveys I had students complete in the last class, I have already organizedthem into groups specific groups with similar thinking patterns (though not 100% thesame, because differences will help to facilitate a discussion)." Details misconceptionsand groups and what their underlying misconceptions are for each group.”MonitoringPlans questions and prompts to address to students and probe their thinking in order togenerate a discussion. Creates a completed monitoring tool based on student work fromprevious day.Selecting"I will ask for volunteers if students fail to volunteer I will ask for group 2 to start."They had the q2m2 then group 5 can offer alternative explanation of lab data then group1 with the alternative form of sugar (I will privately ask Brittney from group 4 if shewould come up she will wrap up this discussion b/c she had most complete and wellthought out response"Sequencing"I will ask for volunteers if students fail to volunteer I will ask for group 2 to start."They had the q2m2 then group 5 can offer alternative explanation of lab data then group1 with the alternative form of sugar (I will privately ask Brittney from group 4 if shewould come up she will wrap up this discussion b/c she had most complete and wellthought out response"ConnectingPlans questions that prompt students to make comparisons to the affordances anddrawbacks of sickle cell anemia.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  602© ISLSIn the first set of lesson plans (Instructional Performance 1), coding for use of the Five Practices modelshowed that PSTs did utilize part of the model in their planning. Of the 14 PSTs, evidence of anticipating andmonitoring occurred the most in their planning practices with 8 out of 14 anticipating and 11 out of 14monitoring to some degree (see Table 3). Half of the teachers (7) showed evidence of selecting students’ workto present in their planning, with sequencing and connecting used by only 5 teachers.In Instructional Performance 2 (IP 2) planning, PSTs show evidence of using connecting in theirplanning most frequently, 10 out of 14. Selecting and sequencing use occurred the least in their planning, 4 and2 PSTs, respectively. However, use of anticipating and monitoring practices decreased compared with IP1, 6PSTs and 7 PSTs respectively (see Table 1). Overall, there is not evidence that the PSTs use the Five Practicesmodel as intended, incorporating all of the Practices in their planning. Instead, PSTs show evidence of usingselective practices in each lesson planTable 3: Total number of pre-service teachers’ use of features of the five practices instructional model in theirlesson planning assignments.AnticipatingMonitoringSelectingSequencingConnectingIP1No Evidence637995P Use811755IP2No Evidence87101245P Use674210Use of the Five Practices Model in Discussion Planning Over TimeIn looking at the way PSTs planning changed over time, we see two patterns emerge. First, there is a shift inanticipating and monitoring use in IP1 with minimal attention paid to planning for connecting to clear evidencein IP2 where connecting is a focus of the PSTs’ planning attention (see Table 1). This finding suggests thatPSTs recognized the importance of planning for connecting and discussion orchestration after implementing IP1and made that planning a focus in their subsequent lesson plans. Moreover, evidence suggests that PSTs attendto particular aspects of their planning at certain times. For example, immediately after coursework focusing onthe importance of using the Five Practices, 51% of the PSTs used elements of the Five Practices model in theirplanning. As time passes, only 41% of the PSTs used elements of the Five Practices model in their planning.This finding suggests: (1) PSTs recognized the importance of planning for connecting in their discussion, (2)PSTs focused on other elements of their planning as they continue teaching in their field placements.Second, in an effort to determine if any content specific variations occurred in the PSTs planning, weanalyzed the data with respect to content area (see Tables 4 and 5). Although the sample size is low (n=14), apattern emerges between Physical Science and Biological Science. For IP 1, both content area PSTs plan usingfeatures of the Five Practices at some level. However, for IP 2, there is a significant drop in the General SciencePSTs that plan using the Five Practices model. The Biological Science PSTs plan using the Five Practicesacross IP 1 and IP 2, while planning in the Physical Sciences drops noticeably. This finding indicates a possibleconnection between planning and using the Five Practices model in the two science areas. We cannot speak tospecifics without further research, but there may be a connection between content area and curriculum and easeor feasibility of using the Five Practices model. Moreover, there may be differences in the way the PSTsunderstanding of the Nature of Science or learning of science. For instance, if a PST has an understanding thatChemistry is learned through doing experiments and completing problems, then it might be difficult toconceptualize a robust whole class discussion around Chemistry content.Table 4: Total number of pre-service teachers’ use of the five practices model in planning for instructionalperformance 2 by content area.IP1Anticipating Monitoring Selecting Sequencing ConnectingNo Evidence425675P Use68543PhysicalScienceTotal1010101010No Evidence21232Biological 5P Use23212ScienceTotal44444ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  603© ISLSTable 5: Total number of pre-service teachers’ use of the five practices model in planning for instructionalperformance 3 by content area.IP2Anticipating Monitoring Selecting SequencingConnectingNo Evidence76894Physical5P Use34216ScienceTotal1010101010No Evidence11330Biological 5P Use33114ScienceTotal44444Conclusions and ImplicationsThese findings suggest that the Five Practices role-play approximations in the Teaching Laboratory course playsa role in supporting PSTs as they plan for robust science discussions using this instructional model. Over time,the PSTs appear to focus on other aspects of their teaching, e.g., classroom management, and less focused onplanning related specifically to discussions using the Five Practices model. It might be necessary to designsupports methods courses to further unpack the importance of student talk and discussion in science. Inaddition, we are currently designing ways to support PSTs planning and teaching through discussion throughouttheir teacher preparation coursework. This study provides evidence that the Five Practices model and teachingof this instructional model provides a useful framework for PSTs as they plan discussions. By simulating andapproximating a Five Practices discussion in pedagogy courses, the PSTs engaged in approximations of practicesimilar to those identified by Grossman et al (2009a) as effective. As the teachers gained experience, theyengaged in varying levels of authentic and complex discussion practices, thereby developing the knowledge andskills necessary to begin to integrate the decomposed pieces of the model as they planned lessons for their own7-12 students. Through the public practice and feedback, we highlighted particular aspects of the Five Practicesimportant for planning a productive discussion. By drawing PSTs’ attention to these important aspects andallowing them to engage in opportunities to practice, they showed evidence of using these practices as theyplanned to engage their students in science discussions. 	  Additionally, these findings suggest that the role-play scenarios in which the PSTs participated in thepedagogy courses are effective in the PSTs learning. Providing the PSTs with opportunities to engage in theapproximations of practice (Grossman et al., 2009) allows for greater traction and understanding of thestrategies presented in the role-play. Problematizing the issues that arise as teachers enact discussions in thefamiliar and comfortable setting of their own classrooms allows the PSTs to notice these issues and practiceways to address them.In addition, findings from this study indicate the importance of grounding Five Practices discussions inhigh-levels tasks (Smith & Stein, 2011). Although not a focus of this study, anecdotal data reveals thatdesigning and planning discussions around tasks that are not cognitively demanding for students can hinder theways in which the PSTs plan and implement these discussions. As such, we continue to work on designingways in teacher preparation to support PSTs development as instructional designers.In order for the ambitious vision of science instruction presented by the NGSS (Achieve, Inc., 2013) tobecome a reality in secondary schools, teachers must design instruction with these goals in mind. By usingvarious curriculum resources (e.g. texts, online lesson plans and resources, standards, curriculum materials,etc.), teachers can design instruction that supports students’ engagement in SEPs and their sense making relatedto key disciplinary phenomena. The ability to navigate through the vast number of these resources and to designinstruction appropriate for each group of students is the essence of what Brown (2009) terms pedagogicaldesign capacity (PDC).Thinking about the task, or thinking through the lesson, in critical ways can supportteachers’ as they design their planned curriculum (Smith & Stein). Analyzing tasks through the student lensallows teachers to understand their value in supporting students’ learning and support teachers as they buildupon individual tasks to create lesson arcs and curriculum units (Remillard, 2000).Theoretically, we will continue to learn more about teacher learning and the mechanisms behindlearning to orchestrate discussions through the continued use of the Five Practices model and the iterations ofrepresentation, decomposition, and approximation of practice through design research that continues in thesecourses (Grossman et al., 2009a). The potential learning ecologies and theories that emerge from this researchwill enhance teacher education across disciplines. Practically, it directly impacts the secondary science preservice teachers in this teacher preparation program yearly. Ultimately, teachers impact secondary sciencestudent learning greatly through participating in task-based discussions regularly. This study lays the foundationfor generalizability to other disciplines. The features of the role-play instructional model based on the FivePractices (Stein et al., 2008) can be used in teacher education course in all disciplines. Through theICLS 2014 Proceedings	  604© ISLSidentification of important features of the model that are essential for PST learning, teacher educators can designinstruction to incorporate similar role-play instructional models in their disciplines.The work associated with preparing pre-service science teachers to incorporate science and engineeringpractices into their instruction is something everyone should be concerned with, especially given the release ofthe Next Generation Science Standards. As the demands on teachers’ instruction increases, beginning teachersneed to be able to incorporate high-leverage practices effectively in order to engage students. This workdescribes a feasible way to prepare PSTs to engage students in task-based science discussions and the planningof those discussions through a set of decompositions, representations, and approximations. Additionally, thiswork addresses what these practices can look like in real environments, suggests one possible way to framethese practices in established instructional theory, opens the doors for discussions around practices, and hassome clear avenues for further research including lesson implementation and student learning.ReferencesAchieve, Inc. (2013). The Next Generation Science Standards.Ball, D. L., & Cohen, D. K. (1996). Reform by the book: What is – or might be – the role of curriculummaterials in teacher learning and instructional reform? Educational Researcher, 25, 6 - 8, 14.Ball, D. L., & Forzani, F. (2009). The work of teaching and the challenge for teacher education. Journal ofTeacher Education, 60(5), 497-511.Ball, D. L., Sleep, L., Boesrt, T. A., & Bass, H. (2009). Combining the development of practice and the practiceof development in teacher education. The Elementary School Journal, 109 (5), 458-474.Berland, L. K., McNeill, K. L. (2010). A learning progression for scientific argumentation: Understandingstudent work and designing supportive instructional contexts. Science Education, 94, 765-793.Berland, L. K., & Reiser, B. (2008). Making sense of argumentation and explanation. Science Education, 93(1),26-55.Beyer, C. & Davis, E. A. (2009). Supporting pre-service elementary teachers’ critique and adaptation of sciencelesson plans using educative curriculum materials. Journal of Science Teacher Education 20, 517-536.Beyer, C., Delgado, C., Davis, E., & Krajcik, J. (2009). Investigating teacher learning supports in high schoolbiology curricular programs to inform the design of educative curriculum materials. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching 46(9), 977-998.Brown, M. W. (2009). The teacher-tool relationship: Theorizing the design and use of curriculum materials. InJ. T. Remillard, B. A. Herbel-Eisenmann, and G. M. Lloyd (Eds.), Mathematics Teachers At Work:Connecting Curriculum Materials and Classroom Instruction. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor andFrancis.Cartier, J. L., Smith, M. S., Stein, M. K., & Ross, D. K. (2013). 5 Practices for Orchestrating ProductiveScience Discussions. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics and Corwin Press.Cazden, C. B. (2001). Classroom Discourse: The Language of Teaching and Learning (2nd ed.) Portsmouth,NH: Heinemann.Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R. & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educationalresearch. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9–13.Davis, E. A., & Smithey, J. (2009). Beginning teachers moving toward effective elementary science teaching.Science Education, 93(4), 745-770.Doyle, W. (1983). Academic work. Review of Educational Research, 53(2): 159-199.Duschl, R. (2008). Science education in three-part harmony: Balancing conceptual, epistemic, and sociallearning goals. Review of Research in Education (pp. 268-291). London: Sage Publications.Engle, R. A. (2011). The Productive disciplinary engagement framework: origins, key concepts anddevelopments. In David Yun Dai (Ed.) Design Research on Learning and Thinking in EducationalSettings: Enhancing Intellectual Growth and Functioning, 161-200. London: Taylor & Francis.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. C. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners in a classroom. Cognition andInstruction, 20(4), 399-483.Feiman-Nemser, S. (2001). From preparation to practice: Designing a continuum to strengthen and sustainteaching. Teachers College Record 103(6), 1013-1055.Grossman, P., Compton, C., Igra, D., Ronfeldt, M., Shahan, E., & Williamson, P. W. (2009a). Teachingpractice: A cross-professional perspective. Teachers College Record, 111(9), 2055-2100.Grossman, P., Hammerness, K., & McDonald, M. (2009b). Redefining teaching, re-imagining teachereducation. Teachers and Teaching: theory and practice, 15(2), 273-289.Grossman, P., & Thompson, C. (2008). Learning from curriculum materials: Scaffolds for new teachers?Teaching and Teacher Education, 24, 2014-2026..Leinhardt, G., & Steele, M.D. (2005). Seeing the complexity of standing to the side: Instructional dialogues.Cognition and Instruction, 23(1), 87-163..ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  605© ISLSMcNeill, K. L., Lizotte, D. J., Krajcik, J. & Marx, R. W. (2006). Supporting students construction of scientificexplanations be fading scaffolds in instructional materials. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1),153-191.Michaels, S., O’Connor, C., & Resnick, L. B. (2008). Deliberative discourse idealized and realized:Accountable talk in the classroom and civic life. Studies in Philosophy and Education, 27, 283-297.Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook (2nd ed.). SagePublications, Inc.Remillard, J. T. (2000). Can curriculum materials support teachers’ learning? Two fourth-grade teachers’ use ofa new mathematics text. Elementary School Journal, 100(4), 331–350.Remillard, J. T. (2005). Examining key concepts in research on teachers' use of mathematics curricula. Reviewof Educational Research, 75(2), 211-246.Ross, D. K., Cartier, J. L., Forman, E., & Walker, D. C. F., (2011). Using Role Play Scenarios to Help PreService teachers Develop Foundational Discursive Practices. Poster Presentation at the Science andMathematics Teacher Imperative, Portland, Oregon.Sampson, V. & Grooms, J. (2009). Promoting and supporting scientific argumentation in the classroom: Theevaluate-alternatives instructional model. Science Scope, 33.1, 66.Smith, M. S., & Stein, M. K. (2011). 5 Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematics Discussions.Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics and Corwin Press.Stein, M. K., Engle, R. A., Smith, M. S., & Hughes, E. K. (2008). Orchestrating productive mathematicaldiscussions: Five practices for helping teachers move beyond show and tell. Mathematical Thinkingand Learning, 10, 313-340.Stein, M. K., Grover, B. W., and Henningsen, M. (1996). Building student capacity for mathematical thinkingand reasoning: An analysis of mathematical tasks used in reform classrooms. American EducationalResearch Journal, 33, 455–488.	  Zembal-Saul, C. (2009). Learning to teach elementary school science as argument. Science Education, 93, 687 –719.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  606© ISLS