Examining Teacher Assignments and Student Work at theIntersection of Content and Practice in Middle School ScienceBritte Haugan Cheng, Jeremy Fritts, Tiffany Leones and Bowyee Gong, SRI Internationalbritte.cheng@sri.com, jeremy.fritts@sri.com,tiffany.leones@sri.com,bowyee.gong@sri.comAbstract: This poster presents two views of a year-long implementation of an NGSS-alignedcurriculum including teachers’ perspectives on challenges to provide opportunities forstudents to develop scientific practices and disciplinary content in tandem, and work producedby students as part of instruction. Initial findings that point to teacher tendency to usepractices as an alternate student work product rather than as knowledge-generation activitiesare presented and discussed.IntroductionDevelopment of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS; NRC, 2012) and Common Core StateStandards formalizes a complex view of teaching and learning that calls for new models or curriculum design,pedagogy, and assessment that consider strategic integrations of multiple dimensions of learning. In particular,these standards reflect frameworks that recognize that learning occurs within disciplinary practices and thatteaching, learning and assessment goals should reflect this complexity. Stakeholders at the many levels of theeducation system (teachers, administrators, state department leaders, etc.) must contend with the problem ofredefining success, both in terms of instruction and student achievement.This poster presents self-report data about teachers’ instructional goals, their decisions and examples oftheir students’ work produced as part of instructional activities collected over two years. This work wasconducted in conjunction with an efficacy study of NGSS-aligned instructional materials and professionaldevelopment. The major issues addressed by this poster are the challenges of developing and evidencing newviews into teaching and student learning in a multi-dimensional instructional space. Significant contributions ofthe work include rich pictures of teacher understandings and instruction of NGSS aligned science materials andsamples and analysis of student work as evidence of how students’ understandings develop in NGSS-alignedinstruction. The ICLS 2014 conference theme articulates the need to better understand learning through andembedded in disciplinary practices, making this work a direct response to the conference call.This work takes place as part of an efficacy study of the Project-Based Inquiry Science (PBIS)curriculum, a comprehensive, 3-year middle school science curriculum that focuses on standards-based sciencecontent and uses project-based inquiry science units to help students learn. NSF funded the development ofPBIS over the past two decades, with major investments made in the design of materials and with associatedteacher professional development for teachers to understand the content of the units and how to teach them.PBIS materials and activities, though produced before the NGSS and its companion framework were developed,are designed to incorporate modeling, construction of explanations and other scientific practices as a way forstudents to construct understanding of phenomena in the context of long-term projects and investigation.This poster will present two complementary views of a year long implementation of PBIS activitiesincluding 1) initial findings about teachers perspectives on how they provide opportunities for students todevelop scientific practices and disciplinary content in tandem and 2) work produced by students as part of thoseactivities over the course of the academic year.Theoretical ApproachesClassroom implementation is the lynchpin that will determine the impact of NGSS, as has been the case withpast educational reforms (Fullan & Miles, 1992). Understanding the ways teachers may structure instructionalactivities, and understanding reasons for those choices, is necessary in order to evaluate how NGSS is impactingscience learning. Specifically, exploring relationships between the kinds of instructional choices teachers aremaking and how those choices provide learning opportunities for students is a critical activity in examining andsupporting implementation of NGSS (Henningsen & Stein, 1997). Professional development will need to bedeveloped that can help teachers elicit and support student engagement in practices that integrate scienceconcepts in meaningful ways. Moreover, teachers will need tools that will help them reflect on their instruction.This research is motivated by the need to further identify how the specific, strategic integrations of thedisciplinary practices and core disciplinary ideas prioritized by NGSS support students’ conceptual developmentalong both dimensions, and how teachers might be supported to understand and elicit these processes. While thecross-cutting concepts are an essential dimension of NGSS, this work focuses on the integration of content andpractices as an analytic starting point.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1661© ISLSMethodsThis study takes place within a larger, two-year randomized-control (RCT) efficacy study of the PBIS materials.All 6th grade teachers of a large, diverse, urban school district were recruited to participate in the study. 42middle schools with more than 100 sixth grade teachers are participating in the efficacy study. At the beginningof the study, schools in the district were randomly assigned to a study condition where PBIS would be used or acomparison group where current science curriculum materials would be used. Teachers in both conditions wereinvited to participate in professional development about the NGSS framework and practices. Teachers in theimplementation group also were invited to participate in PBIS professional development.35 teachers in each condition were recruited to participate in data collection to examine theirassignments (TA) and the students’ work (SW) produced as part of those activities; we refer to these data asTASW. Year one of the study occurred during the 2012-2013 school year and year two of the study isunderway. While Year one data is being analyzed, producing preliminary findings presented here, both years ofdata will be available for presentation at the conference. All teachers were asked to provide information aboutclassroom activities conducted to meet a set of 3 physical and 3 earth science state standards. This ensured acomparable data set across the two conditions and because the district uses a pacing guide, it was meant toensure that data would be collected at about the same point in the year for all teachers. Teachers were asked toprovide examples of work from students representing below average, average and above average performanceacross all their classes.Classroom assignments were coded to characterize the ways modeling and construction of explanation,two important practices in NGSS are integrated and to characterize the ways the use of the practice aligns withNGSS definitions. Codes were compared with teacher descriptions of assignments. When possible, studentwork was analyzed according to rubrics developed by the project team anchored around NGSS performanceexpectations. When assignments did not align to NGSS performance expectations, student work was analyzedusing rubrics developed as the as part of summative assessment design conducted by the team. Data integritywill be established using similar methods to Borko and colleagues (2005) via triangulation to classroom videotapes and teacher interviews. Borko et al (2005) showed that the use of teacher report of classroom activities, inconjunction with student work, can be a reliable method to characterize what goes on in classrooms.Preliminary FindingsTeachers who did not have the benefit of the PBIS curriculum were more likely to over estimate the role of thescientific practice in their assignments. These teachers were more likely assign activities that included modelingand explanation only as ways to describe phenomena rather than as a means to explore phenomena or to connectevidence and claims as part of explanations. Teachers who did not participate in professional developmentsessions were also more likely to assign activities where practices were not well integrated. Across conditions,students participating in these assignments, where modeling or explanation tend to be used as a means to helpstudents identify components or elements of a situation or phenomenon, rather than as a means to makepredictions or develop hypotheses, are less likely to show evidence of developing more complex understandingsabout the phenomena being studied. Further analysis will continue to explore these initial findings andrelationships. Analyses of teacher reports will examine factors cited by teachers for instructional decisionmaking. Student work analyses will include comparisons of summative assessment data to contextualize studentperformances throughout the year.Conclusions and ImplicationsInitial results confirm the assumption that implementing NGSS will be a difficult transition for science teacherswho appear to struggle with integrating modeling and explanation practices into their instruction in ways thatprovide students with opportunities to generate models or explanations that represent emerging reasoning.Implications of this work include a call for more research that can provide examples and point to challenges ofimplementation will be valuable to teachers and designers as NGSS is adopted across the nation.ReferencesBorko, H., Stecher, B. M., Alonzo, A., Moncure, S., & McClam, S. (2005). Artifact packages for characterizingclassroom practice: A pilot study. Educational Assessment, 10(2), 73-104.Fullan, M. G., & Miles, M. B. (1992). Getting reform right: What works and what doesn’t. Phi Delta Kappan,73, 745–752.Henningsen, M. & Stein, M. K. (1997). Mathematical Tasks and Student Cognition: Classroom-Based FactorsThat Support and Inhibit High-Level Mathematical Thinking and Reasoning. Journal for Research inMathematics Education, Vol. 28, No. 5. (Nov., 1997), pp. 524-549.National Research Council (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1662© ISLS