Building a Learning Progression for Chromosome SegregationUsing Phenomenographic Variation TheoryStanley M. Lo, Stephanie Kim, Su Swarat, Gregory J. LightNorthwestern University, 2205 Tech Drive, Hogan 2-100, Evanston IL 60208, USAstanley-lo@northwestern.edu,s.kim@u.northwestern.edu,s-swarat@northwestern.edu,g-light@northwestern.eduAbstract: Chromosome segregation is a critical yet challenging concept in genetics. Moststudies on how students learn genetics has focused on the K-12 level. Here, we describe theprocess of building a learning progression for chromosome segregation at the undergraduatelevel using variation theory from phenomenography. A major finding is that studentsdemonstrate increasing sophistication in connecting the different modes of representation ofchromosome segregation used in instruction.RationaleChromosome segregation is a critical phenomenon in cell division and is one of the most important yet difficultconcepts for students in genetics (e.g. Kindfield, 1994). Chromosome segregation provides the mechanisticexplanation for inheritance and Mendel’s laws, as well as a means to understand complex genetic phenomena,including recombination or crossing-over, nondisjunction, and chromosome rearrangements.Despite much instructional effort, students have difficulty grasping the phenomenon of chromosomesegregation, as reflected in their performances in diagnostic tests (Smith, Wood, & Knight, 2008). In particular,many students cannot depict the proper structure of chromosomes in mitosis and meiosis, are unable to positiongene alleles in their correct positions on chromosomes, and have trouble explaining the causal relationshipsbetween errors in chromosome segregation and the outcomes of meiosis (Smith & Knight, 2012).The central question is how students conceptualize the process of chromosome segregation. Only withthis knowledge could we identify learning obstacles and design effective instructional interventions accordingly.Since most studies on students’ learning of genetics have been focused on the K-12 level (e.g. Ducan, Rogat &Yarden, 2009), there is much need to unpack how undergraduate students understand chromosome segregation,especially the more advanced aspects of this phenomenon. Therefore, we focused our initial effort onrecombination, a critical aspect of chromosome segregation in the undergraduate genetics curriculum.Theoretical ApproachThis study is designed to explore how students conceptualize the process of chromosome segregation and toidentify the obstacles that prevent them from learning this phenomenon effectively. As the study is exploratoryin nature, the research question is left intentionally broad to capture students’ wide range of conceptions.We used variation theory from phenomenography as a theoretical framework. Phenomenography, aqualitative research methodology, investigates the various ways that people experience or conceptualize aphenomenon (Marton 1981). Variation theory offers a theoretical lens to explore the possible variations in theseexperiences and the learning that result from these differences (Bussey, Orgill & Crippen, 2013). Variationtheory posits that each phenomenon (i.e. chromosome segregation) has defined aspects (e.g. recombination),and for each aspect, there is a limited number of features that exhibit distinguishable variations among them.Learning occurs when the different features and their variations are integrated into a coherent whole.Variation theory can potentially be a useful theoretical framework for building learning progressions(e.g. Swarat, Light, Park & Drane, 2011). Learning progressions are descriptions of increasingly sophisticatedways of thinking about a phenomenon (National Research Council 2007). Essentially, learning progressions areconceptual pathways that students navigate as they develop understanding of a phenomenon. Defining learningprogressions will provide the theoretical foundation to design instructional material that specifically targetstransitions along these conceptual pathways.Methodological ApproachThe method of clinical interview was employed to explore students’ conceptions of chromosome segregation.Clinical interviews help researchers gain insight into student mind by involving him or her in a concrete task,asking a “how did you do it?” or “why” question, and offering an immediate hypothesis making and testingregarding the student’s response (Ginsberg, 1997). The flexibility and effectiveness of clinical interviews haveled to its adoption in many studies of human cognition, the most relevant of which include the famous study ofhow experts and novices understand physics problems (Chi, Feltovich & Glaser, 1981).We engaged students in interview tasks derived from their midterm exam questions that involve thephenomenon of chromosome segregation and, in particular, various aspects related to recombination. Studentswere asked to solve these problems, while being prompted to explain their problem-solving approaches and toICLS 2014 Proceedings1573© ISLSillustrate their thought processes by drawing diagrams. An educational researcher trained in the researchmethodology led the interviews, and a content expert participated to ensure the quality of the interviews.To capture the variety of student conceptions, we recruited students who demonstrated different levelsof performance on the exam questions. That is, we included students who provided sophisticated answersrepresenting multiple features of recombination, those who showed understanding of one or limited number offeatures, and those who performed poorly on the exam questions. This sampling method was chosen to increasethe possibility that we witness the full variations among student conceptions.Interviews were transcribed verbatim. Data analysis took a grounded approach, with iterative closereading of the transcripts and artifacts (i.e. student-drawn diagrams) to identify phenomenographic features ofrecombination and the variations among these features. Key aspects of chromosome segregation, especially inrelation to recombination, were analyzed.Findings and ConclusionsWe report here the analysis of results from six interviews. A major finding is the disconnection among differentfeatures that students used to describe the phenomenon. Students had difficulty integrating the multiple features(i.e. modes of representation) of chromosome segregation and recombination employed in instruction. Forexample, Students with low performance on the exam typically recognized recombination of genetic material inoffspring in one of three ways: conceptual (i.e. phenotypic differences from parents), mathematical (i.e. definedfrequency from crosses), or symbolic (i.e. genotypic combinations of alleles). Students with increasingperformance, and potentially increasing sophistication in understanding chromosome segregation, described theaspect in two or all three features.We believe that these preliminary findings and our approach can shed light on possible ways to build alearning progression for chromosome segregation and recombination in particular. Ultimately, we anticipate thatthis study will yield an outcome space of different student conceptions of chromosome segregation. Thisoutcome space will define a learning progression, including descriptions of varying levels of conceptions, keyfeatures that differentiate among the levels, and possible obstacles that prevent students from advancing towardmore sophisticated understanding.ReferencesBussey, T. J., Orgill, M. K., & Crippen, K.J. (2013). Variation theory: A theory of learning and a usefultheoretical framework for chemical education research. Chemistry Education Research and Practice,14: 9-22.Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems byexperts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.Duncan, R. G., Rogat, A. D., & Yarden, A. (2009). A learning progression for deepending students’understandings of modern genetics across the 5th-10th grades. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 46 (6), 655-674.Ginsberg, H. P. (1997). Entering the child’s mind: The clinical interview in psychological research andpractice. New York: Cambridge University Press.Kindfield, A. C. H. (1994). Understanding of biological processes: Elucidating students’ models of meiosis. TheAmerican Biology Teacher, 56 (6), 367-371.Marton, F. (1981). Phenomenography: Describing conceptions of the world around us. Instructional Science,10:177-200.National Research Council. (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching science in grades K-8.Washington, D.C.: The National Academy Press.Smith, M. K., & Knight J. K. (2012). Using the genetics concept assessment to document persistent conceptualdifficulties in undergraduate genetics courses. Genetics, 191 (1): 21-32.Smith, M. K., Wood, W. B., & Knight, J. K. (2008). The genetics concept assessment: A new concept inventoryfor gauging student understanding of genetics. CBE Life Science Education, 7 (4), 422-430.Swarat, S., Light, G., Park, E-J., & Drane, D. (2011). A typology of undergraduate students’ conceptions of sizeand scale: Identifying and characterizing conceptual variation. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 18 (5): 512-533.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1574© ISLS