Knowledge Organization with Multiple External Representations forSocioscientific Argumentation: A Case on Nuclear EnergyBahadir Namdar, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA, baha@uga.eduJi Shen, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA, j.shen@miami.eduAbstract: Given the vast amount of information readily available through the Internet indifferent forms of representation, learners need to organize their knowledge strategically inorder to make a sound argument, especially on a complex topic such as socioscientific issues.In this study, we designed a science unit on nuclear energy using a newly developed onlineknowledge and learning management system that offers three types of representations:pictorial, textual, and concept maps. We investigated how learners organized their knowledgewith multiple external representations and how their knowledge organization practicesinteracted with their argumentation. Our results indicated that concept maps and wiki entrieswere more connected than the pictorial modes in the network of knowledge entries created bythe learners. Moreover, we found evidence showing that students’ knowledge organizationenabled them to draw information while arguing and that their argumentation guided them toadvance their knowledge organization practices.IntroductionSocioscientific issues (SSI) are useful pedagogical tools in science classrooms. They are often relevant tolearners’ lives and therefore, can promote interest in learning science (Kolstø, 2006; Sadler & Zeidler, 2005).They can engage diverse learners in participating in scientific discourse and argumentation (Zeidler & Nichols,2009). Producing sound arguments on SSI requires learners to synthesize complex information and useevidence-based reasoning (Zeidler & Nichols, 2009). It is important to create opportunities for learners todiscover mutual influence of science and society, which can empower learners’ science learning as well as theirdecision making in their lives(Simonneaux, 2008). Zeidler & Nichols (2009) submitted that arguing anddebating about SSI in classroom could engage students in scientific thinking and reasoning, and providestudents with firsthand experience of the advancement of scientific knowledge in daily life.With the rapid development of information and communication technology (ICT), relevant (andirrelevant) information and data pertinent to particular SSI are distributed across a vast network of resources.Such information and data are often presented in multiple external representations (MER), such as tables,graphs, texts, models, and pictures (Ainsworth, 2006; Chandrasegaran, Treagust, & Mocerino, 2011). Whenarguing about a given SSI, students need to organize relevant information in an effective way and construct andrepresent their arguments accordingly, especially in computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL)environments. Therefore, learners must know how to search, sort, cluster, tag information in the forms ofrepresentations that reflect their understanding. We call this process knowledge organization (Namdar & Shen,2013).Although SSI, MER, and argumentation have been widely studied in science education, the process ofknowledge organization with MER and the interaction between knowledge organization and argumentation onSSI remains relatively unexplored. Hence, to address this gap in the literature, we designed a learning unit on aSSI and asked learners to organize their knowledge using MER and argue about the issue using a CSCLplatform. Our inquiry has focused on the following two research questions: (In an argumentation-based CSCLenvironment)1. How do learners organize knowledge effectively with MERs?2. How does learners’ knowledge organization with MER interact with their argumentation practices?Theoretical FrameworkThis study is built on both cognitive and social constructivist perspectives toward learning science. First, from asocial constructivism standpoint, we hold the assumption that learning occurs within a community of learnersand that learners construct their understanding within this socially interactive context (Lemke, 2001;Vygotskiĭ , 1986). Therefore, in our research we created a collaborative learning environment for learners toconstruct their knowledge using a CSCL tool in small groups and also at the class level. Second, based on theassumption of cognitive constructivism, learners use tools to construct their individual understanding (Piaget,1970). In this study students used different representations to coordinate and construct meanings of a SSI.Researchers have reported many benefits of using MERs in science instruction, such as capturinglearners’ interest (Ainsworth, 1999) and enhancing students’ understanding of scientific concepts(Chandrasegaran et al., 2011; Waldrip, Prain, & Carolan, 2010). According to Ainsworth (1999), one goal ofutilizing MER is to enable learners to take advantage of the benefits that are associated with each representation,ICLS 2014 Proceedings254© ISLSand help individuals with varying learning abilities. It has been noted that naturally many students have metarepresentational competency (diSessa, 2004), which might lead to improved learning gains (Grossen & Carnine,1990).Ainsworth (2004, 2006) argued that learners have difficulties with integrating information frommultiple data sources as they see individual representations in MERs in isolation. Therefore, learners need tomake meaningful links between those representations. We define knowledge organization as “the process ofsearching, sorting, clustering, archiving, and externalizing knowledge in a systematic way to achieve a betterunderstanding of the world” (Namdar & Shen, 2013, p. 345). This process will enable learners to have moresystematically organized and externalized information which will help them to retrieve information frommultiple sources.Our conceptualization of knowledge organization also stems from knowledge integration andknowledge building theories. We adopt the premises of helping learners make connections about their ideas andconceptually integrate those ideas from knowledge integration (Linn, 2006). We also believe in the needs ofcreating a knowledge building community and representing knowledge as in the forms of epistemic artifacts(Sterelny, 2005) from the knowledge building perspective (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). Knowledgeorganization therefore embraces two distinct attributes. First, knowledge organization requires learners toactively create, manipulate, and connect MERs, especially with the aid of technological tools. Second,knowledge organization demands the creation of interrelated knowledge webs at different social levels.Learning Platform and Unit DesignInnovative Knowledge Organization System (iKOS)iKOS is a web-based knowledge organization platform that helps learners to organize knowledge bothindividually and collectively (ikos.miami.edu). It follows three core design principles: providing learners withmeans to externalize knowledge in multiple forms and facilitate the transformation among them; engaginglearners’ knowledge organization and construction at both the private and the public spaces and ease the flowbetween them; nurture learners’ independent, critical thinking as well as collaborative mind set and catalyze thetransition between them. In iKOS, learners can create knowledge entries in three distinct representation modes:Event, Wiki, and Concept Map. In Event, learners search the web, find, and upload pictures of a complexscientific phenomenon. Learners tag and annotate those pictures to understand the phenomenon of interest. Wikiis similar to the Wikipedia interface in which learners can write text. Learners can also create Concept Maps inthe system and visualize the connections among a set of related science concepts (Novak & Cañas, 2008). iKOSautomatically links and visualizes learners’ knowledge entries based on similar keywords.Context and Lesson SequenceThis study took place in a large southeastern public US university. The sample included a class of 23 pre-serviceteachers who were taking a middle school methods class for science teaching. The study was conducted in 4sections in total of six hours. The first, second, and last sections took one hour, while the third section took threehours. We assigned students in four groups and each group had five students except one group with fourstudents.Although we focus on the learning aspect in the study, there are two main reasons to recruit pre-serviceteachers. First, we concur with Zeidler, et al.(2002) in that “[pre-service teachers] are in a position for effectingchange with the future learners they teach concerning the topics that have been identified as seminal issues forscience education” (p.346). Therefore, introducing an innovative learning approach to pre-service teachers maybe more transformative for the future of science education. Second, introducing a new learning approach,especially in its early phase, may be risky for existing teachers as they face the pressure of high-stakes testing.Pre-service teachers are more accessible in this regard.The lesson sequence was implemented as the following: (1) introduction to argumentation and conceptmapping; (2) Introduction to the topic of nuclear energy by reading an article and watching videos that focusedon pros and cons of nuclear energy; (3) Creating iKOS entries individually; (4) Creating iKOS entriescollaboratively in small groups on a particular scientific aspect of nuclear energy and engaging inargumentation; (5) Peer critique and revision of MERs, 6) Final presentation and argumentation. At the end ofthe unit, students presented their findings and argued for their stance on the issue of building nuclear powerplants. First author taught the class sessions for this study.Data Collection and AnalysisWe employed a concurrent nested mixed methods study design (Creswell, Plano Clark, Gutmann, & Hanson,2003) to better understand the knowledge organization and argumentation practices (Greene, 2007). Wecollected multiple sources of data for the purposes of complementarity as the different data were used to tap intoICLS 2014 Proceedings255© ISLSdifferent facets of the learning process (Greene, Caracelli, & Graham, 1989). The data collection includedparticipant observation of class interventions (Suzuki, Ahluwalia, Arora, & Mattis, 2007), learners’ artifacts(MERs created on iKOS), log file created by iKOS, and video recordings of classes. Quantitative methods thatfocused on understanding the students’ knowledge organization through the use of MERs and qualitativemethods aimed at understanding the interaction between knowledge organization and argumentation practices(Greene et al., 1989; Greene, 2007). Both qualitative and quantitative data were collected concurrently.The first research question was answered by analyzing the log file that was generated by iKOS. As theiKOS system automatically interlinks MERs that were created by the students, this file reports the number oflinks, the number of entries created, and the number of team members if the entry is co-created. We consideredeach individual iKOS entry as a node (or actor) in a graph to enact social network analysis (Knoke & Yang,2007). We calculated the mean normalized degree centrality by adding all the links that were associated withone entry and divided this number by the possible number of links that this entry could possess in connection tothe knowledge web (Knoke & Yang, 2007). Then, we added all the individual mean normalized degreecentralities that were associated with one mode of MER and normalized this number by dividing it by thepossible number of links that entries of particular mode have in the network.To have a better understanding of the actors in the network, we ran key actor analysis using the Rstatistical package. We calculated betweenness centrality and eigenvector centrality measures for each actor inthe network. Betweenness centrality measured the number of shortest paths that an actor is on, which makes thisactor important in controlling the flow of the information in the network (Knoke & Yang, 2007). Eigenvectorcentrality measured how central an actor is and how central the ties of this actor are in the network (Bonacich,2007). These two measures indicate how well connected an actor is in the network.To answer our second research question, based on the results of key actor analysis, we examined theargumentation that involved those students who created the highest ranked key actors. We analyzed the videosby adopting the analytical model suggested by Powell et al. (2003). First, we watched the videotapes severaltimes to become familiar with the content of the video without intentionally imposing critical and theoreticallenses toward the data. Second, based on 5-minute intervals, we described data without including interpretationsor inferences. After becoming familiar with the content of the videos, we carefully identified the significantinstances, or critical events (Powell et al. 2003). Critical events in this research refer to the instances in whichlearners argue collaboratively and take actions in their knowledge organization (revising, editing entries,creating new ones) or use their knowledge organization entries in their arguments. Next, we transcribed relevantargumentation sessions. In the coding stage, we specifically examined students’ statements and their relationshipto the specific entries that the students created or how the students’ arguments led them to create a certain entrytype. For instance, when a student wrote in her wiki “The fact that this power plant will be located 26 milesfrom SkyCity makes it a potential hazard to a large population of people” (Haley, Wiki entry) and employed asimilar idea in her argumentation in the class, we coded her verbal argument as “a reference to a wiki.”ResultsNetwork of Students’ iKOS EntriesThe students created 17 events, 23 wikis, and 20 concept map entries (see Table1). Our results indicated that thewiki mode had the highest mean degree group centrality. This result suggests that in this sample the mostcentralized/prominent entry mode was the wiki mode. These results also show that the event mode was the leastcentralized. Moreover, normalized degree centrality for the concept map mode was close to that of the wikimode.Table 1. Mean Normalized Degree Centralities for iKOS ModesEntry ModeEventWikiConcept MapTotal Number of Entries172320Normalized Degree Centrality0.380.510.49SD0.280.210.22Figure 1 shows the results of our key actor analysis weighted by eigenvector and betweennesscentralities. Each numbered actor in the figure represents an iKOS entry. The diameter of each actor isproportional to the product of eigenvector and betweenness centralities. We closely examined the top five keyactors in the network (#A149, A145, A130, A121, A157; see figure 1). Our results indicated that three out offive actors were concept maps and the remaining two actors were wiki entries.Additionally, the network density was 0.55which means that 55% of the possible links were present. Inother words, this knowledge network was a very dense network.ICLS 2014 Proceedings256© ISLSInterpretationOverall, the knowledge web that was generated as a result of this intervention was highly connected (see Figure1), which suggests a good knowledge organization practice by the students. The high density of the network alsosuggests that the students were mindful when organizing their knowledge; that is, they carefully connectedconcepts in their concept map entries and generated keywords for their wiki entries as the tags and keywords arethe sources for links in iKOS.Both concept maps and wiki entries were more central than the event entries, as expected. Since thefunction of a concept map is to connect big ideas (Novak & Cañas, 2008), it makes sense for them to be central,relatively speaking, in a knowledge web. Also, students created more wiki entries. This was natural as textualrepresentations are more approximate to verbal arguments. This result is consistent with our SSI unit that had anargumentation-based design. On the other hand, the event entries were not as connected in the knowledge web(Table 1). An event entry was relatively harder to create compared to the wiki and concept map entries in thesystem. Also, the function of an event entry is to encourage students to reflect their understanding of scientificprocesses and concepts.Yellow-Concept mapGreen- WikiRed- Event	  Figure 1. Key Actor Analysis for iKOS Entries Weighted by Betweenness and Eigenvector CentralitiesFigure 2. Haley’s Concept Map EntryInteraction between Knowledge Organization and Argumentation: The Case of HaleyTo address our research question 2, we further examined the top ranked key actors. The concept map entrycreated by Katie was the top ranked entry overall. However, Katie needed to leave the class after the first groupdiscussion. Therefore, we decided to focus on the case of Haley, who created the second highest ranked keyactor, which was a concept map (see Figure 2).In her homework Haley generated an entry in each mode (step (3) in lesson sequence). In her evententry, Haley inserted a picture of a nuclear power plant and focused on how this nuclear fission power plantworked. In her concept map, she looked at different types of nuclear energy creation processes: nuclear fissionand fusion (See Figure 2). In her long wiki entry she listed the benefits, drawbacks of nuclear energy, and wroteher claim to the question of ‘should we build nuclear power plant in our state?” She summarized her claim as:ICLS 2014 Proceedings257© ISLS“no, we should not build nuclear power plants in our state.” and listed six pieces of evidence : “(1) Costs billionsof dollars, (2) Benefits do not outweigh the risks, (3) Power companies don't pay if accident happens, familiespay by losing their loved ones (sometimes years later due to cancer), (4) Exposure to radiation kills living cells,(5) People around power plant are displaced (property value goes down since no one wants to live near a powerplant), (6) Located 26 miles northeast of a city - too close to a densely populated area.” Finally, she wrote herjustification:While nuclear energy is a relatively clean source of energy, the potential release of radiationfrom nuclear power plants is a huge risk. Accidents can happen, and they have happened. Thefact that this power plant will be located 26 miles from SkyCity makes it a potential hazard toa large population of people. We do not have the technology yet to make sure harmfulradiation is not released. Why should we build a nuclear power plant when the proper safetymeasures are not in place? [Haley, wiki entry, 04/17/2013]We compared Haley’s individual entries with those created by her teammates’ (her group had 5students). Two students did not create any entries prior to the class. None of the other two students created aconcept map. Haley was the only student in her group who created all three types of external representations.When we look at the event entries, we saw that all three students (Haley, Rachel, and Melissa) inserted a pictureof a nuclear power plant. Melissa only inserted a picture and did not use any tags, a poor knowledgeorganization practice. Rachel on the other hand, used seven tags in her event. But instead of using centralscientific concepts such as radioactive elements, heat, and energy as Haley did, she used specific terms such ascoolant and cooled liquid to refer to concrete objects.Key actor analysis indicated that Haley’s event entry was more central compared to the other two students’event entries. For wiki entries, Melissa’s wiki entry was one of the key actors (A130). In her entry she wrote:Nuclear energy comes from a process called fission. This generates heat which producessteam, which then generates electricity. There is another type of reaction called fusion(Melissa, Wiki Entry, 04/17/2013).Rachel, on the other hand, wrote several things about nuclear energy (e.g., the percentage of energy andelectricity generated from nuclear power, some benefits such as reducing carbon emissions and some drawbackssuch as radiation threats to environment).When coming to the class, students were asked to argue on the following two questions in their smallgroups (step (4) in lesson sequence): Should we build nuclear power plants in our state? For how long should wedepend on nuclear energy as an alternative energy source? Haley immediately initiated the discussion:[Excerpt 1. Transcripts 09/01/2013: 04:35-05:32]Haley:I do not think we should, because in the article it is talking about building it likewithin twenty-five miles, or something like that from SkyCity. So if anythingwere to go wrong. That would affect… it’s like very close to a high populationof people.Ashley:Yeah.Haley:That would affect a lot of people.Researcher: What would be the effect?Haley:Well, the radiation kills living cells so like that might not affect them right awaybut it could affect them like over ten years if they are exposed to that radiation,and it develops cancer and then ten years down the line, power plants are notgonna be the ones that wait for that. They are not gonna come and say “oh youknow we gave you cancer” and we are not gonna be able to fix it so people aregonna lose their lives.This excerpt indicates that Haley was able to draw information from the wiki entry she created in which shementioned the “lethal amounts of radiation, “the potential release of radiation from nuclear power plants is ahuge risk,” and “The fact that this power plant will be located 26 miles from SkyCity makes it a potential hazardto a large population of people.”As Haley initiated the discussion, she actually dominated it. She drew information seven times fromher wiki, four times from her concept map, and one time from her event entry. Following their groupargumentation session Haley gave an example of a movie that she saw in which a lawyer was trying to save acommunity that lived near a nuclear power plant. It contaminated the ground water and caused cancer in theICLS 2014 Proceedings258© ISLScommunity. After giving this example Haley drew the group’s conversation to a certain point that they started totalk about cancer and radiation.[Excerpt 2. 09/01/2013: 15:30-15: 41]Haley: It [nuclear power plant] contaminates…even if there isn’t an accident they are stillspreading nuclear radiation into the ground.Rachel: They cause cancer.Haley: Yeah, it caused cancer and they did not know where it was coming from and they justthought, you know, cancer, you really never know where it comes from.After about ten minutes into their small group discussion, students were asked to choose one scientific aspectassociated with nuclear energy and create iKOS entries to explain it. Haley’s group decided to focus on the topicof radiation exposure and its connection to cancer (see excerpt 3 below).[Excerpt 3. 09/01/2013: 17:35- 18:05]Ashley: Why do not we do radiation and cancer, so we do not want it.Rachel: [Inaudible]Ashley: We are done. We are gonna do radiation and cancerHaley: How radiation kills cells?Ashley: Yeah.Haley: Radiation exposure and cancer.As a result, Haley’s group created one entry on each mode and all entries focused on the connection betweenradiation and cancer. However, there was a slight difference in terms of the information represented in threemodes. In the wiki, they stated that “The radiation that comes from nuclear reactors is ionizing radiation,” andlisted two dangers:(1) It can damage DNA leading to mutations, thus potentially causing cancer or death of thecell. Damage to the cell can take place in less than a second, but cancer can take years todevelop, and(2) Ionizing radiation can be more carcinogenic than other types of radiation, and lead tocancers such as: thyroid, bone marrow, leukemia, skin, lung, stomach, breast, etc.They also wrote about the dangers of exposure to radiation and the testing of nuclear reactors in their wiki. Inthe event entry, they inserted several pictures that showed different information: about how UV photon mutatesthe DNA, how normal cells mutate to cancer cells, and how cancer cells leads to a tumor. In the concept map,they summarized the types of radiation and tied those to the cause of cancer.InterpretationOur analysis showed that Haley was able to draw information from different representations as she argued onthe nuclear energy topic within her group. She mostly used text-based entries (wiki-7 times; concept maps-4times) as the source of information for her argument. This is natural as she was asked to verbally argue on thesame topic, and she referred to her statements in the wiki mode. She only referred once to her event entry.Acquiring information from a pictorial representation during a verbal argumentation might be more challenging,as it requires students to explain and elaborate on the nuances that the picture includes. Through looking intoHaley’s case, we extracted two characteristics of the type of knowledge organization practices that contribute toargumentation.The first characteristic of a better knowledge organization might be the number of different types ofrepresentations that were created. Compared to her group members Haley was the only student who created allthree representations. The creation of more representations might have allowed her to acquire different pieces ofinformation as she used MERs to represent slightly different units of information on a given topic.The second characteristic of better knowledge organization that fostered argumentation speaks to thequality of the entries that were created. For instance, although Melissa’s wiki was a key actor in the knowledgenetwork, we see that she did not elaborate on the fission concept. The reason for Melissa’s wiki entry to be keyactor is that it connects with key actors in the knowledge network (e.g., #A148, A149, A157, A159; see figure1); as Melissa used the key concepts as her keywords (i.e., nuclear, energy, nuclear energy, and fission).Therefore, her entry was highly connected with other entries in the class. However, in the argumentation, shewas not actively involved, and she did not acquire any information from her event entry during argumentation.Rachel, on the other hand, only listed facts about nuclear energy in her wiki entry without further elaboration.However, the structure of Haley’s wiki entry was very organized. She wrote her claim and justification aboutICLS 2014 Proceedings259© ISLSnuclear energy. As we also analyzed the group discussion, we saw that Haley was drawing information easilyfrom her wiki entries for her arguments. Therefore, good knowledge organization might have fosteredargumentation in the classroom. Similarly, as knowledge organization fostered students’ argumentation, theirargumentation also encouraged them to find and organize new information before they presented their findingsto the class. However, specific types of interactions need further research Individually Haley’s representationsfocused on different aspects of nuclear energy, but in their group knowledge organization, they createdrepresentations in three modes that focused on the connection between radiation and cancer. Additionally, asHaley used key concepts such as fission, fusion, and energy as central concepts in her concept map, her conceptmap was highly connected to other entries.Ainsworth (2006) listed three functions of MERs: complementary roles, constrain interpretation, andconstruction of deeper understanding. As we see from Haley’s individual entries, they were clearlycomplementary to each other. In that regard, MERs served to expand the scope of her understanding. Hergroup’s entries, on the contrary, included more or less similar information. This was partially because in ourlesson design we asked students to focus on one topic and present their findings to the class so that they mightchose to create similar entries. On the other hand, Haley’s group created their entries on the similar topic toemphasize their shared points. Therefore, to a certain degree, these similar entries in different modes served asconstrains to each other, and helped the group develop a more in-depth understanding.Conclusion and DiscussionLinn (2000) argued that “the internet provides a rich, confusing, chaotic, informative, persuasive set of scientificinformation” (p. 785). This is more so for SSI topics. Therefore, it is crucial to help learners use tools toorganize and coordinate pieces of information that they use to make sound arguments. We designed a scienceunit on nuclear energy using an online knowledge and learning management system (iKOS) that offers threetypes of representations: pictorial, textual, and concept maps. Our results suggest that the interaction betweenknowledge organization and argumentation is bidirectional (i.e., students’ knowledge organization enables themto draw information while arguing and that their argumentation guides them to advance their knowledgeorganization practices. On the other hand, we need more sophisticated methods to be able to capture relevantlearning process both on an individual and a collaborative level.According to Erduran and Evagorou (2012), educators should make the best use of visualrepresentations as these are fundamental objects of enhancement of scientific knowledge and students’ lives.Along these lines, we found that use of visual representations, MER in our case, enabled learners to organizetheir knowledge on SSI and helped them in argumentation. More specifically, our results indicated that whenorganizing knowledge with MERs, learners mostly created wiki and concept map entries. Additionally, whenour system automatically created a knowledge-web based on the MERs that were created by the students, wikiand concept map entries were highly connected representation types. On the other hand, when we looked at thekey representation across the whole network and the student (Haley) who created it, we also found that Haleywas acquiring information from her wiki and concept map entries while she was arguing on the topic. Also,students’ argumentation encouraged them to (re)organize knowledge.ReferencesAinsworth, S. (1999). The functions of multiple representations. Computers & Education, 33(2-3), 131–152.Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for considering learning with multiple representations.Learning and Instruction, 16(3), 183–198. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2006.03.001Bonacich, P. (2007). Some unique properties of eigenvector centrality. Social Networks, 29(4), 555–564.doi:10.1016/j.socnet.2007.04.002Chandrasegaran, B. A. L., Treagust, D. F., & Mocerino, M. (2011). Facilitating high school students ’ use ofmultiple representations to describe and explain simple chemical reactions. Teaching Science, 57(4), 13–21.Creswell, J. W., Plano Clark, V. L., Gutmann, M. L., & Hanson, W. . (2003). Advanced mixed methodsresearch designs. In A. Tashakkori & C. Teddlie (Eds.), Handbook of mixed methods in social andbehavioral research (pp. 209–240). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Erduran, S., & Evagorou, M. (2012). Visualising evidence and scientific methods : Implications for scienceeducation. In National Association of Research in Science Teaching, Indianapolis, IN (pp. 1–15).Greene, J. C. (2007). Mixed methods in social inquiry (p. 216). San Francisco: John Wiley & Sons.Greene, J. C., Caracelli, V. J., & Graham, W. F. (1989). Toward a Conceptual Framework for Mixed-MethodEvaluation Designs. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 11(3), 255–274.Grossen, B., & Carnine, D. (1990). Diagramming a logic strategy e Effects on difficult problem types andtransfer. Learning Disability Quarterly, 13(3), 168–182.Knoke, D., & Yang, S. (2007). Social network analysis (Quantitative applications in the social sciences). (T.Liao, Ed.) (p. 133). Sage Publications, Inc.ICLS 2014 Proceedings260© ISLSKolstø, S. D. (2006). Patterns in students’ argumentation confronted with a risk focused socio-­‐scientific issue.International Journal of Science Education, 28(14), 1689–1716. doi:10.1080/09500690600560878Lemke, J. L. (2001). Articulating communities: Sociocultural perspectives on science education. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 38(3), 296–316. doi:10.1002/1098-2736(200103)38:3<296::AIDTEA1007>3.3.CO;2-ILinn, M. C. (2000). Designing the knowledge integration environment. International Journal of ScienceEducation, 22(8), 781–796.Linn, M. C. (2006). The knowledge integration perspective on learning and instruction. In R. Sawyer, Keith(Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 243–264). New York, NY: CambridgeUniversity Press.Linn, M. C., & Hsi, S. (2000). Computers,teachers, peers: Science learning partners. Mahwah,NJ: LawrenceErlbaum Associates.Novak, J. D., & Cañas, A. J. (2008). The theory underlying concept maps and how to construct and use them.(IHMC CmapTools Report). Retrived from: http://cmap.ihmc.us/Publications/ResearchPapers/TheoryCmaps/TheoryUnderlyingConceptMaps.htmNamdar, B. & Shen, J. (2013). Knowledge organization with multiple external representations in anargumentation based computer supported collaborative learning environment. In Rummel, N., Kapur, M.,Nathan, M., & Puntambekar, S. (Eds.). To See the World and a Grain of Sand: Learning across Levels ofSpace, Time, and Scale: CSCL 2013 Conference Proceedings Volume 1 — Full Papers & Symposia.International Society of the Learning Sciences. pp, 344-351.Piaget, J. (1970). Genetic epistemology. New York: Columbia University Press.Powell, A. B., Francisco, J. M., & Maher, C. a. (2003). An analytical model for studying the development oflearners’ mathematical ideas and reasoning using videotape data. The Journal of Mathematical Behavior,22(4), 405–435. doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2003.09.002Sadler, T. D., & Zeidler, D. L. (2005). Patterns of informal reasoning in the context of socioscientific decisionmaking. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(1), 112–138. doi:10.1002/tea.20042Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building : Theory , pedagogy , and technology. In K.Sawyer, R. (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97–115). New York, NY.Simonneaux, L. (2008). Argumentation in socio-scientific contexts. In S. Erduran & M. P. Jimenez-Aleixandre(Eds.), Argumentation in science education: An overview (pp. 179–199). Springer Netherlands.Sterelny, K. (2005). Externalism, epistemic artefacts and the extended mind. In R. Schantz (Ed.), TheExternalist Challenge: New Studies on Cognition and Intentionality. Berlin: de Gruyter.Suzuki, L. A., Ahluwalia, M. K., Arora, A. K., & Mattis, J. S. (2007). The pond you fish in setermines the fishyou catch: Exploring strategies for qualitative data collection. The Counseling Psychologist, 35(2), 295–327.Vygotskiĭ , L. (1986). Thought and language. (A. Kozulin, Ed.). Ipswich, MA: MIT Press.Waldrip, B., Prain, V., & Carolan, J. (2010). Using Multi-Modal Representations to Improve Learning in JuniorSecondary Science. Research in Science Education, 40(1), 65–80. doi:10.1007/s11165-009-9157-6Zeidler, D. L., & Nichols, B. H. (2009). Socioscientific issues: Theory and practice. Journal of ElementaryScience Education, 21(2), 49–58. doi:10.1007/BF03173684Zeidler, D. L., Walker, K. A., Ackett, W. A., & Simmons, M. L. (2002). Tangled up in views: Beliefs in thenature of science and responses to socioscientific dilemmas. Science Education, 86(3), 343–367.ICLS 2014 Proceedings261© ISLS