Friendship, Participation, and Site Design in Interest-DrivenLearning among Early AdolescentsAshley Cartun, Ben Kirshner, Emily Price, Adam York, University of Colorado BoulderAshley.Cartun@colorado.edu, Ben.Kirshner@colorado.edu, Emily.Price@colorado.edu,Adam.J.York@colorado.edu (1)Abstract: Increasingly, learning scientists are recognizing the importance of studying andanalyzing learning across the multiple settings of youths' lives. We hypothesize that thepotential for positive long-term outcomes for youth in interest-powered learning environmentsis shaped by the degree to which programs cultivate personal connections that can expandaccess and strengthen participation in settings rich with resources for interest development. Toinvestigate this hypothesis, we draw on evidence collected by youth researchers as part of astudy of five learning environments that aim to support cross-setting pursuit of interests.Findings from this study support claims that youth do facilitate access to valued learningspaces for their peers, and that friendships can be central to sustaining interest in activities.The data from this youth ethnographic study supports placing a priority on relationships, aswell as content, within sites for interest driven learning.IntroductionIncreasingly, learning scientists are recognizing the importance of studying and analyzing learning across themultiple settings of youths' lives (Bevan, Bell, Stevens, & Rafzar, 2012; Jackson, 2011). One of the keycatalysts for cross-setting learning is interest (Barron, 2006; Bell, Bricker, Tzou, & Baines, 2012), which refersto engagement with particular content that develops through interactions with others around that content (Hidi &Renninger, 2006). Interest-driven learning environments are ones that seek to organize activities that allowyouth to pursue and develop existing interests and develop new ones (Azevedo, 2013; Edelson & Joseph, 2004;Ito et al., 2013).In this paper, we explore the role of peers and friends in shaping interest development and sustainingparticipation in interest-driven learning environments. We hypothesize that the potential for positive long-termoutcomes for youth in interest-powered learning environments is shaped by the degree to which programscultivate personal connections that can expand access and strengthen participation in settings rich with resourcessupportive of interest development. To investigate this hypothesis, we draw on evidence collected by youthresearchers as part of a study of five learning environments that aim to support cross-setting pursuit of interests.Our study findings point to exciting possibilities, such as how to design for learning spaces that supportfriendship as one path to expanding possible futures for youth.Theorizing the Role of Peers in Participation in Interest-Driven Learning AcrossSettingsInterest-driven and out of school settings are particularly valuable avenues for experiencing competence andleveraging expertise from their families and communities (Calabrese Barton, Tan, & Rivet, 2008; Gutiérrez,Morales, & Martinez, 2009). Increasingly, policy makers and researchers alike have called for tighter linkagesbetween formal and informal settings for learning, to better leverage diverse youths’ expertise and enable deeperforms of “life-wide” learning (Banks et al., 2007). Tighter linkages are especially important for providing youthwith recognition for accomplishments outside of school in ways that are consequential for youth’s social futures(Riconscente, Kamarainen, & Honey, 2013).Within this line of research on cross-setting and interest-driven learning, however, there has beenlimited attention to the role peers play in interest-driven learning within and across settings. Peer connectionsare potentially important, however, because it is through networks that many young people discover newinterests, and friendships developed within interest-driven learning activities may help to sustain participation inthem and, subsequently, facilitate deepening of interests. Evidence from developmental psychology supports theclaim that peers are an important reason why adolescents sustain engagement in sports and arts activities(Patrick et al., 1999). In some cases, peer connections may also benefit youth, because they broker access toactivities where youth can develop new knowledge and skill (Dika & Singh, 2002; Stanton-Salazar &Dornbusch, 1995).Our focus in this analysis on peer relationships is supported by evidence from studies on youthdevelopment. One reason to study peers in the context of interest driven learning sites is that many sites of thiskind cater to adolescents, and during the adolescent years peers become a more important influence than in otherstages of development (Berndt, 1982; Hartup, 1993; Savin-Williams and Berndt, 1990). During adolescence, aspeer groups become more salient, other relationships can be redefined for young people, who often report thatICLS 2014 Proceedings348© ISLSthey can most “be themselves" when they are with their peers (Savin-Williams and Berndt, 1990). Studies alsoshow that peers play an important role in shaping motivation for academics (Juvonen and Wentzel, 1996), anoutcome of concern when discussing cross-setting learning and the impact of interest-powered sites.By attending to youths’ own reports of the role of peers in their experience of interest-driven learningwe can begin to consider the features of learning environments that may support or inhibit development ofrelationships. Deepening this understanding may hold lessons for site design practices including the generalpoint that to design appealing and effective learning spaces for young people involves attending to both contentlearning and peer relationship development.MethodologyData for this analysis was gathered from a participatory youth ethnographic study of sites where young peopleengage in interest-driven learning. The current study is principally an observational study, where youth are partof designed learning environments. The team developed a youth participatory research component that providedtraining in interviewing techniques, use of structured protocols for conducting peer and mentor interviews, andactivities in which youth traced their own experiences of connected learning across setting and time. The youthethnography took place as a series of online video conferences that were facilitated by the research team. Thisparticipatory research connected nodes of youth researchers that were geographically distributed and met inweb-mediated settings (in this case Google hangouts). The infrastructure we developed, including trainingmaterials, a wiki, hangouts, email communication, and stipends, sustained research activities over a 10-weekprogram.This research was conducted under the umbrella of the Connected Learning Research Network(CLRN), which is investigating and analyzing the impacts of today's changing media ecology on learning (Itoet. al., 2013). This participatory youth ethnography is part of a larger mixed-methods research study thatexamines children’s participation in connected learning environments and the relationship of participation tovalued outcomes of interest development, persistence, and school belonging.Youth ethnography was selected as a methodology because it creates an opportunity for young peopleto become involved in documenting and analyzing their experiences in these environments including the kindsof opportunities available to them, and to identify what counts as a “quality”	   opportunity	   to	   young	   people	  (Rubin & Jones, 2007). The rationales for including participatory research in an ethnographic study of learningenvironments include the awareness that young people have a unique insider perspective on the activity in thosespaces and can contribute in valuable ways to the construction of knowledge about what supports learning(Cammarota & Fine, 2008, Sabo-Flores, 2008). Engaging in participatory research can also serve as a positivedevelopmental opportunity for young people in that it invites them to participate in practices of investigationand analysis of systems (Mitra, 2004). Research of this nature disrupts the dichotomy between researcher andresearch participants, with an expanded belief about who should generate knowledge to inform policies andpractices (Cook-Sather, 2002, Morrell, 2008).ParticipantsSitesFive sites participated in the youth ethnography. Table 1 lists program pseudonyms and a description of each ofthe site’s central activities. The sites were geographically distributed, with one site on the west coast, one in therocky-mountain west, one in the southeast, and two in the northeast United States.Table 1: List of SitesSPARKA youth program for documentary filmmaking.Community BridgeA school based school community service program connected to anational initiative focused on the improvement of teaching writing.The SPOTAn after-school youth program that offers arts and humanitiescourses.NEXT SchoolA school where students take courses in game design, criticalresearch and entrepreneurship.Freespace LibraryA library teen program that was in the process of designing a newtechnologically rich space.ICLS 2014 Proceedings349© ISLSYouthRoughly five youth from each of the five sites were hired to participate in a paid internship within this researchproject. Most of the youth were from nondominant backgrounds. The participants included black, Latino, andwhite youth from low and middle income communities.Sources of EvidenceYouth researchers recorded a total of 82 peer and 12 mentor interviews, 27 “interest stories” detailing thedevelopment of an interest or hobby, and they also submitted 22 brief digital self-introductions. Eleven youthsubmitted maps showing their daily and weekly routines that were accompanied by audio explanations of whatthey depicted on their maps.Peer InterviewsThe primary source of data used for this analysis is a set of 82 semi-structured interviews where youth at thesites recruited peers for the study. The youth researchers adapted a protocol for eliciting details about long-term,interest-driven projects, the development of expertise in an area of interest to them, and the formation of newsocial ties through participation in connected learning.Mentor InterviewsYouth researchers recruited and interviewed mentors who played a role in their own interest development orlearning at their site. The interviews included questions about the mentor’s philosophy towards work withyoung people and the supports and challenges to their work.Interest MapsSome of the youth participants documented their everyday experience by creating a hand drawn map showingtheir daily and weekly routines related to an interest. These were accompanied by audio explanations of whatthey depicted on their maps. Elements in the map included people, places, and resources that were important tohelping them pursue an interest.Interest StoriesTo deepen our understanding of interest development, we asked youth ethnographers to articulate stories of theirown interests. The youth participants drew a storyboard depicting the formation of an interest, how the interestfigures into their life currently, and where they see themselves taking the interest in the future. Thesestoryboards were also accompanied by audio narrations.Personal IntroductionsAt the outset of the project youth recorded brief audio introductions describing thoughts and questions relatingto participating in a study of their site, and detailing some of their personal interests.Approach to AnalysisIn an effort to attain a valid coding scheme and inter-rater reliability, the research team established a multi-stepcoding process, which included the development, testing and refinement of codes throughout a series of codingsummits. Coding clusters were developed from the project’s various qualitative data sources. Our analyticalprocess resulted in three broad groupings: one pertaining to the lead interest-based activity, another pertaining tothe building of cultural capital (interest, expertise, and identity development), and a third pertaining to thebuilding of social capital (connections with others), which also contained a series of child codes to be used forco-occurring patterns and other forms of qualitative and quantitative analysis. To test this coding scheme, thirdparty validity testing was used, and we achieved an inter-coder agreement of at least 80% for all codes. Oncevalidity was established, codes were refined through a series of reliability testing using kappa statistics. Thismulti-step coding process using defining guidelines and principles established inter-rater reliability and alignedwith our research questions and theoretical framework related to connected learning practices.ResultsIn our data we observed peers mentioned often in interviews and data that the youth ethnographers collectedabout their interest pursuits. However, peers fill different roles in people’s experiences across sites. The centraltheme that that we highlight in our findings is that sites vary with respect to how friendship figures intoparticipation at the site. Interviews from The SPOT contained many examples of young people being introducedto the site by peers, both friends and near-age family members. At two of the sites, Community Bridge andSPARK, the primary story emerging from interviews was that pursuit of the activities at the site led to newfriendships. These two sets of results illustrate how peers might impact interest development in different, butequally important ways.ICLS 2014 Proceedings350© ISLSPeers as BrokersThe data from The SPOT suggests that friends and family in some cases figure prominently in how peopleinitiated their involvement with the site. A common them in interview responses was that friends and familyverbally shared information about the types of activities and opportunities for learning at The SPOT. Peersshared that this interest-powered site was “open” and “fun,” and in some cases young people joined their peersto visit The SPOT just to try it. After young people started going to the site, they report that they began todevelop or expand upon interests in activities at The SPOT such as making music, dancing and videoproduction. This is an encouraging finding in part because it shows that peers in some cases do facilitate accessto expansive opportunities for interest development.One of the young people at The SPOT clearly recalls how they were introduced to the site, first frominterest sparked by a friend discussing the site, and then how they found interesting opportunities that theybegan to pursue. “Well, I have a friend who goes there...and he told me about how he does his own music there.I got interested in it, and I asked him if I could go with him one day. He took me, and I enjoyed it so much thatI signed up right away. I started doin’ dance and music production myself.” This type of story was common atthis site, with 9 of the 20 peer interviews containing similar comments about the role of peers in introducing theyoung person to new activities at The SPOT, which has deepened some personal interests.Data from The SPOT suggests that peer word of mouth can be a powerful mechanism for promotingaccess to valued spaces for interest development. In this case peer recruiting was an organic process, initiatedbecause young people wanted others to know about the interesting opportunities at the site. This process wassupported both by the fact that young people found the site to be offering valuable opportunities, and becausethe site is open to newcomers who can begin taking part in activities simply by showing up.Forming New ConnectionsMany of the youth interviewed at the Community Bridge and SPARK reported that the most interesting part ofbeing involved in this program was meeting new people. We saw this theme echoed in 20 of the 39 peerinterviews across these two sites. As one interviewee stated, “...connecting with people I would say that’s themost interesting thing about this project because you get to see the world through their eyes, you get to relate tothem, and um you get to see stuff and do stuff that you probably haven’t even thought of.” At both SPARK andCommunity Bridge youth engaged in work that prompted them to learn skills with digital media, yet makingnew personal connections was more often reported to be the most interesting aspect of participating in theprogramming.Both of these sites offered programming that revolved around joint activity. In the case of CommunityBridge, students collaborated on community service oriented senior projects where they created digital stories,videos, and blogs that chronicled their work. At SPARK the youth participants worked alongside collegestudents producing documentary films on a variety of social issue topics, most recently education reform.Through these projects team members at both sites had to find ways to work together drawing on the expertisedistributed throughout their groups in order to accomplish a shared task. Also of note was that the projects atboth of these sites required that participants have contact with community members outside of their organizationin order to gather information to inform their projects.Youth from these sites reported on new connections with peers who were part of their project teams, aswell as new connections they formed through their community outreach. We heard similar results, though insmaller numbers, from other sites, including Freespace Library and The SPOT, where meeting new people wasdiscussed as one positive aspect of participation.DiscussionThe findings from this youth ethnography support the assertions of other studies that emphasize the importanceof peer connections in adolescence (Savin-Williams and Berndt, 1990). Peers are mentioned often as youngpeople talk about their experiences at sites where they pursue their interests. What we find thought-provoking isthat across the sites that we collected data with, there was some variation in how peers fit into the stories youngpeople told about what brought them to sites or sustains their interests. Trying to understand the multiple formsof peer connections that young people experience in more nuanced ways will be an ongoing task of thislongitudinal study. This data set supports some minor but meaningful claims about the role of peers andfriendship in interest driven learning.One claim is that youth do facilitate access to valued learning spaces for their peers. Our resultsforegrounded young people as brokers to valued spaces, especially at one site within our study where peerintroductions was the primary mechanism through which people were introduced to the site. At this site openaccess supported the process of peer recruitment by allowing for young people without prior experience to cometo the space through the invitation of friends or family. Unfortunately, this may not be a common experience foryouth with limited access to resource rich spaces. We can think of at least two ways to expand upon this findingin future research. First, by studying the powerful appeal of peer recommendations and what encourages youngICLS 2014 Proceedings351© ISLSpeople to take up an invitation to try a new activity. Second, by investigating in closer detail the features oflearning spaces that can support young people in feeling comfortable and prepared to share their experienceswith peers. Both of these lines of inquiry make the peer connections central as a potential form of access tovaluable resources.Our second claim is that developing friendships is often a key element of interest-driven learning.Many times, even in the context of new media and technology rich spaces, it was personal connections thatemerged as the “most interesting” aspect of activity. We suggest some consideration for research and designwork in interest-driven learning spaces from this finding. The design of sites where “making new friends” wasreported often centered activity around participating in a joint endeavor that required some form of outreach,such as community based research to inform a documentary film. This design encouraged both meeting newpeople and shared activity that promoted deep and sustained personal engagement. Friendships and engagementwith activity in these cases were not detached: rather they were both integral to the positive experience thatyoung people reported at their sites. Activity supported the development of new peer connections, and thesenew friendships made the sites an interesting place to engage in activity.The data from this youth ethnographic study supports placing a priority on relationships, as well ascontent, within sites for interest driven learning. In the stories that young people shared through interviews andself-documentation friendship was a constant presence as they described their initial discovery and pursuit ofinterests. These findings may be of use in future research and design of interest-driven sites for learning byattending to factors within and across contexts that support peer connections.Endnotes(1) Authors listed alphabetically to indicate equal contribution.ReferencesAzevedo, F. S. (2013). The tailored practice of hobbies and its implication for the design of interest-drivenlearning environments. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 22(3), 462-510.Banks, J. A., Au, K. H., Ball, A. F., Bell, P., Gordon, E. W., Gutierrez, K., Heath, S. B., Lee, C. D., Lee, Y.,Mahiri, J., Nasir, N. S., Valdes, G., & Zhou, M. (2007). Learning in and out of school in diverseenvironments: Life-long, life-wide, life-deep. Seattle, WA: UW Center for Multicultural EducationBarron, B. (2006). Interest and self-sustained learning as catalysts of development: A learning ecologyperspective. Human Development, 49, 193-224.Barton, A. C., Tan, E., & Rivet, A. (2008). Creating hybrid spaces for engaging school science among urbanmiddle school girls. American Educational Research Journal, 45(1), 68-103.Bell, P., Tzou, C., Bricker, L. A., & Baines, A. D. (2012). Learning in diversities of structures of social practice:Accounting for how, why, and where people learn science. Human Development, 55, 269-284.Berndt, T. J. (1982). The features and effects of friendship in early adolescence. Child development, 1447-1460.Bevan, B., Bell, P., Stevens, R., & Razfar, A. (Eds.). (2012). LOST Opportunities: Learning in out-of-schooltime. New York, NY: Springer.Cammarota, J., & Fine, M. (Eds.). (2008). Revolutionizing education: Youth participatory action research inmotion. Routledge.Cook-Sather, A. (2002). Authorizing students’ perspectives: Toward trust, dialogue, and change in education.Educational researcher, 31(4), 3-14.Dika, S. L., & Singh, K. (2002). Applications of social capital in educational literature: A critical synthesis.Review of educational research, 72(1), 31-60.Edelson, D. C., & Joseph, D. (2004). The interest-driven learning design framework: Motivating learningthrough usefulness. In Y. B. Kafai, W. A. Sandoval, N. Enyedy, A. S. Nixon & F. Herrera (Eds.),Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 166-173). Mahwah,NJ: Erlbaum.Gutiérrez, K. D., Morales, P. Z., & Martinez, D. C. (2009). Re-mediating literacy: Culture, difference, andlearning for students from nondominant communities. Review of Research in Education, 33(1), 212245.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K. & Watkins, S. C. (2013). Connectedlearning: an agenda for research and design. Digital Media and Learning Research Hub.Hartup, W. W. (1993). Adolescents and their friends. New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development,1993(60), 3-22.Hidi, S., & Renninger, K. A. (2006). The four-phase model of interest development. Educational Psychologist,41(2), 111-127.Jackson, K. (2011). Approaching participation in school-based mathematics as a cross-setting phenomenon.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(1), 111-150.ICLS 2014 Proceedings352© ISLSJuvonen, J., & Wentzel, K. R. (Eds.). (1996). Social motivation: Understanding children's school adjustment.Cambridge University Press.Mitra, D. (2004). The significance of students: can increasing" student voice" in schools lead to gains in youthdevelopment?. The Teachers College Record, 106(4), 651-688.Morrell, E. (2008). Critical literacy and urban youth: Pedagogies of access, dissent, and liberation. New York:Routledge.Patrick, H., Ryan, A. M., Alfred-Liro, C., Fredricks, J. A., Hruda, L. Z., & Eccles, J. S. (1999). Adolescents'commitment to developing talent: The role of peers in continuing motivation for sports and the arts.Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 28(6), 741-763.Riconscente, M. M., Kamarainen, A., & Honey, M. (2013). STEM badges: Current terrain and the road ahead.New York, NY: New York Hall of Science.Rubin, B. C., & Jones, M. (2007). Student action research: Reaping the benefits for students and school leaders.NASSP Bulletin, 91(4), 363-378.Flores, K. S. (2007). Youth participatory evaluation: Strategies for engaging young people (Vol. 14). JohnWiley & Sons.Savin-Williams, R. C., & Berndt, T. J. (1990). Friendships and peer relations during adolescence. In S. S.Feldman & G. Elliott (Eds.), At the threshold: The developing adolescent (pp. 277-307). Cambridge,MA: Harvard University Press.Stanton-Salazar, R. D., & Dornbusch, S. M. (1995). Social capital and the reproduction of inequality:Information networks among Mexican-origin high school students. Sociology of education, 116-135.ICLS 2014 Proceedings353© ISLS