The Role of Inconsistencies in Collaborative KnowledgeConstructionMartina Bientzle, Ulrike Cress, Joachim Kimmerle, Knowledge Media Research Center,Knowledge Construction Lab, Schleichstr. 6, 72076 TuebingenEmail: m.bientzle@iwm-kmrc.de, u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de, j.kimmerle@iwm-kmrc.deAbstract: When learners use shared digital artifacts for purposes of knowledge construction,they may be confronted with different types of inconsistencies. We present a study in whichphysiotherapy students had to handle two types of inconsistencies: Inconsistencies within awiki text and inconsistencies between the text and their own attitude toward health andtherapy. We conducted both a quantitative and a qualitative analysis of the students’contributions. We found that students modified inconsistencies within a text by changing thetext, sometimes even by changing scientific facts. When learners revised inconsistenciesbetween the text and their own attitude they did not change their personal therapeutic healthconcept, but transformed the text to fit their own perspective. Finally, we found that studentsrearranged scientific facts to a higher degree if the text was not in line with their attitudes. Wediscuss the implications of our findings for understanding knowledge construction.IntroductionShared digital artifacts play an increasing role in computer-supported collaborative learning and collaborativeknowledge construction. This applies both to environments that are explicitly intended for purposes ofknowledge building (such as Knowledge Forum; see Fujita, 2013; Hong & Scardamalia, 2014; Zhang,Scardamalia, Reeve, & Messina, 2009) as well as to tools that allow for a rather casual and incidental way oflearning and knowledge construction (such as social tagging tools, for example; Cress, Held, & Kimmerle,2013; Golder & Huberman, 2006). Shared artifacts allow their users to make individual contributions and tointroduce their own knowledge to the community of all users. But different types of shared digital artifacts varyin the degree in which they can be influenced and modified. Tools that are particularly convenient for users tomake comprehensive modifications are wikis (Kimmerle, Cress, & Held, 2010). In wikis users have theopportunity to drastically influence the content of the shared artifact (Leuf & Cunningham, 2001; Moskaliuk &Kimmerle, 2009).When people use shared digital artifacts for purposes of knowledge construction, they are confrontedwith different types of inconsistencies. There may be inconsistencies within a shared artifact itself. This is thecase, for example, when contradictory words or definitions are used to refer to the same object in a socialtagging environment or when different statements contradict each other within a wiki article (e.g., Kimmerle,Cress, Held, & Moskaliuk, 2010). Inconsistencies within texts and their implications for cognitive informationprocessing have been examined in text comprehension research for more than two decades (see Graesser,McNamara, Louwerse, & Cai, 2004; McNamara, Kintsch, Songer, & Kintsch, 1996). McNamara et al. (1996)argued, for example, that a poorly composed text may support skilled readers in elaborating on its content, sincethey have to cognitively compensate for imprecise or ambiguous information. When using wikis for knowledgeconstruction, however, the collaborative handling of inconsistencies within the shared text should also be givenattention, in addition to the individual cognitive processing of information (see Cress & Kimmerle, 2007, 2008;Kimmerle, Moskaliuk, & Cress, 2011), in particular since the selective handling of information may haveimplications for the collective construction of knowledge. So far there has not been enough investigation intohow such inconsistencies affect the collaborative production of a shared text. Another type of inconsistency mayoccur between the knowledge, beliefs, or attitude of an individual user and the information contained in theartifact. It is an empirically well-supported finding that such contradictions may lead to some kind of cognitivedissonance (Festinger, 1964) or to socio-cognitive conflicts (Berlyne, 1960; Piaget, 1977). When this occurs,individuals then have to deal with the contradictions in order to reduce the dissonance and re-equilibrate theircognitive structures. If learning scientists want to implement collaborative learning settings that support anunbiased handling of information, they need to understand learners’ strategies of dealing with contradictingattitudes. A particularly relevant question for the learning sciences is how people deal with these inconsistenciesin situations where they are not limited to a purely cognitive processing of the inconsistencies. What happenswhen they have the opportunity to modify the content of a shared digital artifact—as in the case of wikis? Howstrongly are they bothered by inconsistencies within a wiki text? How do they act or react to content that doesnot suit their view of the world? And what is the impact of particular combinations of inconsistencies? That is,do users react differently to inconsistencies within a wiki text when its general message is in line with theirattitude, compared to a text that contradicts their opinion?ICLS 2014 Proceedings102© ISLSBientzle, Cress and Kimmerle (2013) reported that inconsistencies within a wiki text per se did notprovoke wiki users to conduct more modifications than in a situation without such inconsistencies in the text.But in texts that expressed a point of view contradictory to that of the users, those with inconsistencies weremodified more frequently than texts without inconsistencies. It is apparent that people tolerated logicalinconsistencies to a much lesser degree when they appeared in the wrapping of a contradictory point of view.This selective handling of information in the collaborative construction of knowledge is relevant for the learningsciences. If researchers aim to support learners in contributing to a preferably open-minded and unbiasedknowledge construction process, then they need to comprehend how learners act when they have to deal withinconsistencies. So it is worthwhile to take a much closer look at how the findings of Bientzle et al. (2013) cameabout. Previous literature has not sufficiently described the underlying processes and the strategies that learnersapply in such situations. Therefore, we provide in this article a detailed qualitative analysis of people’scontributions. First, we describe the procedure of the experiment. Then we present a variety of exemplaryfindings of how the participants dealt with various constellations of inconsistencies. Finally, we discuss theimplications of our results for future research in learning and education.MethodIn order to better understand how learners handle different types of inconsistencies, we analyzed theircontributions, deletions, and modifications in a wiki text. On the basis of Bientzle et al.’s (2013) data set, weexamined under which conditions learners applied particular strategies for dealing with inconsistencies in a wikitext. Since medical information is particularly concerned with inconsistencies (Kienhues, Stadtler, & Bromme,2011; Kravitz, Duan, & Braslow, 2004; Sniderman & Furberg, 2009), a health-related topic was chosen for thisstudy, and physiotherapy students were recruited as participants.Inconsistencies were incorporated into the text by adding logical contradictions into statements aboutthe effectiveness of stretching. To establish inconsistencies between the text and a learner’s attitude, we used apre-test to measure the therapeutic health concept of the participants. Based on this measurement, we thenprovided a text that was either consistent with or contradictory to the therapeutic health concept of theparticipants. We constructed four different versions of texts by combining these two types of inconsistencies.ParticipantsSeventy-six students (Mage = 21.99, SD = 4.28; men: n = 24, women: n = 50, 2 did not indicate their gender) of astate-approved school of physiotherapy (PT Academy) participated in the study. The students were in the first,second, or third (final) year of their vocational training. They were randomly assigned to one of the fourversions of the text, which they edited individually at a laptop in a classroom setting.Inconsistencies within a TextThe fluctuating quality of health knowledge and inconsistencies in health information are challenges for healthrelated knowledge construction. Health information is not only based on scientific facts, but very frequently alsoon practical and anecdotal knowledge. In many cases, however, anecdotal knowledge is not supported byscientific evidence at all. As a consequence, inconsistencies within health knowledge occur.In the health care sector, especially in sports and physiotherapy, stretching is an established and widelyused treatment. It is used to improve mobility and flexibility, to prevent injuries and aching muscles, and tofoster a quicker regeneration. At the same time many scientific investigations disclose inconsistent andcontroversial effects of stretching (Small, Mc Naughton, & Matthews, 2008; Taylor, Dalton, Seaber, & Garrett,1990; Weppler & Magnusson, 2010). Thus, this topic seemed to be particularly suitable to investigate whathappens when students are confronted with relevant but inconsistent information in a situation where they havethe opportunity to modify the content.Inconsistencies between a Text and a Learner’s AttitudeTo investigate the effect of inconsistencies between content in a shared artifact and people’s attitude, we choseto use people’s therapeutic health concept. This is a central and well examined concept in the health sciences(Alonso, 2004; Laffrey, 1986). There are various perspectives on what health is considered to be. It is knownthat health professionals and patients differ in their individual understanding of health (Patel, Arocha, &Kushniruk, 2002), and that even among healthcare professionals no common understanding of the conceptexists (Engel, 1977; Larson, 1999; Roberts, 1994).In the health care sector two different classification systems coexist. The International Classification ofDiseases (ICD; World Health Organization, 1992) promotes a biomedical therapeutic health concept, whereasthe International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF; World Health Organization, 2001)promotes a biopsychosocial perspective. The biomedical therapeutic health concept implies a scientificperspective on therapy and health that can be described by keywords like ‘scientific’, ‘evidence-based’, or‘standardized’. The biopsychosocial therapeutic health concept implies a more holistic perspective that can beICLS 2014 Proceedings103© ISLSdescribed by keywords like ‘individualized’, ‘social participation’, or ‘functioning in everyday life’. In order toevoke inconsistencies between the text and a learner’s attitude, we presented texts that were either consistentwith participants’ health concept or that contradicted their attitude toward therapeutic principles.Experimental MaterialBy systematically combining inconsistencies, four different versions of the text were constructed: (1) text withconsistent information and a therapeutic health concept that was congruent with the learners’ health concept; (2)text with inconsistent information and a congruent health concept; (3) text with consistent information and ahealth concept that contradicted that of the learners; and (4) text with inconsistent information and acontradicting therapeutic health concept.A text with inconsistent information included five statements that illogically connected a scientific factwith practical or anecdotal knowledge. An example of an inconsistent statement was: “Temporary stretchingresulted in no structural extension of the muscle fiber. This seems to be a reason for a better mobility after astretching intervention.” In physiotherapy, stretching is widely used to increase the range of motion (ROM), inparticular if muscle contractures are identified to be caused by a restriction of mobility. It is frequently assumedthat a structural extension of the muscle fiber occurs via stretching, which is then supposed to be the reason forthe positive effect on mobility. But the anatomic fact is that no structural extension of the muscle fiber occurs.This scientific finding diametrically opposes the anecdotal knowledge that an increase of the ROM would bedue to the structural length of a muscle fiber. The discrepancy between these two statements is obvious tostudents of physiotherapy (manipulation check measures indicated that students estimated such text sections asmore inconsistent; for details see Bientzle et al., 2013).The therapeutic health concept of the text was operationalized by including either five statementscongruent with the student’s concept or five statements contradictory to the student’s concept. As alreadyknown from the literature, the biopsychosocial perspective is common and popular in physiotherapy (Jorgensen,2000; Stenmar & Nordholm, 1994). According to the pre-test of the health concept, this was also true of theparticipating sample of physiotherapy students. To take this into account, the text with a contradicting healthconcept included five biomedical statements, whereas the text with a congruent health concept included fivebiopsychosocial statements. An example of a contradicting (i.e., biomedical) statement was: “Since stretchinghas various effects, patients benefit most from standardized examination and the use of evidence-basedtreatments.” An example of a congruent (i.e., biopsychosocial) statement was: “Since stretching has variouseffects, patients benefit most from individualized examination and the use of treatments suited to the individual’sneeds.”We conducted a qualitative analysis (Mayring, 2000) and a statistical frequency analysis in order togain deeper insights into how students handle inconsistencies when they have the opportunity to modify thecontent of the text. We focused on those text sections that provided logical inconsistencies within the text andrepresented either a biomedical (contradicting) or a biopsychosocial (congruent) therapeutic health concept.ResultsIn the following sub-sections we present the participants’ strategies for handling inconsistencies within a text aswell as inconsistencies between a text and learner’s attitude (see Table 1 for an overview). We also discuss theeffects of the interaction of these two types of inconsistencies.Table 1: Strategies for handling inconsistencies.Type of inconsistencyInconsistencies within a textInconsistencies between a text andlearner’s attitudeICLS 2014 ProceedingsStrategyNo modificationDeletion of the entire section of the textResolving the inconsistency reasonablyModifying the scientific factNo modificationRevising without changing the perspective ofthe textDeletion of the entire section of the textTransforming into own perspectiveIntegrating contradicting attitude with the ownattitude104Frequency(percentage)83 (46.7%)32 (16.8%)44 (23.2%)31 (16.3%)102 (53.7%)9 (4.7%)21 (11.1%)28 (14.7%)30 (15.8%)© ISLSInconsistencies within a TextOver all conditions and participants, 190 sections represented inconsistencies within the text. Eighty-three(43.7%) sections were not modified at all. There were 11 students who modified five out of five inconsistenciesand six students who never modified any inconsistencies. This quite large range of behavior indicates that thepure existence of logical inconsistencies does not guarantee active participation in knowledge construction inorder to solve these discrepancies. In the following, we provide a deeper analysis of the remaining 107 (56.3%)text sections in which the students did modify logical inconsistencies.Thirty-two (16.8%) text sections with logical inconsistencies were completely deleted. Students whodeleted the entire section made an effort to create a coherent text by trying to get rid of these confusingsegments. They were obviously able to identify those specific sections of the text that were a source ofinconsistency. But they did not make the effort to look into the problem more deeply.Forty-four (23.2%) logical inconsistencies were reasonably resolved with respect to content. In most ofthese cases students presented a solution to the inconsistency in that they deleted the inference that wasincorrectly drawn from the scientific finding. This is illustrated by the modification made to the followingexample: “It is already known that stretching fosters the range of motion. Temporary stretching resulted in nostructural extension of the muscle fiber. This seems to be a reason for a better mobility after a stretchingintervention.”The selective deletion of an illogical inference needs—in contrast to deleting an entire section—adeeper understanding of the content. Students who performed such selective deletions had to be aware of thequality of information: It seems they considered scientifically evaluated information as more trustworthy thanpractical or anecdotal knowledge. They were able to identify the anecdotal knowledge as the source ofinconsistency and accordingly drew the conclusion that it was this part that needed to be removed in order toachieve a coherent text.Another approach to resolving an inconsistency was to adapt the anecdotal knowledge. The followingexample demonstrates this strategy. This was the original text: “It is commonly considered that after temporarystretching the flexibility of the musculature is improved. A hint of this assumption is that the stress-strain curveof the muscle is left unchanged after stretching.” This inconsistency was adapted by simply inserting the word“not”: “… that after temporary stretching the flexibility of the musculature is not improved. A hint of thisassumption …”.The adaptation of the anecdotal knowledge showed that students who applied this strategy apparentlyreflected about the inconsistency and were thus even able to incorporate the anecdotal knowledge in a modifiedway. It seems they were familiar with scientific reasoning to such a degree that they demonstrated the ability tointerpret a scientific fact correctly.An additional, even more demanding strategy to resolve an inconsistency reasonably was to adapt theanecdotal knowledge and add further information at the same time. The following text section is an illustratingexample: “Stretching is used to foster a quick regeneration after high physical load. The reduced blood flowand the traction on the stressed and micro-traumatized musculature during static stretching provide anexplanation for the assumed positive effect of stretching on regeneration.” This inconsistency was adapted byinserting further information about missing scientific evidence. In addition, this student adapted the illegitimateconclusion from the scientific fact by deleting “the assumed positive effect of stretching on” and by inserting acorrect conclusion. The whole section of the text appeared after the revision in the following way: “Stretching isused to foster a quick regeneration after high physical load. However, this has not yet been proved, sinceregeneration processes cannot be associated with stretching. The reduced blood flow and the traction on thestressed and micro-traumatized musculature during a static stretching do not provide an explanation for theassumed positive effect of stretching on regeneration.”Besides a deep understanding of the specific content, such an elaborate revision requires people’sability to reflect on the current stage of knowledge about the effectiveness of stretching. Students who were ableto perform such revisions had to be aware of the uncertainty in medical anecdotal knowledge and also of thelack of scientific evidence in physiotherapy.Apart from these strategies to resolve inconsistencies as described so far, inconsistencies within thetext also stimulated the participants to modify the scientific fact. Thirty-one (16.3%) of the logicalinconsistencies were edited in this way.In the following example the scientific fact was adapted in order to fit to the anecdotal knowledge. Thiswas the original sentence: “The reduced blood flow and the traction on the stressed and micro-traumatizedmusculature during a static stretching …”. A participant changed this sentence in the following way: “Thereduced enhanced blood flow …”.This is another example of a participant who revised the scientific fact: “… the stress-strain curve ofthe muscle is left unchanged after stretching” was changed into: “… the stress-strain curve of the muscle is leftunchanged changed positively after stretching.” After this student’s revision the conclusion that the scientificICLS 2014 Proceedings105© ISLSfact would be an explanation for the positive effect of stretching became logically correct (even though it wasstill incorrect with regard to current scientific knowledge).Students who performed such adaptations had to be aware of the inconsistencies in the text. But inthese cases, they identified the scientific knowledge as the source of the inconsistency. It seems they consideredscientific knowledge as less certain and trustworthy than established anecdotal knowledge.Inconsistencies between a Text and a Learner’s AttitudeIn total, 190 sections of the texts represented a biomedical therapeutic health concept which contradicted theparticipants’ health concept. We found that 102 (53.7%) sections were not modified at all. This indicates thatthe mere existence of inconsistencies between a text and learner’s attitude did not necessarily lead to textmodifications. Perhaps students did not realize the inconsistencies or they were not personally affected by them.In the following, we provide a deeper analysis of the remaining 88 (46.3%) text sections in which thestudents did modify the text. Nine (4.7%) biomedical statements were revised without changing the therapeutichealth concept. In the following example only the extent of the standard ROM of the knee joint was modified:“A deficit in the mobility which should be treated exists, if a patient does not achieve the standard ROM [i.e.,knee: ext/flex (0/0/180) (0-5/0/120-150)]”It seems that students who performed such an adaptation were not bothered by the biomedicalstatement; they even tried to improve the accuracy of the biomedical information. This is remarkable in the faceof the fact that all participants preferred biopsychosocial statements. This behavior seems to reflect some openmindedness toward other attitudes or at least a willingness to tolerate other perspectives.In contrast to this editing behavior we also found that 21 (11.1%) text sections that represented abiomedical therapeutic health concept were completely deleted. Deleting the whole section of the text was anoption which had the effect of neutralizing attitudes represented in the text. Students who deleted the entiresection made an effort to diminish the contradicting therapeutic health concept. It seems they were disturbed bythe contradicting attitude but they did not invest much effort to transform the section of the text to fit their ownperspective.Another approach of some participants was to transform the contradicting statement to be in sync withtheir own perspective. Twenty-eight (14.7%) biomedical statements were transformed into biopsychosocialstatements, whereas no biopsychosocial statement was transformed into a biomedical statement. The followingexample demonstrates this strategy. The statement „Since stretching has various effects, patients benefit mostfrom standardized examination and the use of evidence-based treatments” was adapted by replacing thebiomedical keywords “standardized” and “evidence-based” with the biopsychosocial keywords“individualized” and “individual” respectively.Another approach to eliminating the biomedical perspective was to relativize the biomedical statementwith the help of a biopsychosocial statement. For example, keywords like “standard ROM” remainedunchanged. But at the same time the statement “A deficit in the mobility which should be treated exists, if apatient does not achieve the standard ROM [i.e., knee: ext/flex (0/0/180)” was revised by replacing the secondpart of the statement with the following change: “… which should be treated exists, if a patient isn’t able tohandle his daily routine caused by the deficits. However treatment decision should not mainly depend on thestandard ROM.”Students who performed these strategies made an effort to diminish the contradicting therapeutic healthconcept and to adapt the text to their personal way of thinking. This behavior seems to reflect a very strongopinion and little willingness to accept other attitudes.So far only strategies of acceptance or rejection have been presented, but there were also 30 (15.8%)statements for which students made an effort to integrate the contradicting attitude with their own attitude. Thestatement “A deficit in the mobility which should be treated exists, if a patient does not achieve the standardROM [i.e., knee: ext/flex (0/0/180)” was supplemented by “while the main focus should be on deficits thatbecome apparent in the everyday life of the patient.”Another student only replaced “standardized” with “individualized” and left the biomedical keyword“evidence-based” unchanged. The transformation of this biomedical statement appeared as follows: “Sincestretching has various effects, patients benefit most from standardized individualized examination and the use ofevidence-based treatments.”Students who exhibited such editing behavior made an effort to reach a balanced presentation of thetherapeutic health concepts. They did not devalue the contradicting attitude. This seems to be a verysophisticated way of handling those inconsistencies between the opinion voiced in the text and their ownattitude—particularly impressive since all students had a strong biopsychosocial orientation.Interaction of the Different Types of InconsistenciesA particularly interesting and key question is how the combinations of the two types of inconsistencies exertedinfluence on the contributions and the editing behavior of students. Therefore, we examined the students’ICLS 2014 Proceedings106© ISLSreactions to inconsistencies within a text when the text was in line with their personal attitude compared to thesituation in which the text contradicted their biopsychosocial health concept. To test differences in the reactionsto inconsistencies depending on the health concept of the text, we calculated chi-squared tests.There were 95 sections that included inconsistencies within the text which were embedded in a healthconcept contradictory to that of the students. Another 95 sections contained inconsistencies within the textwhich were in line with the participants’ health-related attitude. In the following, we present three types ofrevision strategies which were applied by the participants: Reasonable resolutions of inconsistencies, deletions,and rearrangements of scientific facts.Overall, 61 (64.2%) text-immanent inconsistencies were edited in texts that expressed contradictoryhealth concepts, while only 46 (48.4%) inconsistencies were revised in texts that were in line with theparticipants’ personal attitude: Χ2 = 4.81, p =.028.This difference is not attributable to reasonable resolutions of inconsistencies, however. Twenty(21.1%) inconsistencies within biomedical texts and 24 (25.3%) inconsistencies within biopsychosocial textswere revised in this way: Χ2 = 0.47, p =.492.The differences regarding deletions were greater, though also not statistically significant. Here, 20(21.1%) inconsistencies within biomedical texts and twelve (12.6%) inconsistencies within biopsychosocialtexts were completely deleted: Χ2 =2.41, p =.121.The strategy that contributed to the overall difference very strongly was the rearrangement of scientificfacts. Here, the frequency differed significantly between conditions. Twenty-one (22.1%) inconsistencies withinbiomedical texts but only ten (10.5%) inconsistencies within biopsychosocial texts were revised by using thisstrategy: Χ2 = 4.66, p =.031.In sum, it seems that students were more tolerant toward logical inconsistencies within a wiki textwhen this text was in line with their personal attitude toward health and therapy. Our findings regardingdeletions clearly support this interpretation. The attitude represented in the text, however, had no influence onthe most sophisticated and challenging revision strategy, that is, to resolve the text-immanent inconsistenciesreasonably. Finally, the cases where a biomedical (i.e., contradictory) text caused the participants to revise ascientific fact stand out. They give the impression that a contradictory attitude as expressed in a wiki text waseven able to tempt the physiotherapy students to manipulate scientific content according to their personalpreferences.DiscussionWhen shared digital artifacts, such as wikis, are used as learning settings to foster collaborative knowledgeconstruction, students are confronted with different kinds of inconsistencies. Because of the fluctuating qualityof knowledge and its diverse sources, inconsistencies may frequently occur within a shared artifact. In theanalysis presented here we examined how students handle different types of inconsistencies.First, we considered how inconsistencies within a wiki text affected the collaborative production ofknowledge. We found that inconsistencies within the text resulted in diverse reactions of the participants.Almost half of the inconsistencies were not modified at all. The remaining inconsistencies were either deleted,reasonably resolved, or resolved in that students changed scientific facts. It was rather surprising that thestudents tended to modify scientific facts to such an extent. This can possibly be attributed to the nature of theirvocational training. As can be seen from the German training and examination regulations of physiotherapy(PhysTh-APrV, 1994), physiotherapy is more a practical than an academic type of training. This might be onereason why anecdotal knowledge was apparently considered to be more trustworthy. Another reason may bethat the anecdotal knowledge as presented in our material was closely linked to the practical knowledge of thestudents. In this situation, practical knowledge seemed to be more robust than theoretical knowledge (see alsoHascher, Cocard, & Moser, 2004).In a second step, we considered how inconsistencies between a text and a learner’s personal attitudeaffected the participants’ contributions. We found that students also used various strategies to handle suchinconsistencies. Again, about half of the inconsistencies were not modified at all. The remaining inconsistencieswere deleted, revised without changing the therapeutic health concept, transformed to fit people’s ownperspectives, or integrated into their own point of view. That some students tried to transform biomedicalstatements into biopsychosocial statements strongly indicates that the therapeutic health concept is a verycentral and stable concept for physiotherapists’ professional identity. That some students integrated thecontradictory attitude with their own attitude might be caused by the social character of the shared digitalartifact. As already reported in previous research (e.g., Kimmerle, Moskaliuk, Bientzle, Thiel, & Cress, 2012)people tend to revise shared artifacts in a rather deliberate and tactical way.Finally, our qualitative analysis suggests that the co-occurrence of inconsistencies led to specificeffects. We found that students questioned logical inconsistencies within the text to a lesser degree if the generaltext was in line with their personal attitudes. This means that students seemed to take a more critical look attext-immanent inconsistencies when the shared artifact contradicted their own attitude. This might be anICLS 2014 Proceedings107© ISLSinteresting starting point for researchers and practitioners who want to foster critical handling of uncertaininformation by learners. In addition, we found that a contradictory attitude in particular fostered the revision ofscientific facts. Since we operationalized the inconsistencies between the wiki and the participants’ attitude onlythrough the biomedical vs. biopsychosocial therapeutic health concept, we cannot certainly conclude that thiseffect would also occur when other types of inconsistencies exist between a text and a learner’s attitude.Whether this result is specifically due to the clash of biomedical and biopsychosocial health concepts or can begeneralized to other inconsistencies is an open question for future research.The selective handling of information has important implications for the collective construction ofknowledge, and is highly relevant for the learning sciences. According to our qualitative analysis, it is importantto be aware that the pertinent source of an inconsistency may exert an essential influence on how students dealwith it. Learning scientists should take into account the complex interplay between individuals (theirknowledge, beliefs, attitudes, and abilities) on the one hand and shared digital artifacts on the other. And theyshould also consider the interplay among different sources of inconsistencies, if they want to implementlearning settings that support collective knowledge construction.ReferencesAlonso, Y. (2004). The biopsychosocial model in medical research: The evolution of the health concept over thelast two decades. Patient Education and Counseling, 53, 239-244.Berlyne, D. E. (1960). Conflict, arousal, and curiosity. New York: McGraw-Hill.Bientzle, M., Cress, U., & Kimmerle, J. (2013). How students deal with inconsistencies in health knowledge.Medical Education, 47, 683-690.Cress, U., Held, C., & Kimmerle, J. (2013). The collective knowledge of social tags: Direct and indirectinfluences on navigation, learning, and information processing. Computers & Education, 60, 59-73.Cress, U., & Kimmerle, J. (2007). A theoretical framework of collaborative knowledge building with wikis: Asystemic and cognitive perspective. In C. A. Chinn, G. Erkens, & S. Puntambekar. (Eds.), Proceedingsof the 7th Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference (pp. 153–161). New Brunswick,NJ: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Cress, U., & Kimmerle, J. (2008). A systemic and cognitive view on collaborative knowledge building withwikis. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3, 105–122.Engel, G. L. (1977). The need for a new medical model: A challenge for biomedicine. Science, 196, 129-136.Festinger, L. (1964). Conflict, decision, and dissonance (Vol. 3). Stanford University Press.Fujita, N. (2013). Online graduate education course using Knowledge Forum. In D. Suthers, K. Lund, C. Rosé,N. Law, & C. Teplovs (Eds.), Productive multivocality in the analysis of group interactions (pp. 375381). New York: Springer.Golder, S. A., & Huberman, B. A. (2006). Usage patterns of collaborative tagging systems. Journal ofInformation Science, 32, 198-208.Graesser, A. C., McNamara, D. S., Louwerse, M. M., & Cai, Z. (2004). Coh-metrix: Analysis of text oncohesion and language. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36, 193-202.Hascher, T., Cocard, Y., & Moser, P. (2004). Forget about theory—practice is all? Student teachers’ learning inpracticum. Teachers and Teaching, 10, 623-637.Hong, H. Y., & Scardamalia, M. (2014). Community knowledge assessment in a knowledge buildingenvironment. Computers & Education, 71, 279-288.Jorgensen, P. (2000). Concepts of body and health in physiotherapy: The meaning of the social/cultural aspectsof life. Physiotherapy Theory and Practice, 16, 105-115.Kienhues, D., Stadtler, M., & Bromme, R. (2011). Dealing with conflicting or consistent medical informationon the web: When expert information breeds laypersons' doubts about experts. Learning andInstruction, 21, 193-204.Kimmerle, J., Cress, U., & Held, C. (2010). The interplay between individual and collective knowledge:Technologies for organisational learning and knowledge building. Knowledge Management Research& Practice, 8, 33-44.Kimmerle, J., Cress, U., Held, C., & Moskaliuk, J. (2010). Social software and knowledge building: Supportingco-evolution of individual and collective knowledge. In K. Gomez, L. Lyons, & J. Radinsky (Eds.),Learning in the disciplines: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences(Vol. 1, pp. 9–16). Chicago, IL: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Kimmerle, J., Moskaliuk, J., Bientzle, M., Thiel, A., & Cress, U. (2012). Using controversies for knowledgeconstruction: Thinking and writing about alternative medicine. Proceedings of the 10th InternationalConference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 1-8). Sydney: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Kimmerle, J., Moskaliuk, J., & Cress, U. (2011). Using wikis for learning and knowledge building: Results ofan experimental study. Educational Technology & Society, 14 (4), 138-148ICLS 2014 Proceedings108© ISLSKravitz, R. L., Duan, N., & Braslow, J. (2004). Evidence-based medicine, heterogeneity of treatment effects,and the trouble with averages. The Milbank Quarterly, 82, 661-687.Laffrey, S. C. (1986). Development of a health conception scale. Research in Nursing & Health, 9, 107-113.Larson, J. S. (1999). The conceptualization of health. Medical Care Research and Review, 56, 123-136.Leuf, B., & Cunningham, W. (2001). The wiki way. Quick collaboration on the web. Boston: Addison-Wesley.Mayring, P. (2000). Qualitative content analysis. Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 1(2), Article 20.Moskaliuk, J., & Kimmerle, J. (2009). Using wikis for organizational learning: Functional and psycho-socialprinciples. Development and Learning in Organizations, 23(4), 21-24.McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N. B., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Are good texts always better? Interactionsof text coherence, background knowledge, and levels of understanding in learning from text. Cognitionand instruction, 14, 1-43.Patel, V. L., Arocha, J. F., & Kushniruk, A. W. (2002). Patients’ and physicians’ understanding of health andbiomedical concepts: Relationship to the design of EMR systems. Journal of Biomedical Informatics,35, 8-16.Piaget, J. (1977). The development of thought: Equilibration of cognitive structures. New York: Viking Press.PhysTh-APrV (1994). Retrieved October 27, 2013 from Federal Ministry of Justice website:http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/physth-aprv/BJNR378600994.htmlRoberts, P. (1994). Theoretical models of physiotherapy. Physiotherapy, 80, 361-366.Small, K., Mc Naughton, L., & Matthews, M. (2008). A systematic review into the efficacy of static stretchingas part of a warm-up for the prevention of exercise-related injury. Research in Sports Medicine, 16,213-231.Sniderman, A. D., & Furberg, C. D. (2009). Why guideline-making requires reform. JAMA: Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, 301, 429-431.Stenmar, L., & Nordholm, L. A. (1994). Swedish physical therapists' beliefs on what makes therapy work.Physical Therapy, 74, 1034-1039.Taylor, D. C., Dalton, J. D., Seaber, A. V., & Garrett, W. E. (1990). Viscoelastic properties of muscle-tendonunits: The biomechanical effects of stretching. The American Journal of Sports Medicine, 18, 300-309.Weppler, C. H., & Magnusson, S. P. (2010). Increasing muscle extensibility: A matter of increasing length ormodifying sensation? Physical Therapy, 90, 438-449.World Health Organization (1992). International statistical classification of diseases and related healthproblems, tenth Revision (ICD-10). Geneva: World Health Organization.World Health Organization (2001). The international classification of functioning, disability and health (ICF).Geneva: World Health Organization.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility inknowledge-building communities. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 7-44.AcknowledgmentsSome of the quantitative findings (i.e., the statistical results of a coding and counting procedure) of thisexperiment were reported in Bientzle et al. (2013). The qualitative analysis as presented in the article at handhas not been published before.ICLS 2014 Proceedings109© ISLS