Tools for Sustained Student Engagement in InterLACE(Interactive Learning and Collaboration Environment)Chris Teplovs, Problemshift Inc.,Windsor, Ontario, dr.chris@problemshift.comLeslie Schneider, Tufts University, Medford, MA.,leslie.schneid@gmail.comAbstract: This poster documents the important role that CSCL technologies like InterLACEcan play in providing spaces for active learning, reflection and social discourse, and therebysustaining student engagement. We present a suite of tools designed to support sustainedstudent engagement in InterLACE (Interactive Learning and Collaboration Environment), anonline collaboration environment designed to support STEM education. We include toolsdesigned for use by researchers, teachers, and students that provide insight into vocabularyusage, participation rates, and collaboration patterns. Preliminary results from six classroomswill be presented.Major Issues, Theories, SignificanceScience, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education has experienced a philosophical shiftaway from the memorization of facts, figures, and procedures toward engaging students in more authenticscience practices. Central to this practice-and-process focus is a multi-dimensional concept that we call “activeand sustained learner engagement”: the interaction of higher order cognitive engagement, motivation, andinteraction among peers.Sustained learner engagement requires assessments that are “concurrent, embedded, and integral to theteaching and learning process” (Chan & Lee, 2007; Black & Wiliam 1998). Increasingly new technologies canplay an important role in helping teachers blend authentic scientific inquiry and formative assessment. Fewefforts have been made to develop systems that help teachers understand their students’ activity and learning asit happens (Shapiro & Wardrip, 2011). Researchers have only just begun to examine how the use of CSCL toolsfor formative assessment support teachers in addressing student learning needs as they evolve in the classroomin the moment of instruction across different kinds of pedagogies (van Es and Sherin, 2001). As well, beyondfeedback on multiple choice type questions, even fewer tools are available to help students both incorporate andbenefit from formative assessment data.InterLACE (Interactive Learning and Collaboration Environment) is an innovative web-basedcomputer supported collaboration environment that encourages scientifically meaningful experiences andpromotes a broad range of active learning processes including epistemic practices of disciplines, authenticscience practices as defined by the Next Generation Science Standards, and sustained engagement.We have developed a suite of tools within InterLACE designed to measure and support this multidimensional concept of active learning and sustained student engagement by building on earlier work onformative assessment tools by Teplovs, Donoahue, Scardamalia and Philip (2007). The suite comprises threecore toolsets, each of which is designed to answer one of the following questions: (1) What are students writingabout? (2) How much are students contributing? (3) Who is working with whom?The interplay between the three factors that these questions address provides a framework forunderstanding and maintaining active learning and sustained engagement. The use of multiple tools provides fora degree of internal triangulation and checks of validity. Our goal is to extend this approach to provide a deeperunderstanding of the dynamics of learner engagement. If we can deploy analytics that tell us about all threefactors, teachers should be in a position to design learning activities that are both challenging and personallyengaging. And if students are writing about deep concepts, with posts and responses that continue over time, andare interacting with one another’s ideas, then it may be more likely that student engagement and personalgrowth will remain high.Preliminary FindingsWe will present data from six classrooms. Single-class examples of the analyses that will be conducted acrossall classrooms are shown in Figure 1, which highlights three of the tools from the toolset. The vocabularygrowth tool (Figure 1a) shows vocabulary growth over time, which is related to contribution rates (Figure 1b).Collaboration patterns are available in graphical and textual form (Figures 1b and 1c). We believe that the key tomaintaining sustained student engagement is the interaction between these three metrics. However, eachquestion can also be considered independently to provide insights about student activity.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1575© ISLS(a) Vocabulary Growth(b) Participation and Collaboration(c) Collaboration PatternsFigure 1. Analysis Tools.Investigations into word use by students within their posts shows continued substantial gains invocabulary growth over time both in terms of total words and unique words used within the class, from theperspective of all words (Figure 1a), academic words, and domain-specific words (i.e. words about the topic ofphysics). Measures of productivity are also important, and this toolset counts contributions over time by studentsincluding original posts, responses to others, and self-responses (Figure 1b). Visualizing this informationprovides the teacher and students instant access to not only the type and quantity of activity happening withinthe system, but also the nature of the interactions and the dynamics of the community of learners (whichstudents are/aren’t participating and which part of the lesson is generating the largest number of ideas anddiscussion). In addition, understanding the details of student responses to ideas (of their own or of theirclassmates) can provide high-level information into the nature of collaboration. Beyond the table informationpresented to the class (Figure 1c), we also look at the details of who is collaborating with whom by examiningthe associated social networks generated by the class over time within the system.ReferencesBlack, P. J. & Wiliam, D. (1998). Assessment and classroom learning. Assessment in Education, 5(1), 7-71.Chan, C. K. K. & Lee, E. Y. C. (2007). Fostering knowledge building using concurrent, embedded andtransformative assessment for high-and low-achieving students. In Proceedings of the 8th InternationalConference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL'07), 108-117.Shapiro, R. B. & Wardrip, P. S. (2011). Interactive representations of student activity to inform teachercollaborations: results from a formative investigation. In Proceedings of Computer Support forCollaborative Learning 2011. Hong Kong.Teplovs, C., Donoahue, Z., Scardamalia, M., & Philip, D. (2007). Tools for concurrent, embedded, andtransformative assessment of knowledge building processes and progress. In Proceedings of the 8thInternational Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 721-723.van Es, E.A., & Sherin, M.G. (2002). Learning to notice: Scaffolding new teachers’ interpretations of classroominteractions. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 10(4), 571-596.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1576© ISLS