Supporting Middle Schoolers’ Use of Inquiry Strategies ForDiscovering Multivariate Relations In Interactive PhysicsSimulationsLuke D. Conlin, Nicole Hallinen, Daniel L. Schwartz, Stanford University, Graduate School of Education,Wallenberg HallEmail: lconlin@stanford.edu, hallinen@stanford.edu, danls@stanford.eduAbstract: Within research on students’ inquiry into related variation, several researchers havepointed out the importance of students understanding multiple variable relations. So far, theControl of Variables Strategy (CVS) has demonstrated only limited success in supportingstudents’ discovery of multiple variable relationships. In this report, we present an alternatestrategy, which we call the General Principle Strategy (GPS). We report on preliminaryresults of a classroom study where we taught students in two conditions to use CVS or GPS,respectively, in the context of several physics topics. We find evidence that both strategieshelp students figure out the multivariable relationship underlying the working of a balancescale, as inferred from associations between their performance on a written posttest and on acomputer game-based posttest. Based on these results, GPS shows promise as an effectiveway of teaching multiple variable relations that underlie a wide variety of physics phenomena.IntroductionEngaging in scientific inquiry allows students to learn science content while participating in the epistemicpractices of science. diSessa (2008) has identified two distinct but complementary modes of inquiry prevalentin the literature, which tap into different aspects of authentic disciplinary practices: inquiry into the meaning ofconcepts, and inquiry into related variation. The latter involves empirically discovering relations betweenvariables, such as the relation between the range of a projectile and its initial speed.One line of research on inquiry in science classrooms has identified specific strategies that scientistsuse to figure out the causal relations between variables and has explored the effectiveness of explicitly teachingthese strategies to support students’ inquiry (Chen & Klahr, 1999; Ford, 2005; Kuhn, Pease, & Wirkala, 2009).The most prominent inquiry strategy employed in these studies has been the control of variables strategy(CVS). CVS involves discovering relations between variables by designing controlled experiments, changingonly one variable at a time to make unconfounded comparisons.Many studies have reported success in teaching CVS to learners in a variety of age groups, who learnto set up unconfounded comparisons and to draw correct inferences from them (Chen & Klahr, 1999; Ford,2005; Kuhn et al., 2009). These studies have primarily demonstrated the usefulness of CVS for discoveringsingle variable relationships, where only the main effects of a variable are considered, and not its interactionwith other variables. For instance, students might use the CVS strategy to find out whether the length of aspring, its width, or how much weight is hung from it affects how far a spring stretches, but do not explorewhether the effect of hanging a weight changes based on, say, the width of the spring (Chen & Klahr, 1999;Ford, 2005). Many relations in science involve multiple interacting variables, and as Kuhn (2007) has pointedout, CVS may not be sufficient for unpacking these relationships. So far, there is little evidence that students’learning of CVS helps with their discovery of the relationship between multiple interacting variables (Kuhn etal., 2009; Kuhn, 2007), although this could be due to a lack of instructional supports for extending CVS tohandle multiple interacting variables.Much of the research on students’ inquiry into related variation has focused on the hypotheticodeductive approach to science, which is the logic of inference underlying CVS. This approach begins with theformulation of a hypothesis that is then used to deduce observational consequences. Much less work has beendone to explore students’ use of an equally valid logic of inference, which has played a comparably importantrole in science: the inductive approach (Shemwell, Chase, & Schwartz, under review). Induction begins withmaking observations and synthesizing an underlying principle or explanation. While science educatorsgenerally recognize the importance of inductively searching for patterns in data, little work has been done toinvestigate how to support students in conducting such a search in a systematic way.In this paper, we present an inductive strategy, general principle strategy (GPS), which shows promisefor supporting students’ inquiry into related variation, particularly for discovering the relationships betweenmultiple variables. This strategy has roots in the history and philosophy of science, dating at least back toBacon (Shemwell, Chase, & Schwartz, under review), and has strong connections to modern accounts ofunification and coherence-seeking in science. The general approach involves examining all the data to find oneICLS 2014 Proceedings31© ISLSunderlying general explanation. This can apply to a broad array of contexts where CVS may be impracticable(e.g., the historical discovery that the evening star and the morning star were in fact the same object, Venus), butit can also be used as an alternative for making comparisons that establish relations between variables.GPS offers another way of making unconfounded comparisons. Instead of making pairwisecomparisons based on dependent variables (as in CVS), the GPS approach to is to make comparisons acrosscases based on a common outcome, then to look for common characteristics. The logic of GPS involves usingthe dependent variable to make inferences about the independent variables, while for CVS the logic of inferenceproceeds from independent variables to the dependent. For instance, given the top speeds of a set of airplaneswith different wing lengths, body shapes, and tail configurations, the GPS approach would be to look at thefastest planes and see what their common characteristics are. The CVS approach would be to pick acharacteristic (wing length) and vary only that characteristic to see if the speeds are different.Other studies have explored ways of supporting students in looking across cases to find a generalexplanation, for example, by having students invent an index that could apply to multiple contrasting cases.Schwartz, Chase, Oppezzo, & Chin (2011) compared two instructional methods for teaching 7th & 8th gradestudents the ratio concept underlying density. They found that students who were instructed to invent a“crowdedness” index that could apply to multiple contrasting cases better learned and applied the ratio conceptto new physics topics compared with students who were told the ratio concept and given cases to practice. Chi,Dohmen, Shemwell, Chin, Chase, & Schwartz (2012) found improved learning outcomes for undergraduatestudents who were told to invent a general explanation that can predict the range of several contrasting cases ofprojectiles. Chase, Shemwell, & Schwartz (2010) compared the general explanation strategy with a Predict,Observe, and Explain (POE) strategy during 50-minute lesson using a physics simulation related to Faraday’slaw. They added explicit support of the general explanation strategy by providing an example from anotherdomain (buoyancy). They found that students who were guided to seek a general explanation across the casesdeveloped a deeper understanding of the vector component nature of magnetic flux than POE students. In thesestudies, the supports for students seeking a general explanation were largely embedded in the task, rather thanbeing at the focus of extended, explicit instruction.Given that several studies have shown that explicit instruction of strategies can improve students’learning and transfer of the strategies (Chen & Klahr, 1999), it is of interest to know whether explicit instructionof GPS could enhance students’ learning of the strategy. In what follows, we report on the results of a study inwhich we taught middle school students either the CVS or GPS strategy in the context of several physics topics,over several weeks. We focus on the results of a posttest item designed to assess their use of an inquiry strategyon a novel physics topic. We report on several interesting associations between their choice of inquiry strategyon this item and their performance on a subsequent computer game-based assessment of their discovery of amultivariable relationship. These results substantiate GPS as a useful strategy for supporting students’ inquiryinto multivariable relationships.Methods: Teaching and AssessmentIn the present study, we taught four classes of middle school students (132 total) one of two strategies forfiguring things out in science (CVS or GPS) during seven 50-minute sessions over a three-week period. Eachclass was randomly split into two conditions, stratified by class grade and gender. We refer to these conditionsas CV or GP to disambiguate them from the strategies. The principle difference between conditions was thestrategy they learned for doing inquiry. The CV condition received explicit CVS instruction applied to a varietyof physics topics, including projectiles, buoyancy, and collisions, with a focus on learning the content throughinquiry. The GP condition received explicit GPS instruction applied to the same sequence of physics topicswith the same focus on figuring things out through inquiry. The lessons were taught by two instructors, whoeach taught 2 classes in each condition to counteract class and teacher effects.In both conditions, the instruction included a variety of activities such as hands-on explorations,worksheets, and computer simulations of physics phenomena. For example, on the 5th day of instruction,students in both conditions were given simple pendulums (strings with metal washers), and asked to figure outwhat matters for how quickly a pendulum goes back and forth. In the CV condition, students were encouragedto pick a variable (mass, length, angle, etc.) that might affect how quickly a pendulum will go back and forth,and to test its effect by making comparisons that vary only variable at a time. In the GP condition, the studentswere also tasked with finding out what affects the pendulum period, but their instructions were to conduct theirexperiments to find multiple ways to make two pendulum swing at the same rate. Both groups were encouragedto determine the causes of changes in the pendulum period. The sequence of lessons for both groups movedfrom using inquiry strategies to make causal inferences about single variables to considering multiple variablerelations.After the sequence of lessons, each class took a written posttest that included an item assessing theiruse of either strategy (CVS or GPS) in the context of a new physics topic, racing different balls down a ramp(see Figure 1). The item presented data on five balls that were rolled down the ramp, including their size,ICLS 2014 Proceedings32© ISLSweight, shape, and the outcome (how long it took to them to roll down the ramp). The item asked the studentsto: (i) decide which balls they would compare to figure out what makes them go fast (the Ramp Comparisonstask), and (ii) use the data to decide what matters for how fast a ball reaches the bottom (the Ramp Conclusionstask).Figure 1. The "Ramp" written posttest itemThe day after the written posttest, students took a posttest in the form of a computer game adapted froma physics simulation of a balance scale (Wieman, Adams, & Perkins, 2008). The game included a Challengemode and an Exploration mode (see Figure 2). In Challenge mode, the students were presented with a sequenceof eight challenges: they had to predict whether a given configuration would tip left, tip right, or balance in themiddle. In Exploration mode, the students were free to place bricks anywhere on the balance scale and see whathappened. Their ultimate goal was to answer eight challenge problems correctly in a row.Figure 2. Balance Act posttest Challenge mode (left) and Explore mode (right)To make predictions about whether the two sides balance, students need to consider multiple variablessimultaneously, i.e., the weight on each side and their distances from the fulcrum. The sequence of challengesstarted off testing just the main effects of each variable (e.g., same amount of bricks on both sides, but fartherout on one side) but increased in difficulty to include variable interactions (e.g., one side has more bricks butthey are closer to the fulcrum, as in Figure 2). To complete the Challenge mode, the students had to make eightcorrect predictions in a row. As soon as they got one wrong, they were returned to Exploration mode along witha display of the configuration they missed. They were free to explore, but they could choose to re-enterChallenge mode at any time. When they returned to Challenge mode they had to start again with a whole newset of eight challenges to get through. Performing perfectly in Challenge mode is not likely without figuring outthe multiplicative relationship of weight and distance, and so all told, the game serves as an assessment ofstudents’ preparedness to learn the multivariate relationship.Data & AnalysisOf the 132 middle school students, 29 did not return consent forms and were excluded from the analysis, aswere 3 students who were absent from either day of posttesting, leaving a sample of n = 100. In what follows,we present an analysis of students’ performances on both the written and computer-based posttests. First weICLS 2014 Proceedings33© ISLSexplain the coding scheme for responses to the Ramp Comparisons and the Ramp Conclusions tasks on thewritten posttest. Then we discuss how students’ performance on the Balance Act computer-based assessmentgame is associated with their strategy use on the Ramp question.Coding Responses on the Written PosttestThe Ramp item first asked the students to pick which balls to compare in order to figure out what makes a ballgo fast down the ramp. There was no specification of how many balls to compare, although most (79%) chooseto compare two. We coded the responses to the Ramp Comparisons task as CVS, GPS, or Neither. A studentusing the Control of Variables Strategy should pick two cases to compare that vary only on one characteristic(weight, shape, or size). There are two possible pairs for which this is the case: tennis ball & baseball or soccerball & basketball. If the student chose either of these pairs, their response was coded “CVS”.If students are using GPS, they should pick cases that have the same outcome (time down the ramp)then look for what characteristics are common across these cases. In the case of the Ramp Comparisons taskthere are two ways to pick a common outcome: (i) pick the fastest balls (baseball & bowling ball), which took1.5 seconds, or (ii) pick the slower balls (tennis ball, soccer ball, & basketball), which took 2 seconds. If astudent responded with either of these groupings, their response was coded as GPS (1).The second question of the Ramp item, which we will refer to as the Ramp Conclusions task, askedstudents to use the data to decide what affects the time needed for the ball to roll down the ramp. There was nospecification of how many factors could be affecting the speed, but most (80%) put only one. Using eitherstrategy should lead to the same (counterintuitive) conclusion for this data, which is “shape” (2). The students’responses were coded as correct if they identified shape (hollow or solid) and did not list any othercharacteristics.Two coders independently coded 20% of the responses, which were randomly selected from theposttests. They agreed on 100% of the codes for both Ramp questions before discussion.ResultsInquiry Strategy on The Ramp QuestionDid the students in each condition learn to apply the strategy to the new physics topic? Figure 3 shows ahistogram of the strategies used on the Ramp Comparisons task, by condition. Note that the strategy used onthis question tends to align with the condition. A Chi-square test of independence shows that this association is, p < .01. Also note that in the GPS condition (N=53) there were a relativelysignificantlarge proportion of students who used CVS. The converse is not true: in the CVS condition (N=47) only onestudent used the GPS strategy. This suggests that many students in GP (and by implication, CV) may havealready been familiar with CVS. Lastly note that in both conditions (but especially in the GP condition) there isa fairly large proportion of “Neither” codes, i.e., comparisons that did not conform to either strategy.Figure 1. Histogram of inquiry strategies used on the Ramp Comparison task, by condition.Were the students able to draw the right conclusions from their comparisons? Table 1 is a contingencytable for the strategy used on the Ramp Comparisons task with correct responses on the Drawing Conclusionsbetween using either strategy on thetask. There is a significant associationMaking Comparisons task and drawing the correct inference in the Drawing Conclusions task. However, Chisquare does not isolate which interaction is driving the effect. To test whether the large proportion of “Neither”codes in GP was behind the association, we collapsed CVS and GPS into a single category “Either” and foundICLS 2014 Proceedings34© ISLSthat the association was still significant. This suggests that students usingeither strategy were more likely to draw the correct conclusion from their comparison.The association of drawing the correction conclusion with condition was not significantThis could be due to the low incidence rate of people using GPS (n=15), thehigh number of students in the GP condition using CVS, and the high incidence rate of “Neither” codes. Alltogether, the results suggest that both strategies were helpful for those that used them, but that in futureiterations instruction should focus on improving the uptake of GPS.Table 1: Contingency table for Ramp Comparisons strategy and correct/incorrect Ramp Conclusions.Ramp Comparisonsstrategy:CVSGPSNeitherTotalRamp Conclusion:incorrect1241834Ramp Conclusion:correct38111766Total501535100Strategy Choice and Performance on the Balance ActTo complete the Balance Act Challenge mode, students needed to successfully predict eight challenges in a row.The students were coded for completing the Challenge mode or not. Table 2 is a contingency table for thestrategy used on the Ramp Comparisons task with their successful completion of the Balance Act Challengemode. The association between strategy used on the Ramp Comparisons ramp question and completion of the. The table shows that of theBalance Act Challenge mode is significantstudents who used GPS, more than half (60%) completed the Balance Act Challenge. Compare this withstudents who used the CVS strategy, of which slightly less than half (46%) completed the Balance Act, and withthe students who used neither strategy, of which only 26% completed the Balance Act. The table shows thatstudents who used either strategy on the ramp task had a better chance of completing the challenge than thosewho did not use either strategy.Table 2: Contingency table for Ramp Comparisons strategy and Balance Act completion.RampComparisonsStrategyCVSGPSNeitherTotalBalance Actchallenge notcompleted2762659Balance Actchallengecompleted239941Total501535100We also coded students’ performance on the Balance Act according to the maximum number ofchallenges in a row they got correct. Those who completed the challenge have a max score of 8, and the overallmean was 6.59 (see Figure 4). We find that the strategy used on the Ramp Comparisons task is also associatedwith the maximum number of challenges won in a row in the Balance Act Challenge mode. An analysis ofvariance with the maximum score on the balance scale crossed with the inquiry strategy used on the ramp. The means of the maximum balance scale challenge forquestion was significantthose who used either GPS or CVS on the ramp question were significantly higher than those who used neitherstrategy. The means for GPS are descriptively higher than for CVS, but this difference does not rise to.significanceICLS 2014 Proceedings35© ISLSMean BalanceActMaximumScore8.00Mean: 6.596.004.002.000.00CVSGPSNeitherRampComparisonsStrategyError Bars: 95% CIFigure 2. Bar chart comparing means of the maximum number of challenges answered correctly ina row on the Balance Act, by strategy used on the ramp question.Conclusion & DiscussionThe written posttest item assessed whether students learned to apply and draw correct inferences from theinstructed inquiry strategy (CVS or GPS) in a new physics context. Analysis shows that the strategies used onthis question were associated with each respective condition (CV or GP), and that using either inquiry strategywas significantly associated with finding the correct answer. The computer-based posttest assessed whetherstudents figured out a multiple variable relationship of torque in the context of balancing. Analysis suggeststhat if they used either strategy on the written posttest, they did significantly better at picking up the multivariaterelationship (weight x distance) on the computer-based posttest. This is suggestive that the strategies do helpthem figure out multiple variable relationships.In this preliminary study, we found evidence that GPS is at least as effective as CVS for figuring outhow multiple variables interact with each other. There is also a hint that GPS helps more than CVS, althoughdue to the low incidence of GPS strategy use, the mean difference did not rise to the level of statisticalsignificance. Overall, this study serves as an existence proof that it is possible to explicitly teach the strategy ofseeking a general principle to middle school students in ways that help them figure out multiplevariablePage 1interactions on their own. This is an important implication for instruction.Further research is needed to verify that students really are using these strategies as they explore withthe Balance Act simulation. This could be corroborated by examining their work on Balance Act either throughthe session log files and/or by videotaping their screen as they work with the PhET, coding when their movesare consistent with GPS or CVS. The lack of significant associations by condition with Ramp Conclusions andBalance Act measures, due to the low overall incidence rate of students using GPS, as well as the high rates ofstudents using CVS or neither strategy, suggests that future studies should focus on exploring ways of teachingGPS more effectively.Lastly, future work will focus on finding the productive common ground between students’ inquiryinto related variation and inquiry into the meaning of concepts. diSessa (2008) has described these modes ofinquiry as distinct but complementary, pointing out that few studies have examined their intersection. Ideally,exploring related variation in realistic contexts could inform students’ understanding of the meaning of therelated contexts, for example, by making sense of the counterintuitive conclusions drawn from their applicationof inquiry strategies.Endnotes(1) There is an ambiguous case: if students chose the soccer ball and the basketball, they could either be controllingvariables by making a comparison based on the one characteristic being different (weight), or seeking a generalexplanation based on the common outcome (2 seconds). We therefore took a conservative approach to coding for GPS;for the slow (2 sec) balls, all three had to be compared in order to be coded as a GPS response. If just thebasketball/soccer ball pair was selected, it was coded as CVS. It is conservative in that it may be throwing out GPSresponses, thereby weakening the correlation between the instructional condition and the strategy used on the rampICLS 2014 Proceedings36© ISLStask. Anyone comparing this particular pair is much more likely to be doing so based on the CVS strategy, since that isone of 2 possible correct CVS pairs, while for the GPS strategy that would be one of 4 possible GPS pairs. There wereonly 5 cases of this, and 3 additional GPS pairs that were excluded based on the conservative coding scheme..(2) Even though most people intuitively expect the mass and the size of the shapes to matter, it turns out that mass andradius both cancel out of Newton’s equations (in the limit of low rolling speeds). Hollow objects have greaterrotational inertia, and so cannot speed up as quickly, no matter what the mass or the size is.ReferencesChase, C., Shemwell, J., & Schwartz, D. (2010, June). Explaining across contrasting cases for deepunderstanding in science: An example using interactive simulations. Proceedings of the 9thInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences-Volume 1 (pp. 153–160). International Society ofthe Learning Sciences.Chen, Z., & Klahr, D. (1999). All other things being equal: Acquisition and transfer of the control of variablesstrategy. Child development, 70(5), 1098–1120.Chi, M., Dohmen, I., Shemwell, J., Chin, D., & Chase, C. (2012, April). Seeing the forest from the trees: Acomparison of two instructional models using contrasting cases. Paper presented at the 2012 AmericanEducational Research Association Annual Conference (pp. 1–10). Retrieved 3/5/2014, from the AERAOnline Paper Repository.diSessa, A. (2008). A “theory bite” on the meaning of scientific inquiry: A companion to Kuhn and Pease.Cognition and Instruction 26(4), 560-566. doi:10.1080/07370000802391760Ford, M. J. (2005). The game, the pieces, and the players: Generative resources from two instructionalportrayals of experimentation. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(4), 449–487.Kuhn, D. (2007). Reasoning about multiple variables: Control of variables is not the only challenge. ScienceEducation, 91(5), 710–726. doi:10.1002/sceKuhn, D., Pease, M., & Wirkala, C. (2009). Coordinating the effects of multiple variables: A skill fundamentalto scientific thinking. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 103, 268–284.doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2009.01.009Shemwell, J., Chase, C., & Schwartz, D. (under review). Seeking the general explanation: Revisiting thewisdom of Francis Bacon.Wieman, C., Adams, W., & Perkins, K. (2008). PhET: Simulations that enhance learning. Science, 322(5902),682-683. doi:10.1126/science.1161948AcknowledgmentsThis work was funded by NSF 09-602, and The Hewlett Foundation. The authors would also like to thank DorisChin, Kristen Blair, Joe Prempeh, Min Chi, and Michael Ford for valuable assistance with the study. Additionalthanks go to Kathy Perkins, Michael Dubson, and the PhET team.ICLS 2014 Proceedings37© ISLS