Demystifying Success in a Summer Bridge Program:Investigating Students' Intrinsic Motivation and Mastery Goals inthe Context of a Learning Analytics InterventionSteven Lonn, Stephen Aguilar, and Stephanie D. TeasleyUniversity of Michigan, 1401B Duderstadt Center, 2281 Bonisteel Blvd., Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2094slonn@umich.edu, aguilars@umich.edu, steasley@umich.eduAbstract: This study investigated students' academic motivation orientations in a summerbridge program and how a learning analytics-based intervention supported the activities of theacademic advisors. Students' mastery orientation decreased over the course of the term andour results showed how certain learning analytics features and use cases were associated withthis change. The findings indicate that student motivations need to be carefully considered inthe design of learning analytics-based interventions since the resulting tools can affect howstudents make sense of and engage with their courses.IntroductionPostsecondary institutions need viable and successful models to increase retention, particularly for those groupsof students with historically lower graduation rates. As learning analytics (LA) tools have been utilized toaddress retention concerns, students’ pre-entry attributes and their formal institutional outcomes (i.e., grades)have dominated the predictive models that drive these interventions. Students' intrinsic motivation to achievetheir stated goals and their capacity to plan and utilize available resources are fundamentally linked to retentionin higher education, yet these measures are difficult to include in large-scale LA tools. This study investigatedstudents' motivational orientations and how a LA-based intervention supported the activities of the academicadvisors by asking the following research questions:• RQ1: How do students' motivational orientations change during a summer bridge program?• RQ2: What factors are associated with changes in motivation during a summer bridge program?• RQ 3: What is the relationship between when advisors' use an early warning system and their students’academic performance during a summer bridge program?Theoretical FrameworkExisting theory has shown how students' motivation within the context of competence-relevant activities can bedefined as achievement goals, converging in mastery and performance goals. "Mastery goals focus on thedevelopment of competence and task mastery, whereas performance goals focus on the demonstration ofcompetence relative to others" (Rawsthorne & Elliot, 1999, p. 326). Performance goals may be furtherdelineated into performance-avoid and performance-approach orientations (Elliot & McGregor, 2001).Achievement Goal Theory posits that students engage with learning environments differently based on theseorientations (Dweck, 1986).MethodologyOur research agenda is organized around principles of design-based research. We collaborated closely with theleaders and staff of a summer bridge program to design and implement teaching methodologies, student surveys,and a learning analytics-powered early warning system intended for academic advisors.Setting, Participants, and Data SourcesThis study focuses on the seven-week Summer Bridge Program (“Bridge”) that is situated within a large fouryear, more selective, lower transfer-in, and primarily residential university with very high research activity(http://classifications.carnegiefoundation.org) located in the Midwestern United States. Two hundred andsixteen Bridge students completed three courses in the Summer 2013 term. Most participants were female(62.5%) and identified as members of an underrepresented minority group (69.4%). One-fifth (21.8%) werefirst-generation college students and one-sixth (14.8%) were athletes. Students' high school GPAs ranged from2.1 to 4.0 (M=3.45) and composite ACT scores ranged from 14 to 30 (M=22.54).Two online motivational surveys were distributed, one at the start-of-term (12 items) and one at theend-of-term (22 items). To measure students' motivational orientations, selected items from the Patterns ofAdaptive Learning Scales (PALS) instrument were employed in both surveys. While the surveys represent themain data sources, the overall project was focused primarily on how academic advisors in Bridge used an earlywarning system (EWS), Student Explorer, which was designed to provide advisors information about theirstudents' performance to facilitate timely interventions (see Krumm, Waddington, Lonn & Teasley, in press).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1665© ISLSResultsPaired-samples t-tests assessed whether students' goal-orientations changed during Bridge (RQ1). There were nosignificant differences between pre-bridge and post-bridge performance-approach scores or performance-avoidscores. There was a statistically significant decrease in students’ pre-bridge mastery scores (M = 4.7, SD = .55,α = .89) and post-bridge pre-bridge mastery scores (M = 4.3, SD = .84, α = .93); (t(208) = 6.53, p < .001).To better understand what might contribute to this decrease in mastery orientations (RQ2), we specifieda multiple regression model of students’ change in mastery. We controlled for relevant demographiccharacteristics, previous academic expectations and support, incoming mastery, as well as previousachievement. Students’ incoming mastery was positively associated with their outgoing mastery, β = .34, t(12)= 3.1, p < .01. Surprisingly, students’ self-reports of how often their advisors showed them their EWS data werenegatively associated with changes in mastery β = -.11, t(12) = -2.247, p < .05, (R2 = .30, F(12) = 6.12, p < .01).Since Bridge programs are meant to ensure that students are prepared for college-level coursework, wewanted to understand which factors were associated with student's final grades. Using multiple regressionmodels, we controlled for demographic characteristics, academic achievement measures, high schoolpreparation, and encouragement by family and friends. Athletic status was negatively associated with Englishcourse grades, β = -.67, t(15) = 2.52, p < .05, , while students' reports of excellent high school teachers werepositively associated with English course grades, β = .12, t(15) = 2.04 p < .05, R2 = .31, F(15) = 2.83, p < .01.For students in the remedial Math course (A), mastery orientation was negatively associated with course grade,β = -.67, t(16) = 2.52, p < .05, and the Bridge advisors EWS views after meeting with students was alsonegatively associated with students’ Math A course grades, β = -13.4, t(16) = -2.952, p < .05, F(16) = 11.11, p <.001. For students in the college-level Math course (B), perceived family encouragement was negativelyassociated with course outcomes β = -15.6, t(17) = -2.15, p < .05, F(15) = 5.18, p <.001. Finally, students’ selfreports of how often their advisors showed them EWS data were not associated with any course grade.Discussion and ConclusionWhile Achievement Goal Theory research has shown that high mastery orientation is adaptive for students inacademic settings (Rawsthorne & Elliot, 1999), our results show that some features of the Bridge program maymoderately decrease students’ mastery goal orientations (RQ1). We were surprised to learn that showingstudents their own data within the context of an early warning system (EWS) might have contributed to thisdecrease (RQ2). Yet, we do not know which features of EWSs contribute to this decrease. Moreover, ourfindings support the idea that any student-facing LA intervention will need to be developed and deployed withcare, because such tools affect how students make sense of and engage with their courses.Understanding the relationship between when advisors used the EWS and students' academicperformance as measured by course grades (RQ3) is a nuanced endeavor with mixed results. After controllingfor pre-entry demographics, students' perceptions about encouragement from family and friends, and formativecourse performance, the extent to which Bridge advisors viewed students’ data via Student Explorer aftermeeting with students was negatively associated with students’ Math A course grades. One of the limitations ofour study is that, by design, EWSs encourage deeper investigation of students who are struggling academicallythan students who are thriving, thus skewing the statistics gathered from EWS user actions. A student with alower grade is therefore more likely to have their advisor log EWS use than a student with a higher grade,potentially explaining the trends witnessed in our analyses.LA interventions are designed to foster optimization of learning and learning environments that couldultimately improve student performance and retention. Our results indicate that even guided presentations ofstudent performance data can have significant effects on students' academic achievement and their motivationalorientation. Therefore, designers of LA interventions should consider how best to collect and present such datasources. Furthermore, the next generation of LA interventions must resolve the tension between ease ofscalability in current data sources (e.g., grades) and the richness of measures such as students' intentionality,goals, and motivations that have proven utility in tailoring learning environments to learners' needs, but aremore difficult to collect at scale and integrate into current LA tools and processes.ReferencesDweck, C. S. (1986). Motivational processes affecting learning. American Psychologist, 41(10), 1040–1048.Elliot, A. J., & McGregor, H. A. (2001). A 2×2 achievement goal framework. Journal of Personality and SocialPsychology, 80(3), 501.Krumm, A. E., Waddington, R. J., Lonn, S., & Teasley, S. D. (In Press). A learning management system-basedearly warning system for academic advising in undergraduate engineering. In (J. Larusson & B. White,Eds.) Handbook of Learning Analytics: Methods, Tools and Approaches. New York: Springer-Verlag.Rawsthorne, L. J. & Elliot, A. J. (1999). Achievement goals and intrinsic motivation: A meta-analytic review.Personality and Social Psychology Review, 3(4), 326-344.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1666© ISLS