Reactivation of Multimodal Representations and PerceptualSimulations for Meaningful Learning: A Comparison of DirectEmbodiment, Surrogate Embodiment, and Imagined EmbodimentSaadia A. Khan, Teachers College, Columbia University525 West 120th Street, Box 118, New York, NY 10027Email: khan2@tc.columbia.eduAbstract: Embodiment has been found to enhance learning and motivation. It is proposed thatduring embodied experiences, learners reactivate multimodal representations of previouslystored memories related to objects and events, and the mental perceptual simulations learnersconstruct during embodiment enhance their learning and motivation. This paper presents thefindings of a study that investigated the effects of different types of embodiment on thelearning and motivation of adult learners. The study compared four groups, DirectEmbodiment, Surrogate Embodiment, Imagined Embodiment, and No Embodiment (control).The findings suggest that learners learn better and have higher motivation when they engagein embodied learning than when they experience no embodiment, and that role-playing asavatars in virtual environments and role-playing physically both enhance learning andmotivation more than imagining actions and reading. The findings suggest that role-play canmake learning more meaningful.IntroductionAccording to the embodiment premise, cognition depends not just on the mind but also on the body andpeople’s experiences of their bodies in action (Gibbs, 2007; Robbins & Aydede, 2009). Embodiment or usingbodily movements to enact knowledge and concepts can help people learn (Lindgren & Glenberg-Johnson,2013). Theories of embodied cognition propose that embodiment improves memory and comprehension since itinvolves the construction of mental perceptual simulations and the reactivation of multimodal representationsinitially stored in memory during a learner’s previous experience with an object or event (Barsalou, 2008a,2008b). Furthermore, it is proposed that embodiment can lead to positive transfer of learning since learnerslearn to imagine during an embodied learning experience, and they are then able to use their imagination in newlearning situations (Black, Segal, Vitale, & Fadjo, 2012). Empirical research on imagination and embodiment isfurther supported by neuroimaging data that indicate that the same brain regions are activated when we performan action and imagine an action (Buccino, Binkofski, et al., 2001; Buccino, Riggio, et al., 2005; Hauk &Pulvermuller, 2004; Pulvermuller, 2008). Research findings suggest that embodiment can enhance memory,comprehension, transfer, and motivation (Barab, Dodge, Thomas, Jackson, & Tuzun, 2007; Bianchi-Berthouze,Kim, & Patel, 2007; Black, Khan, & Huang, 2014; Glenberg, Gutierrez, Levin, Japuntich, & Kaschak, 2004;Khan, 2012, 2013; Khan & Black, 2013, in press; Metcalf, Dede, Grotzer, & Kamarainen, 2009; Metcalf,Kamarainen, Grotzer, & Dede, 2011; Noice & Noice, 2001; Scott, Harris, & Rothe, 2001).How can embodiment be used effectively to make learning a more meaningful experience for learners?I propose that embodied instruction and learning should specifically involve role-play activities in whichlearners can construct imaginary worlds (Black, 2007) through bodily movements. Role-play, whether it isthrough physical movements or virtual movements or imagined movements, can be expected to provide learnerswith the opportunity to engage with the learning material at a deeper level. Role-playing involves (a) an internalprocess in which the role-player uses certain conceptual constructs (i.e., the character she is playing, the gameworld, and the story), and (b) sharing this internal process with others through external expression (Lankoski &Järvelä, 2012). Embodiment via role-play provides immersive learning experiences in which the learner can putherself in another person’s shoes (whether this is a fictional character or a character from history) to betterunderstand learning material. The learner gets the opportunity to embody the character and enact a story throughmovement, gestures, dialogue, and the expression of emotions. This enables learners to relate more to thelearning material and it can make learning more enjoyable by introducing an element of play into mundanelearning material. Role-play also allows learners and instructors to collaborate during embodied learningexperiences, in which instructors and peers can provide scaffolding to learners.Theoretical BackgroundIn spite of a growing body of evidence suggesting that embodiment enhances learning and motivation,embodied cognition is still developing towards a unified theory (Shapiro, 2011). Embodied cognition theoriesthat explain cognition via mental simulations and reactivation of multimodal representations include PerceptualSymbol Systems, the Indexical Hypothesis and Basic Systems Theory. According to Perceptual Symbol Systems(Barsalou, 2008a, 2008b), whenever we experience some object or event, we store the memory of that object orICLS 2014 Proceedings230© ISLSevent as multimodal representations. When we need to recall something about the object or event at a later time,we reactivate these multimodal representations as mental simulations of the object or event. Basic Systems alsoproposes that we simulate the multimodal components (including vision, audition, action, space, affect, andlanguage) of a complex memory during retrieval (Barsalou, 2008a). The Indexical Hypothesis (Glenberg, 2008;Glenberg et al., 2004), which is related to Perceptual Symbol Systems, proposes that language comprehensioninvolves (a) indexing words and phrases to objects in the environment or to perceptual symbols, (b) derivingaffordances (Gibson, 1979) from the objects, and (c) combining the affordances according to syntax to producea coherent simulation (Glenberg et al., 2004). The Indexical Hypothesis also corresponds with the IdeomotorTheory developed by Prinz about ideomotor mapping or forming learned associations between actions and theireffects or between desired effects and actions (Glenberg, 2008). Boroditsky and Prinz (2008) have combinedPerceptual Symbol Systems and Indexical Hypothesis to propose that two Input Streams are involved incognition. According to them, people receive information from both perception and language and information iscombined from these two input streams.Black et al. (2012) have provided a theoretical framework that contributes to embodied cognitiontheory by specifically focusing on how embodiment can be used to deliver instruction. Their InstructionalEmbodiment Framework defines different types of embodiment that can be used for instruction and learning(see Figure 1). The framework divides embodied instruction into two main types of embodiment: PhysicalEmbodiment and Imagined Embodiment. Physical Embodiment is further divided into Direct Embodiment (i.e.,physically moving to perform actions during learning), Surrogate Embodiment (i.e., using a deputy to performactions, such as controlling the actions of a virtual agent or avatar), and Augmented Embodiment (e.g., usingtouch devices and augmented reality). Imagined Embodiment is divided into Explicit (i.e., learners are explicitlyinstructed to imagine while learning) and Implicit (i.e., learners are not explicitly instructed to imagine whilelearning and imagining takes place at an implicit, latent level). According to Black (2007), imagination plays animportant role in enhancing understanding and comprehension and constructing imaginary worlds during alearning activity can improve learners’ memory and comprehension.The Instructional Embodiment Framework proposes that embodied instruction is more effective as aninstructional strategy than traditional non-embodied instruction since embodiment enables learners to constructmental perceptual simulations. Since mental perceptual simulations involve more than one modality, they canenable us to ascribe a deeper meaning to our experience making learning more meaningful. Based on thisframework, a number of research studies suggest that learners learn better when instruction includes embodiedlearning experiences, and that embodied learning is further enhanced when there is a higher level ofembodiment than when there is a lower level of embodiment or no embodiment (Black et al., 2012; Khan, 2012;Khan & Black, 2013, in press; Lu, Kang, Huang, & Black, 2011).Figure 1. Instructional Embodiment Framework (Black et al., 2012).The study presented in this paper investigated three different types of embodiment identified by theInstructional Embodiment Framework (i.e., Direct Embodiment, Surrogate Embodiment, and Explicit ImaginedEmbodiment), and compared these three types of embodiment with a no embodiment control condition. It maybe noted that the group Imagined Embodiment in this study refers to Explicit Imagined Embodiment. Based onembodied cognition theory and previous research, I hypothesized that both physical and imagined embodimentwould enhance learning and motivation more than no embodiment. Since physical embodiment can providelearners with more opportunities to construct multimodal mental perceptual simulations than imaginedembodiment, I also hypothesized that physical embodiment would enhance learning and motivation more thanimagined embodiment. I was also interested in finding out how surrogate embodiment (in which the learner sitsin front of a computer and uses an avatar in a virtual environment to perform actions) would compare withdirect embodiment (in which a learner physically moves and performs actions). Li, Kang, Lu, Han, & BlackICLS 2014 Proceedings231© ISLS(2009) investigated the effects of surrogate embodiment and direct embodiment as teaching and learningmethods on students’ understanding of abstract programming concepts. They found that children who learned ina direct embodiment condition (in which they acted like robots) showed higher gains in terms of comprehensionand engagement as compared to children in a surrogate embodiment condition (in which they controlled themovements of a teacher who acted as a robot). Based on these findings, I expected learners engaged in directembodiment to score higher on learning and motivation measures than learners engaged in surrogateembodiment.MethodParticipantsEighty-four (N = 84) adult graduate students from a university in the United States participated in the study forcourse credit. Participants’ age ranged from 21 to 50 years. A large majority (90%) of the participants were 2130 years old, 50% were 21-25 years old, and 25% were 26-30 years old. There were 60 females and 24 males.The participants were from diverse cultural backgrounds. Participants identified themselves as Asian (42%),Caucasian (39%), African American (6%), Hispanic (5%), South Asian (4%) and Other (4%). All participantswere proficient in English.DesignThe study employed a between-subjects posttest-only control group design. Four groups were investigated: (a)Direct Embodiment (DE), (b) Surrogate Embodiment (SE), (c) Imagined Embodiment (IE), and (d) a NoEmbodiment (NE) control. The dependent variables were memory retrieval, comprehension, near transfer, fartransfer, and motivation.MaterialsThe materials for the main learning task for all four groups included: (a) Novel historical text from the Indiansubcontinent printed on paper about Humayun, India’s Mughal Emperor, (b) illustrations and pictures of themain characters in the text, (c) Apple computers for the Surrogate Embodiment group, and (d) a blank A-4 sizepaper and pencil for the Imagined Embodiment group. Measurement materials included: (a) A memory retrievalpaper and pencil test with twenty multiple-choice and open-ended questions that tested immediate recall offacts, (b) a comprehension paper and pencil test with ten open-ended questions that required participants tomake inferences and think beyond the text, (c) a near transfer test, which was a history comprehension test,containing text from Indian history about the Queen of Jhansi that included elements common with the originaltext given during the main learning task followed by seven open-ended comprehension questions, (d) a fartransfer test, which was a literature comprehension test, containing text from Birbal’s stories from Indianliterature that included elements common with the original text given during the main learning task followed byseven open-ended comprehension questions, and (e) five motivation items on a questionnaire, which measuredparticipants’ enjoyment, confidence in their learning, increased interest in history, general interest and overallmotivation. Participants responded to the motivation items on a five-point likert scale that ranged from stronglyagree to strongly disagree. The maximum score for memory retrieval was 30, the maximum score forcomprehension was 20, the maximum score for the near transfer test was 25, the maximum score for the fartransfer test was 25, and the maximum score for motivation was 25.ProcedureAfter the informed consent process, participants were randomly assigned to the four groups without knowingwhat condition they were in. All participants were given the same printed text, which they read silently onetime, and they viewed pictures of the main characters in the text (these were illustrations and pictures ofavatars). Next, participants were given the main learning task. The total time allocated to complete the task was15 minutes. Participants in the Surrogate Embodiment group were given a brief tutorial and practice sessionbefore beginning the main learning task to familiarize them with their avatars and the features they were to usein a multi-user virtual environment. All participants were instructed to reread the text during the learning task.For the learning task, participants in the Direct Embodiment group were instructed to physically playthe role of the main character in the text (see Figure 2). All participants in the group interacted with and roleplayed with the experimenter, who played the role of another important character in the text. Participants in theSurrogate Embodiment group were instructed to play the role of the main character through an avatar (or virtualagent) and engage in virtual role-play in a multi-user environment (see Figure 3). Participants used virtualgestures and movements during the role-play. A confederate in a remote location controlled an avatar thatrepresented the other character used in the role-play. The experimenter used the same script and the samecharacters in both role-plays. Based on the script, participants were free to create their own dialogue during therole-play. The Imagined Embodiment group was instructed to reread the text imagining the characters and theICLS 2014 Proceedings232© ISLSactions in the text. The No Embodiment (control) was not given any instructions other than to reread the textsilently to control for time.Figure 2. Physical Role-Play During Direct Embodiment.Figure 3. Avatar Role-Play During Surrogate Embodiment.ICLS 2014 Proceedings233© ISLSAfter the learning task, all participants were given the memory retrieval test, comprehension test, neartransfer test, and far transfer test. Participants were given a maximum of 15 minutes to complete each test. Tocreate a delay between immediate recall and the transfer tests, a distraction task was used before the neartransfer test in which the experimenter had a brief conversation with the participants. The experimenterfollowed the same script for all distraction conversations. After the far transfer test, all participants were askedto complete a questionnaire containing motivation items. The questionnaire also contained questions aboutparticipants’ backgrounds, their attitudes and opinions about technology and history, and manipulation checks.All items other than the background questions required participants to select responses on a five-point likertscale that ranged from strongly agree to strongly disagree. The questionnaire was followed by a feedbacksession in which participants were asked questions to gain an insight into how they learned. All participantswere debriefed at the end.ResultsMultivariate tests results were found to be statistically significant at the .05 alpha level, Wilks’ Λ = .252, F(5,76) = 9.089, p < .001, η2 = .369. Groups were found to differ significantly on: (a) memory retrieval, F(3, 80) =21.543, p < .001, η2 = .447; (b) comprehension, F(3, 80) = 17.267, p < .001, η2 = .393; (c) near transfer, F(3,80) = 36.497, p < .001, η2 = .578; (d) far transfer, F(3, 80) = 40.167, p < .001, η2 = .601; and (e) motivation,F(3, 80) = 10.287, p < .001, η2 = .278.Table 1: Mean scores and standard deviations for all dependent variables.Memory RetrievalComprehensionNear TransferFar TransferMotivationDirectEmbodimentMean (SD)23.95 (2.31)16.09 (2.45)16.86 (2.85)15.33 (3.15)22.14 (3.21)SurrogateEmbodimentMean (SD)22.38 (2.91)16.71 (1.65)15.28 (2.74)12.86 (2.97)20.76 (2.99)ImaginedEmbodimentMean (SD)18.81 (2.77)14.09 (2.93)10.52 (2.94)8.38 (2.11)19.24 (2.07)No EmbodimentMean (SD)18.12 (3.03)11.67 (2.82)9.14 (2.69)7.57 (2.29)17.52 (2.94)Post-hoc Tukey HSD tests revealed that overall Direct Embodiment and Surrogate Embodiment groupsperformed better than Imagined Embodiment and No Embodiment groups. Direct Embodiment and SurrogateEmbodiment did not differ significantly from each other on memory, comprehension, near transfer, andmotivation, p > .05, but they did differ significantly on far transfer. Direct Embodiment scored significantlyhigher on far transfer than Surrogate Embodiment, p = .018. See Table 1 and Figure 4.Both Direct Embodiment and Surrogate Embodiment scored significantly higher than ImaginedEmbodiment and No Embodiment on memory retrieval, near transfer, and far transfer, p < .001. DirectEmbodiment scored significantly higher than both Imagined Embodiment (p = .007) and No Embodiment (p <.001) also on motivation. Surrogate Embodiment scored significantly higher than No Embodiment (p = .002) onmotivation but it did not score significantly higher than Imagined Embodiment on motivation, p > .05. SurrogateEmbodiment scored significantly higher than both Imagined Embodiment (p = .006) and No Embodiment (p <.001) on comprehension. Although Direct Embodiment scored significantly higher than No Embodiment (p <.001) on comprehension, it did not score significantly higher than Imagined Embodiment on comprehension, p >.05. This suggests that although Direct Embodiment and Surrogate Embodiment did not differ significantly oncomprehension and motivation, Direct Embodiment enhanced motivation more than Imagined Embodimentwhile Surrogate Embodiment did not enhance motivation more than Imagined Embodiment. In contrast, DirectEmbodiment did not significantly improve comprehension more than Imagined Embodiment while SurrogateEmbodiment was found to improve comprehension more than Imagined Embodiment. See Table 1 and Figure 4.Another interesting finding is that participants in the Imagined Embodiment group scored significantlyhigher than participants in the No Embodiment group on comprehension (p = .013), but the two groups did notdiffer significantly on any other dependent variable, p > .05. See Table 1 and Figure 4.No statistically significant relationship was found between participants’ gender, age, ethnicity, culturalbackground, and attitudes towards technology and history and the dependent variables.ICLS 2014 Proceedings234© ISLSFigure 4. Mean Percentages for Memory Retrieval, Comprehension, Near Transfer, Far Transfer, andMotivation for All Groups.DiscussionThe results suggest that embodiment enhances learning and motivation and that constructing imaginary worldsimproves comprehension. Our first hypothesis was that all three types of embodiment would enhance learningand motivation more than no embodiment. I found that participants who experienced both types of PhysicalEmbodiment (i.e., Direct and Surrogate) scored higher than No Embodiment on all dependent variables. Thissupports previous research on embodied learning and instruction. I also found that similar to DirectEmbodiment and Surrogate Embodiment, Imagined Embodiment enhanced comprehension more than NoEmbodiment. This finding supports research by Glenberg et al. (2004) who found that imagined manipulationenhances comprehension more than a no-manipulation read reread control condition.Although I also hypothesized that Imagined Embodiment would score higher than No Embodiment onall dependent variables, I found that Imagined Embodiment did not enhance memory, near transfer, far transferand motivation more than No Embodiment. This does not support previous research findings that suggest thatimagining actions enhances memory and motivation more than no embodiment. For example, Glenberg et al.(2004) found that imagined manipulation enhanced memory and transfer more than a control condition. Onereason for Glenberg et al.’s (2004) significant results could be that their participants were children who weregiven a relatively simple task. In our study, adult participants were given a completely novel text about thehistory of a country they were not very familiar with. The lack of a significant difference between ImaginedEmbodiment and No Embodiment scores could be attributed to the level of difficulty and the novelty of the text.Another possibility, one might argue, is that although the No Embodiment group was not explicitly instructed toimagine actions, participants in this group were engaged in implicit imagination. Since Black et al.’s frameworkICLS 2014 Proceedings235© ISLSespecially considers Implicit Imagined Embodiment, I included manipulation checks that gathered informationabout whether or not participants in the No Embodiment group imagined actions while reading. Althoughparticipants reported that they did not imagine actions while reading, we must acknowledge that these were selfreport measures.I also hypothesized that Physical Embodiment (i.e., Direct and Surrogate) would enhance learning andmotivation more than Imagined Embodiment. I found that participants in the Direct Embodiment group scoredhigher than participants in the Imagined Embodiment group on all dependent variables except forcomprehension. Participants in the Surrogate Embodiment group scored higher than participants in the ImaginedEmbodiment group on all dependent variables except for motivation. The lack of significant gains incomprehension for Direct Embodiment compared with Imagined Embodiment could be attributed to attention. Itmay be assumed that since participants had to act physically and move around physically, this distracted them.On the other hand, one might argue that since Direct Embodiment and Surrogate Embodiment comprehensionscores did not differ significantly from each other, attention might not be the issue. In that case, it seems moreplausible that imagination plays a significant role in helping people understand text and our results indicate thatimagining actions improves comprehension as much as physically performing actions. This also supportsprevious neuroimaging and empirical findings.Direct Embodiment and Surrogate Embodiment groups did not differ significantly on memory,comprehension, near transfer and motivation, which suggests that virtual role-play was just as effective asphysical role-play. Participants in both groups reported that they were able to imagine themselves as the maincharacter during role-play and that helped them relate to the reading. Their feedback suggests that physical andvirtual role-play made learning equally meaningful for them. These results do not support Li et al.’s (2009)findings that Direct Embodiment enhances comprehension more than Surrogate Embodiment. However, wemust keep in mind that Li et al. investigated a different domain.One interesting finding is that Direct Embodiment far transfer scores were significantly higher thanSurrogate Embodiment far transfer scores. This suggests that physical role-play might have an advantage overvirtual role-play with regards to far transfer. The question is why did participants in the Direct Embodimentgroup score significantly higher on far transfer than participants in the Surrogate Embodiment group when thetwo groups did not differ significantly on any other dependent variable? Direct Embodiment possibly involvedthe reactivation of more multimodal representations during simulation, and this might have contributed to thefar transfer. Feedback from participants also revealed that most participants in the Direct Embodiment groupwere able to imagine themselves as the main character in the text provided in the far transfer test. They alsoreported enjoying this text more than participants in the Surrogate Embodiment group because they were able toimagine the story and imagine themselves as the main character. In this sense they seemed to be transferring theimaginary worlds construction from the main learning task to the far transfer test.Conclusion and ImplicationsThe findings suggest that embodied instruction via role-play can make learning more meaningful and it cansignificantly enhance learning, transfer, and motivation more than no embodiment. The findings also suggestthat virtual role-play via avatars can be as effective as physical role-play in enhancing memory, comprehension,near transfer, and motivation. This has implications for teaching and learning. Physical role-play might not befeasible in classrooms due to time constraints. Physical role-play is also not possible in distance learning. Thestudy, therefore, provides evidence for using surrogate embodiment via avatar role-play for teaching andlearning. The findings also support theory and research on the role of imagination in learning. This suggests thatembodiment can enable learners to approach learning in a manner that is enjoyable and relevant to them, whichmakes learning more meaningful.ReferencesBarab, S., Dodge, T., Thomas, M. K., Jackson, C., & Tuzun, H. (2007). Our designs and the social agendasthey carry. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 263-305.Barsalou, L. W. (2008a). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.Barsalou, L. W. (2008b). Grounding symbolic operations in the brain’s modal systems. In G. R. Semin & E. R.Smith (Eds.), Embodied grounding: Social, cognitive, affective, and neuroscientific approaches (pp. 942). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Bianchi-Berthouze, N., Kim, W. W., & Patel, D. (2007). Does body movement engage you more in digital gameplay? And why? Lecture Notes In Computer Science, 4738, 102-113.Black, J. B. (2007). Imaginary worlds. In M. A. Gluck, J. R. Anderson, & S. M. Kosslyn (Eds.), Memory andmind (pp. 195-208). NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Black, J. B., Khan, S. A., & Huang, S. C. D. (2014). Video games as grounding experiences for learning. In F.C. Blumberg (Ed.), Learning by playing: Frontiers of videogaming in education (pp. 290-301). NewYork: Oxford University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings236© ISLSBlack, J. B., Segal, A., Vitale, J., & Fadjo, C. L. (2012). Embodied cognition and learning environment design.In D. Jonassen & S. Land (Eds.), Theoretical foundations of learning environments (pp. 198-223). NY:Routledge.Boroditsky, L., & Prinz, J. (2008). What thoughts are made of. In G. R. Semin & E. R. Smith (Eds.), Embodiedgrounding: Social, cognitive, affective, and neuroscientific approaches (pp. 98-115). Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.Buccino, G., Binkofski, F., Fink, G. R., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., Seitz, R. J., Zilles, K., Rizzolatti,G., & Freund, H. J. (2001). Action observation activates premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopicmanner: An fMRI study. European Journal of Neuroscience, 13, 400-404.Buccino, G., Riggio, L., Melli, G., Binkofski, F., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (2005). Listening to actionrelated sentences modulates the activity of the motor system: A combined TMS and behavioral study.Cognitive Brain Research, 24, 355-263.Gibbs, R. W. J. (2007). Embodiment and cognitive science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. NY: Houghton Mifflin.Glenberg, A. M. (2008). Toward the integration of bodily states, language, and action. In G. R. Semin & E. R.Smith (Eds.), Embodied grounding: Social, cognitive, affective, and neuroscientific approaches (pp.43-70). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Glenberg, A. M., Gutierrez, T., Levin, J. R., Japuntich, S., & Kaschak, M. P. (2004). Activity and imaginedactivity can enhance young children’s reading comprehension. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96,424-436.Hauk, O., & Pulvermuller, F. (2004). Neurophysiological distinction of action words in the fronto-centralcortex. Human Brain Mapping, 21, 191-201.Khan, S. A. (2012). Surrogate embodied learning in Second Life (Doctoral Dissertation). Ann Arbor, MI:Teachers College, Columbia University, ProQuest, UMI Dissertations Publishing (3512509).Khan, S. A. (2013). Enhancing learning and motivation through surrogate embodiment in MUVE-based onlinecourses. In A. E. Walsh, S. Khan, R. Gilbert, & M. Gale (Eds.), iED 2013 Proceedings (pp. 30-41).Boston, MA: Immersive Education Initiative.Khan, S. A., & Black, J. B. (2013). Enhancing learning and motivation through positive embodied affect andsurrogate embodiment in virtual environments. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the AmericanEducational Research Association, San Francisco, California.Khan, S. A., & Black, J. B. (in press). Surrogate embodied learning in MUVEs: Enhancing memory andmotivation through embodiment. Journal of Immersive Education, 1 (1).Lankoski, P, & Järvelä, S. (2012). An embodied cognition approach for understanding role-playing.International Journal of Role-playing, 3, 18-32.Li, D., Kang, S., Lu, C., Han, I., & Black, J. B. (2009). Case studies of developing programming skills viaembodied experiences in an after-school LEGO robotics program for elementary school students. In G.Siemens & C. Fulford (Eds.), Proceedings of World Conference on Educational Multimedia,Hypermedia and Telecommunications 2009 (pp. 2209-2216). Chesapeake, VA: AACE.Lindgren, R., & Johnson-Glenberg, M. (2013). Emboldened by embodiment: Six precepts for research onembodied learning and mixed reality. Educational Researcher, 42, 445-452.Lu, C. M, Kang, S., Huang, S. C., & Black, J. B. (2011). Building student understanding and interest in sciencethrough embodied experiences with LEGO robotics, Proceedings of World Conference on EducationalMultimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications 2011 (2225-2232). Chesapeake, VA: AACE.Metcalf, S. J., Dede, C., Grotzer, T., & Kamarainen, A. (2009). EcoMUVE: Design of virtual environments toaddress science learning goals. Paper presented at the American Educational Research AssociationConference, San Diego, CA.Metcalf, S. J., Kamarainen, A., Grotzer, T. A., & Dede, C. J. (2011). Ecosystem science learning via multi-uservirtual environments. Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association NationalConference, New Orleans, LA.Noice, H., & Noice, T. (2001). Learning dialogue with and without movement. Memory & Cognition, 29, 820–827.Pulvermuller, F. (2008). Brain embodiment of category-specific semantic memory circuits. In G. R. Semin & E.R. Smith (Eds.), Embodied grounding: Social, cognitive, affective, and neuroscientific approaches (pp.71-97). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Robbins, P., & Aydede, M. (2009). A short primer on situated cognition. In P. Robbins & M. Aydede (Eds.),The Cambridge handbook of situated cognition (pp. 3-10). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Scott, C. L., Harris, R. J., & Rothe, A. R. (2001). Embodied cognition through improvisation improves memoryfor a dramatic monologue. Discourse Processes, 31, 293-305.Shapiro, L. (2011). Embodied cognition. NY: Routledge.ICLS 2014 Proceedings237© ISLS