Problematizing as Scaffold for Engaging in ScientificArgumentationMon-Lin Monica Ko, Learning Sciences Research Institute, University of Illinois at Chicago, mlko@uic.edu1240 W. Harrison Street Room 1570F Chicago, IL. 60607Abstract: Supporting students’ engagement in disciplinary practice is a major tenant of recentreforms in science policy and reform, and yet eliciting and building upon students’ everydayknowledge through engagement in scientific practice remains a central challenge to this work.This paper presents evidence of how problematizing – a term previously used to designscaffolds embedded in technological tools and supports utilized in smaller, face-to-facesettings – can work in a class-wide setting, as a support for noticing gaps in students’ currentexplanations both while motivating the need to engage in investigations and while buildingconsensus explanations to account for science phenomena.Arguing to Learn: Generating Explanatory Accounts for PhenomenaA focus of reforms in standards, learning environments, teacher preparation programs and professionaldevelopment is to support teachers' and students’ engagement with scientific practices to generate explanationsfor real-world phenomena (Achieve, 2013; Windschitl, Thompson, & Braaten, 2008). Engaging in argument asa means for developing scientific explanations has been characterized as arguing to learn because arguments aregenerated to explain phenomena and build an understanding of disciplinary core ideas (McNeill, Lizotte,Krajcik, & Marx, 2006). Classrooms in the U.S. rarely engage in arguing as a means of constructing evidencebased explanations (Pasley, Weiss, Shimkus, & Smith, 2004), and thus, scaffolds may be needed to enculturatestudents into the practice of articulating claims, evidence, and reasoning in their explanatory accounts (Berland& McNeill, 2010). Developing evidence-based accounts for phenomena can be challenging when multiplecandidate explanations can be constructed using the same evidence, when similarities or differences betweenalternative explanations are not obvious, or in cases where how the explanation accounts for the to-be-explainedphenomena is unclear. Because students frequently hold conflicting ideas about science phenomena, identifyingthe differences between multiple candidate explanations may support students in building on or integratingexplanations generated from their everyday knowledge of the world and evidence-based accounts (Linn &Eylon, 2011). These challenges point to the need for instructional contexts and scaffolds that support students inbecoming increasingly adept at generating evidence-based arguments to explain phenomena.Problematizing as Discursive Scaffold for Complex LearningProblematizing has been discussed in the Learning Sciences literature as a key principle for fostering productivedisciplinary engagement and also as a design principle for software tools to support complex learning (Engle &Conant, 2002; Reiser, 2004). In contrast to simplifying or making complex tasks more explicit, problematizingmaintains complexity while recruiting students’ attention, resources to generate dissonance and curiosity forresolving the task at hand to support students in engaging with difficult problems (Reiser, 2004). This papermakes the case that problematizing scaffolds can support students’ engagement in disciplinary discoursepractices and build criteria for generating evidence-based explanations for phenomena.Why might problematizing be a scaffold for engaging students in arguing to learn? For one,problematizing may help students articulate their reasoning and thinking processes, a key aspect of engaging inscientific argumentation (Osborne & Patterson, 2011). Second, when multiple explanations are plausible,argumentation can be used to identify differences between alternative explanations and make clear howevidence and reasoning supports or refutes these candidates. Problematizing may thus support this decisionmaking process by helping students categorize or distinguish between alternative accounts. Lastly,problematizing students’ existing ideas can bring gaps and disagreements to light. Uncovering differencesbetween alternative explanations or gaps in one’s reasoning is crucial to the construction of well-groundedarguments supported by sound evidence and reasoning and also takes into account and rebuts alternatives.Though features of this type of scaffold appear to be well suited to supporting the established challenges ofengaging in argumentative discourse, how this can be accomplished has not been well articulated.Moreover, promoting conceptual change involves the disciplinary practice of scrutinizing and revisingone’s conceptual understandings in light of new evidence, (Duschl, 2000). Problematizing scaffolds can helpmake explicit the differences between candidate explanations generated from everyday knowledge or from firsthand evidence and established scientific principles. Engaging students in sense-making discussions in whichthey are accountable to their peers, standards of reasoning, and disciplinary norms for knowledge building cansupport students’ constructing, evaluating and critiquing scientific explanations (Michaels, O’Connor, &Resnick, 2008). Understanding how teachers and students establish and instantiate a disciplinary standard ofICLS 2014 Proceedings54© ISLSreasoning and arguing to develop explanations for phenomena is critical. Sense-making talk holds greatpotential for problematizing students’ everyday accounts as insufficient explanations, and generates a need toutilize evidence and science principles to generate a coherent explanatory account.In this paper, I draw on 2 cases from one 6th grade classroom to illustrate discursive practices thatmirror the core principles of problematizing as a scaffold for productive engagement in science practice. I firstdescribe the larger longitudinal study that documented variations in how four 6th grade classrooms took up thescience practices. Then, I specify how one teacher’s classroom was identified as a particular case ofproblematizing, and finally, elaborate on two cases from this class to illustrate how problematizing scaffoldedthe process of distinguishing and integrating everyday and evidence-based explanations to motivate the need toengage in investigations, and also to support students to coming to a consensus explanation.MethodsCurriculum ContextThis study took place in the development and national field trial testing of reform-based science curriculum,Investigating and Questioning our World Through Science and Technology (IQWST). The 6th – 8th gradecurriculum engages students in scientific practices to investigate core ideas in science (Krajcik, McNeill, &Reiser, 2008). IQWST lessons are comprised of investigations that involve students in asking and observingscience phenomena, conducting data investigations, reading relevant texts, and discussions to support students’sense making of core disciplinary ideas and practices. Drawing on the work of pilot studies, which uncoveredthat teachers’ curricular adaptations varied in their intent to support students’ sense making of the disciplinarycore ideas (Ko & Reiser, 2010), 3 multi-day lessons, spanning the Physics and Chemistry units, were selected tobetter understand how teachers and students engaged in constructing investigation questions, data collection,and the development of a consensus explanation for various phenomena. The 3 multi-day lessons were observedthroughout the school year in four 6th grade classrooms, spanning from October to February during 2010-2011to provide insight into teachers’ disciplinary practices for students who have not yet had any experience with theIQWST curriculum. The two cases presented in this study come from the first 6th grade IQWST unit on light. Inboth Physics lesson 6 and lesson 11, students are engaged in the work of developing and refining their models ofhow light interacts with matter: exploring why light behaves differently when interacting with a mirror or apiece of paper, and what happens to white light when it interacts with colored filters.Analytic ProcessesThe larger longitudinal study investigated variations in how classrooms engaged in scientific practices. To firstdescribe how classrooms engaged in asking questions, conducting investigations and building explanations, alllessons observed across the four classrooms were videotaped and transcribed. Ongoing field notes of theclassroom activity and pre and post interviews with the participating teachers supplemented the videotapedclassroom observations as resources for developing and refining candidate conjectures. Field notes were takenfor each day a lesson was enacted. A finalized version of the field notes, documenting significant events andtheir time stamps in classroom observations were recorded and finalized within 1-2 days of the observation.Ongoing memos and jottings, comprised of reviews, reflections, and ongoing questions that emerged from theclassroom observations and interviews, were used to further refine ongoing hypotheses about the variations inhow classrooms engaged in scientific practices, as well as the factors that contributed to the differences acrossthe four classrooms.As a result of this ongoing analysis, I found that although classrooms engaged in the same set of datacollection investigations, how these investigations were motivated and subsequently made sense of differedacross the four classrooms. This observation led to an increasing focus on the sense-making discussions thatpreceded and followed data collection activities across the four classrooms.Discourse AnalysisTo capture variations in how classrooms motivated and made sense of investigations to generate explanations,classroom talk was divided into episodes, based on the scientific practices in which students were engaged.Using a grounded approach of moving back and forth between the findings from prior work, existing literatureon classroom discourse and scientific practices, and looking for confirming and disconfirming evidence withinthe available data, 22 codes were developed to describe ways in which students and teachers were engaged inscientific practices.	   These codes captured how classrooms went about asking questions, making sense of data,and generating explanations as well as the cognitive and material resources that were used to do this work. Asecond coder coded 49% of the total data corpus, with a reliability of κ = .82. Agreement was reached throughdiscussion on all discrepant episodes.Looking for patterns in the resources that teachers and students drew on to build explanations forphenomena revealed the epistemic criteria utilized to do knowledge-building work. Within the entire set ofICLS 2014 Proceedings55© ISLScodes identified and refined through the analysis of the total data corpus, 3 codes captured the types of resourceswith which teachers and students construct, critique or defend candidate explanations for scientific phenomena:1) data from classroom investigations, 2) previously established principles and models, and 3) students’everyday knowledge. ‘Data’ consisted of the qualitative and quantitative observations that students generatedduring classroom investigations for the current lesson. ‘Previously established principles and models’ weredefined by the evidence-based claims generated through previous investigation activities and sense-making talkthat addressed each unit’s driving question; these principles were displayed in the class as visual representationsor written statements and were co-constructed by students and teachers. Finally, ‘everyday knowledge’ –derived from student’s daily observations of the natural world, was also used to generate candidate explanations.Teacher and Case SelectionThe coding process revealed variations in how often and in what ways the aforementioned resources were usedto construct candidate explanations differed across classrooms and over the course of the 3 observed lessons.While all 4 classrooms utilized the 3 resources during discussions, two classes used previously establishedprinciples and data from investigations most often to generate questions and to build explanatory accounts forhow light interacts with matter. The remaining classrooms put forth a greater proportion of explanations drawnfrom students’ everyday knowledge, although the classrooms conducted identical investigations. These patternssuggested that investigations were treated differently across the four classrooms; in some, explicitly asopportunities for students to build on their existing knowledge with science principles and data to generateexplanatory accounts for phenomena.I reviewed the transcripts of all four teachers, and then zeroed in on Laura’s class, to better understandhow this was accomplished. In her class, candidate explanations generated from data, students’ everydayknowledge, and previously established principles were juxtaposed to motivate a need to engage ininvestigations, but also as a means to constructing consensus explanations when alternative accounts werepresent. This is in contrast to classrooms where investigations goals for investigation were stated by the teacher,rather than driven by surfacing gaps in students’ current explanations. During consensus-building discussions,Laura’s class went through a laborious process of presenting alternative explanations and identifying evidencefor or against candidate explanations to arrive at a single consensus explanation. Other classrooms, in contrast,simply identified and re-stated the same explanation, and often without accounting for or refuting alternatives.After identifying these patterns, revisiting transcripts, and returning to extant literature onargumentation and explanation, I conjectured that these patterns revealed a unique case of how problematizingscaffolded students’ engagement in scientific practice. A review of existing literature on argumentation inscience classrooms further confirmed this conjecture; using frameworks specifying progressions in students’argument patterns and products (e.g. Berland & McNeill, 2010; Osborne & Patterson, 2011), the talk exhibitedin Laura’s classroom demonstrated sophisticated argumentation when motivating investigations and generatingexplanatory accounts for phenomena. I identified 2 such cases within the transcripts from Laura’s class,presented in detail below, to highlight how problematizing is accomplished, what is problematized, and the keyscientific practices (Achieve, 2013) that these discourse patterns enable students to engage with. Thus, theseepisodes from Laura’s class were selected as paradigmatic cases (Flyvbjerg, 2006) of problematizing asscaffold. Analysis of students’ performance on several pre post measures, when compared to other classrooms,also indicated greater gains in these students’ ability to attend to disciplinary criteria when generating scienceexplanations (Buckingham & Ko, 2013). For this reason, I selected segments of Laura’s classroom as a rich caseof how students are scaffolded into arguing to learn. Laura has over 20 years of experience teaching bothscience and math, and holds a degree in elementary education. Approximately 10 hours of video footage wasobserved in Laura’s classroom from October to February throughout the study. At the time of the study, Lauraused preliminary version of the field trial IQWST curriculum for 5 years, conducted professional developmentfor new teachers, and worked closely with one of the lead universities creating the curriculum materials. The 3other teachers were in their 2nd year of using the curriculum materials.FindingsCase 1: Problematizing to Motivate InvestigationsIn Physics lesson 6, students investigate how light interacts with various types of objects. In previous lessons,students have already begun to describe how light interacts with matter by describing that light “bounces” off.However, the class has yet to explore how this bouncing differs when light is shone on different types of objects,such as a piece of paper or a mirror. Though this phenomenon may seem quite commonplace, everyday accountsfor why light bounces differently are examined in Laura’s class as worthy of further inquiry.The lesson begins as Laura takes a flashlight and shines light onto a piece of paper that is taped to thewhiteboard in the front of the class. While the students readily draw on previously established principles toexplain that light bounces off the paper, students have difficulty explaining why the light bounces differently offICLS 2014 Proceedings56© ISLSa mirror. Laura relentlessly probes students to explain why light interacts with the two objects in such differentways (claims of how the light interacts with objects underlined below, the teacher’s probing questions italicized,and description of non-verbal moves or behavior in (parentheses)):EpisodeResources used1Previouslyestablished principlesand models2Data frominvestigationTeacher and student talkLaura: So the light’s hitting the paper. Are you able to see the paper?Students: YesLaura: Okay why are you able to see the paper? (Almost all students havehands raised) Oh look at all these hands. Why are you able to see the paperJoshua?Joshua: Because the light from the light source is bouncing off the paperand into my eye.…(Additional talk ensues)…Laura: So light's just hitting the paper and bouncing off and going into youreye, and now what if I use a mirror (Teacher shines light on a hand heldmirror, directing light back and forth towards the students, as students beginto yell “Ah my eyes!”)…When I did the paper you weren't yelling (Teacheraims the light back at the paper)Matt: Because it’s bouncing off differentlyLaura: So what's makes it different when light bounces (Teacher continuesto use the mirror to shine light on the students)…So what happens? Why doyou think it’s different from when the light hits your paper? And when ithits the mirror? Alan?Although the Laura’s students use previously established principle that light comes from a source, bounces offthe paper and into the eye, to explain how light interacts with paper (episode 1), this principle comes underscrutiny after Matt admits that the light is “bouncing differently” off of the mirror. Laura underscores this bydirecting the light in various directions (at times hitting the students’ eyes) to further emphasize the contrastingways that light interacts with the mirror and paper (episode 2). Building off of Matt’s claim that light bouncesdifferently, Laura asks the class, “so what makes it different…why do you think it’s different?” The previouslyestablished principle “light bounces off…into my eyes” no longer provides a coherent account of how lightinteracts with both paper and mirrors, signaling a need to revise their previously established principles andmodels.In response to Laura’s probing, a series of exchanges follows in which students attempt to generate anexplanation for these differences in how light bounces. As students begin offering candidate explanationsdrawing on their everyday knowledge, Laura utilizes previously established principles and observational data tofurther reinforce the insufficiency of these candidate explanations. The juxtaposition of previously establishedprinciples and models of how light interacts with matter and the observed difference in how light interacts withpaper and mirrors generates a momentum and need for students to engage in further investigation:EpisodeResource used3Students’ everydayknowledge4Previouslyestablished principlesand models5Students’ everydayknowledge6Data frominvestigationsICLS 2014 ProceedingsTeacher and student talkAlan: Uh I think its different ‘cuz when it hits the paper it’s carrying a there's kind of photographic message like when it’s hitting the mirror(Inaudible) light rays so there's no pictureLaura: Okay so what would you say? (Looking at another student, notAlan)...do you have any ideas?Patrick: I think - (Inaudible) maybe its ‘cuz (Shrugs his shoulders)Laura: I mean you said the light was bouncing off paper and going into youreyes (uses the mirror again playfully to shine into Ss eyes) we'll just assumethat that happens. Okay – Irene?Irene: when you use paper, it's just shining (Inaudible) but when it hits themirror its bouncing off the mirror (Inaudible)Laura: So why does it do it for a mirror and not for a paper? (Lots ofstudent hands raised in response to this question)	  Irene: ‘Cuz the mirror is like if we look you can see yourreflection...(Inaudible)Teacher: Why (asking Irene, who appears to be stumped)? Good questions.Laura: So is the light hitting different objects differently?Students: Yes.Laura: Why?...How does light know how to do that?...should we collectsome more information about this?57© ISLSIn the above episodes, students generate several different candidate explanations: Alan proposes that the paperprojects a photographic message of light (episode 3) and Irene suggests that light shines on paper but bouncesoff a mirror (episode 5). In both instances, Laura probes these candidates by asking “why?” or “what would yousay?” and reminds students, “You said the light was bouncing off…and going into your eyes” (episodes 4 and5). Contrasting previously established principles and models from students’ prior investigations in the unit andthe observations of light shining on paper and mirrors further underscore the paucity of their existingexplanations to account for the differences between how light reflects off the mirror and paper (episode 6).As a result of these series of exchanges in which the teacher and students draw on data, students’everyday knowledge, and previously established principles, discrepancies between students’ previouslyestablished principles and models and their current observations of how light interacts with mirrors and paperare highlighted. By making the gap between what students see and what they know explicit, the upcominginvestigation becomes an opportunity to collect data to support a more complete explanatory account. These setof exchanges in Laura’s classroom establishes a disciplinary-specific purpose to what might otherwise beviewed as a science lab activity, and creates a demand for students to revise their existing model in light of theseperplexing observations of how light interacts with objects.Case 2: Problematizing to Build Consensus ExplanationsIn Physics lesson 11, students work with C-spectra, colored filters, and an overhead (emitting white light) toexplore components of white light and how white light interacts with filters. At this point in the Physics unit,students have begun developing and refining a model of how light interacts with matter, coming to consensusthrough investigations and discussions that white light interacts with objects by reflecting off, transmittingthrough, or getting absorbed by the object. During this lesson, students try to extend this existing model toexplain colored light and how white light interacts with colored filters.Laura begins this inquiry by projecting light through an overhead projector covered by a piece of paperwith a rectangular slit cut in the middle, covered by C-spectra paper (which breaks white light into itscomponent color spectrum). Without any colored filters, the white light transmits through the spectra paper andprojects a rainbow of colors representing the components that makes up white light. However, when the orangefilter is placed over the rectangular slit and C-spectra, the blue and purple components of white light seem to“disappear”. After the class works together to investigate the colors of light “disappear” by using various colorsfilters, Laura challenges students to generate an explanatory account for their observations, asking, (specificallyabout the effect of the orange filter on white light), “Where are those colors…where is the blue and purple lightgoing?” (Line 519-523, 11/15/2010)In response Laura’s request, students begin to put forth candidate explanations for the missing light. Inthe transcript below, Jonathan and Lana offer up candidate explanations, drawn from their everyday knowledgeand previously established principles, to account for the missing blue and purple light. An issue arises whenLana misappropriates a previously established principle to explain the missing light; while Laura acknowledgesthe validity of the principle, she points out this principle does not adequately explain how the white light fromthe overhead (composed of visible spectrum, including blue and purple light) hits the colored filter andsomehow disappears as it gets transmitted to the whiteboard:EpisodeResource used1Students’ everydayknowledge2Previouslyestablished principlesand models3Data frominvestigationTeacher and student talkJonathan: It’s disappeared.Laura: It’s disappeared, but I’m going to tell you I did not do anymagic…this is going to be a phenomenon that we can explain…so, Lana,what do you think happened to the color?Lana: You don’t need the blue to make orange, so I don’t think it shows up.And because you need blue to make purple, I don’t think it shows up either.Laura: Okay. So you’re right. So we don’t need it. However, you didn’tanswer my question. So here’s the white. It disappeared. Where did it go?Here’s the white light (pointing to the light bulb in the overhead). It’scoming up. It gets to here (Teacher points to the projection lens above theoverhead screen). Do you all agree it gets to here?Several students: Yeah.Laura: So where does it go?After Jonathan suggested that the light has disappeared, Laura pushed students to account for the underlyingmechanisms of how this has happened by saying, “this is a phenomenon we can explain” (episode 1). Using aprior activity in which she mixed various colors of light, Lana used principles of color composition, specifically,ICLS 2014 Proceedings58© ISLSthat orange light is not made up of blue and purple light, to explain that the light does not show up (episode 2).In response to Lana’s candidate explanation, Laura returns to the demonstration with the overhead projector,pointing out that while Lana’s right - blue light is not needed to create orange light, the white light (containingthe blue and purple spectrum) travelled through the projector, and interacts with the C-spectra paper and theorange filter. By establishing consensus that blue and purple light were projected from the overhead, Laurasimultaneously points out the shortcomings of Lana’s explanation while requesting further explanation from herclassmates, asking “so where does it go?” (Episode 3)Following this critique of Lana’s candidate explanation, Dale and Caitlyn draw on their everydayknowledge to generate additional candidate explanations for the missing light. When Laura later returns to Lanaa second time for an explanation of the observed phenomena, Lana now utilizes the language from previouslyestablished principles about how light interacts with matter to suggest that the filter might be reflecting themissing light. Laura offers Lana’s idea to the class, and then supports them in drawing on previously establishedprinciples and observational data to determine if there is sufficient empirical evidence in support of Lana’sclaim. Through the following exchanges, the class moves from generating candidate explanations to usingprinciples to find disconfirming evidence to support a subset of these candidates:EpisodeResource used4Students’ everydayknowledge5Previouslyestablished principlesand models6Data frominvestigation7Previouslyestablished principlesand modelsTeacher and student talkDale: It gets re-filtered back.Laura: Okay…Caitlyn?Caitlyn: I think it’s still there, but the orange filter’s…covering it.Laura: [The] Filter’s covering it. So it’s covering it so we can’t see it,right? And, sorry, Lana, tell me your answer again.Lana: The filter reflects it because you don’t need blue and purple to makeorange.Laura: Okay. So what do we think about [the filter] reflecting it?Matt: I don’t know.Laura: It’s reflecting which colors, Lana?Lana: Blue.Laura: Does anybody see blue?Students: No.Kyle: No. I see orange in the background.Laura: If it was going to reflect blue, would you see blue?Kyle: Yes.Mike: I don’t know.Laura: So we could still go with what Colleen’s saying, right? Like it getsthere, but then we don’t know where--it’s going somewhere.Assad: It’s absorbed.Laura: Assad?Assad: It’s absorbed.Laura: Why do you think absorbed?Assad: Well, because it’s not being reflected and it’s not being transmittedit’s not being scattered.After Dale and Caitlyn offer up their ideas, Laura returns to Lana for further elaboration on a previously statedexplanation. Although her stated idea (the filter reflects the missing light) differs this time, her reasoning for“because you don’t need blue and purple to make orange” remains the same. Laura publicly acknowledge thisclaim and asked students evaluate it by asking “so what do we think about it…?” (Episode 4-5) Lana’sexplanation that the missing light is reflected is taken up and evaluated in episode 6, where Laura taps studentspreviously established principle that when light reflects, it bounces off objects and into our eyes. After studentsrealize that they do not see blue light being reflected off the orange filter, Laura further emphasizes theimplications of this observation based on their principles, saying, “If it was going to reflect blue, would you seeblue?” The combined effort of first gathering additional (observational) data and the use of previouslyestablished principles leads Assad to deduce that the missing light is absorbed by the filter because “it’s notreflected…transmitted…scattered” (in episode 7).Over the course of the 7 episodes presented above, Laura’s class not only utilizes variety of resourcesto generate candidate explanations, they also critically evaluate them using previously established principles toidentify the relevant disconfirming evidence. Although the teacher instigates the critique of candidateexplanations, students are involved in the joint effort to identify contradictory evidence and offer alternativeexplanations that adhere to their previously established principles. After Assad proposes his candidateexplanation, the classroom continues to work with several colored filters to gather additional supportingICLS 2014 Proceedings59© ISLSevidence for this candidate explanation, bolstering its validity. Later, the class deepens the idea that white lightinteracts with colored filters by absorbing a subcomponent of its total spectrum while letting others transmitthrough by using this same explanation to explain how colored sunglasses work. Through this sense-makingtalk, the students eliminated alternative explanations using evidentiary support and increased the generalizabilityof their current explanation – both critical aspects of epistemic criteria for knowledge building in science.DiscussionThe two cases presented in this paper, both from Laura’s class, exemplify how sense making discussions serveto problematize students’ understanding, thereby engaging students in sophisticated argumentative practices.The first case demonstrates that when discrepancies between students’ current understanding and the observedphenomena are highlighted, students are motivated to engage in investigations to generate a more satisfactoryexplanatory account. The second case illustrates that by drawing attention to evidentiary support for candidateexplanations, students attend to the fit between evidence, alternative explanations, and the disciplinary processesfor moving towards consensus. In both of these cases, the problem-space is not simplified; rather, students areencouraged to offer up a multitude of candidate explanations and supported in sorting through these ideas (seeTable 1 for summary of 2 cases).Table 1: Problematizing as scaffold for motivating investigations and generating explanationsWhat resources areused toproblematize?Are discrepancieshighlighted?Are alternativeexplanationspresented andtested?Scientific practicestudents engage withFunction ofteacher’s discoursemovesCase 1: Problematizing to MotivateInvestigations (Physics 6)Data from investigations (observations)Students’ everyday knowledgePreviously established principles andmodelsYes – between students’ observations andpreviously established principlesCase 2: Problematizing to Build ConsensusExplanations (Physics 11)Data from investigations (observations)Students’ everyday knowledgePreviously established principles andmodelsYes – between candidate explanations andavailable evidenceYes – class puts forth several alternativesbut they are found to be insufficient basedon students’ observationsYes – class draws on data and previouslyestablished principles to eliminatecandidate explanationsEvaluate limitation of existing model orConstruct explanations with evidence;explanation; analyze and interpret data tousing scientific reasoning to show howprovide evidence for phenomenaevidence supports or refutes explanationsDocumenting candidate explanations publicly and marking explanations as objects ofattention; requiring students to reason and justify candidate explanations; drawingattention to the fit between claims and available evidence.Based on existing literature, the patterns of talking in the cases presented here embody the coreprinciples behind how problematizing scaffolds students into the practice of building causal accounts forperplexing phenomena. Whether the class is motivating investigations or building consensus explanations,through the juxtaposition of data, students’ everyday knowledge, and previously established principles andmodels, students are pushed to coordinate this body of knowledge by critiquing and evaluating gaps in theircurrent understanding and to use principles and data as evidentiary support. As a result, students begin to seeinvestigations as opportunities to build stronger explanatory accounts and view the work of constructingconsensus explanations as the process of coordinating claims, evidence, and reasoning for multiple accounts.It is important to note that these two cases were not selected as examples of problematizing scaffolds atwork from the outset of the study. Taking this analytical lens emerged through a thorough analysis of thediscourse from all four 6th grade classes, and by returning to the existing literature to describe the type ofscaffold that was utilized in Laura’s class. Notably, students drew on in similar everyday knowledge, previouslyestablished principles and models, and data from investigations in all of the 4 observed classrooms. It was notsimply drawing on these bodies of knowledge, but rather, identifying gaps and insufficiencies between them thatmoved the students forward in Laura’s class. Identifying these episodes as cases of problematizing emphasizesthe role of scaffolds that go beyond a prescriptive understanding of science argument as claims, evidences, andwarrants. We see students building criteria for evaluating claims organically out of reflecting on theinsufficiency of one’s existing knowledge and understanding the role of science principles and data as resourcesfor constructing increasingly sufficient explanations in Laura’s classroom. The remaining 3 classrooms did notexhibit the consistent tensions born out of noting the explanatory power of different candidate explanations, orhow these explanations differentially accounted for the observed phenomena as was observed in Laura’s class.ICLS 2014 Proceedings60© ISLSSeveral follow up questions are worthy of further inquiry. Are these scaffolds taken up within students’discursive repertoire over time? That is, does Laura take on less of the responsibility, while students takeincreasing ownership over critiquing and evaluating one another’s explanatory claims? Moreover, does thisform of critical and evaluative talk become an integral and spontaneous component of the classroom practice?Identifying additional exemplars of problematizing scaffolds can contribute to the design of social, discursive,and technological tools in ways that do not remove the complexity of the knowledge building work in whichstudents engage (Davis & Miyake, 2004). Furthermore, there is a need to identify other such pedagogical movesthat constitute a problematizing repertoire for teachers.Lastly, the examples presented from Laura’s class provide insight into how to apprentice students intothe scientific practices of arguing to learn, and specifically, integrating evidence-based and everydayexplanations for phenomena. Rather than discounting the everyday accounts that students bring into theclassroom, or relying solely on the data generated from investigations as resources for knowledge building,understanding the disjuncture and connections between these bodies of knowledge can equip teachers with thenecessary probes that encourages students to add, distinguish, and sort out competing candidate explanationsusing evidence and science principles (Linn & Eylon, 2011).ReferencesAchieve. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards. Retrieved from http://www.nextgenscience.org/nextgeneration-science-standardsBerland, L. K., & McNeill, K. L. (2010). A learning progression for scientific argumentation: Understandingstudent work and designing supportive instructional contexts. Science Education, 94(5), 765–793.Buckingham, B.L.E, Ko, M. (2013). Using Classroom Discourse to Account for Differences in the CausalCoherency of Written Explanations. Paper presented at the National Association for Research inScience Teaching, Rio Grande, Puerto Rico, April 6 – 9.Davis, E. A., & Miyake, N. (2004). Explorations of scaffolding in complex classroom systems. The Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 13(3), 265–272.Duschl, R. (2000). Making the nature of science explicit. In Improving science education: The contribution ofresearch (pp. 187–206). Open University Press.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20(4), 399–483.Flyvbjerg, B. (2006). Five Misunderstandings About Case-Study Research. Qualitative Inquiry, 12(2), 219–245.Ko, M. & Reiser, B. J. (2010). Connections, clarity and logistics: science teacher’s enactments of reform-basedscience curricula. Paper presented at the American Education Research Association, Denver, CO, April30 – May 4.Krajcik, J., McNeill, K. L., & Reiser, B. J. (2008). Learning-Goals-Driven Design Model: DevelopingCurriculum Materials that Align with National Standards and Incorporate Project-Based Pedagogy.Science Education, 92(1), 32.Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B.-S. (2011). Science Learning and Instruction: Taking Advantage of Technology toPromote Knowledge Integration (1st ed.). Routledge.McNeill, K. L., Lizotte, D. J., Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. W. (2006). Supporting Students’ Construction ofScientific Explanations by Fading Scaffolds in Instructional Materials. Journal of the LearningSciences, 15(2), 153–191.Michaels, S., O’Connor, C., & Resnick, L. B. (2008). Deliberative discourse idealized and realized:Accountable talk in the classroom and in civic life. Studies in Philosophy and Education, 27(4), 283–297.Osborne, J. F., & Patterson, A. (2011). Scientific argument and explanation: A necessary distinction? ScienceEducation, 95(4), 627–638.Pasley, J. D., Weiss, I. R., Shimkus, E. S., & Smith, P. S. (2004). Looking inside the classroom: Scienceteaching in the United States. Science Educator, 13(1), 1–12.Reiser, B. J. (2004). Scaffolding complex learning: The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing studentwork. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 273–304.Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., & Braaten, M. (2008). Beyond the scientific method: Model-based inquiry as anew paradigm of preference for school science investigations. Science Education, 92(5), 941–967.AcknowledgmentsThe research reported here was supported by the National Science Foundation through Grant ESI-0227557, ESI0439493, ESI-0101780 and DRL 1020316. The opinions expressed are those of the author and do not representviews of the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings61© ISLS