Inexplicable Silence:An Uncomfortable Analysis of the Social SilencesDaniel Steinbock, Keio University, KMD Office, 4-1-1 Hiyoshi, Kohoku-ku 223-8526, Japandaniel@steinbock.orgAbstract: Social silence refers to silences that arise in face-to-face social interaction. Despitehaving a reputation for being nothing at all, close examination of social silence reveals variouskinds of silence, arising under different conditions, playing a variety of roles in the temporalorder of social interaction. What distinguishes one silence from another? For instance, why aresome moments of silence experienced as uncomfortable and others as unremarkable? Here Iintroduce a conceptual framework for describing a variety of social silences, built on the workof conversation analysis and an ethnographic study of silence in the religious practices ofQuakers. A focus on social silence naturally makes the unspoken dimensions of interactionsalient and offers new confirmation for the view that face-to-face learning and communicationare always partly constituted by embodied (non-verbal) actions. The included framework,descriptions and empirical data serve as platform for two theses: 1) calibrating to the acousticenvironment is a basic way that individual behavior is situated in its social context; 2) groupsilence regulates collective attention by directing it to the present moment of socialinteraction.Keywords: social silence, social interaction, embodied practice, conversation analysis,QuakersIntroductionSocial silence refers to silences that arise in face-to-face social interaction. In the West and in the social sciencesgenerally, silence is commonly perceived to be a particular kind of nothing, empty of words and structure,offering no material for attention or analysis. On the other hand, certain kinds of silence in social interaction areroutinely cause for discomfort, embarrassment, and other charged emotions — hardly what we’d expect of‘nothing’ — demonstrating that social silence is, in fact, something and worthy of our attention. This paperoffers a way of distinguishing one silence from another and thus can answer why, for instance, some momentsof silence are experienced as uncomfortable and others as unremarkable.My aim is to describe a few varieties of social silence, with attention to the different situatingconditions in which they arise, take form, and end. I have found this micro-analysis of situated silence helpfulfor understanding the unspoken side of a range of social behavior, including but not limited to public speech,cocktail party conversation, awkward silence, and mystical experience (Steinbock, 2012). An investigation ofsocial silence offers balance against the overwhelming bias towards linguistic phenomena — talk and text — inthe social sciences. As ethnographers of social interaction and speaking have repeatedly asserted, face-to-facelearning and communication are always partly constituted by embodied (non-verbal) practices (Birdwhistell,1970; McDermott, et al., 1978; Goodwin, 2011). Social silence naturally makes these unspoken dimensionssalient, without artificially separating them from the total communicative system (Tannen & Saville-Troike,1985).In these few pages, I offer both the wide view — a way of distinguishing and ordering kinds of socialsilence — and a close look at one culturally-situated practice of silence. First, I introduce a conceptualframework for categorizing different kinds of silence in social interaction, built on the work of conversationanalysis. I then share results from a four year ethnographic study of group silence I conducted in a Quakercommunity. Quakers have practiced deliberate group silence for religious purposes for over three and halfcenturies. In addition to participant-observation, I recorded panoramic video of Quakers’ embodied practice ofgroup silence in situ. These materials provide a basis for discussing the significance of social silence within andbeyond the Quaker context.Social SilenceLike all social phenomena, each silential situation is unique in its particulars. But are there, perhaps, recurrentforms that arise under comparably similar conditions? Here I’ll describe three distinct categories of socialsilence, each having variations that are ‘comfortable’ (situationally-appropriate) or ‘uncomfortable’(situationally-inappropriate): 1) intra-speaker silence, i.e. pauses in individual speech, 2) inter-speaker silence,i.e. gaps between speaker turns in conversation, and (3) group silence. Group silence refers to those seeminglyinexplicable silences, familiar to any casual observer of social life, that occasionally arise in rooms full — nowICLS 2014 Proceedings785© ISLSsuddenly empty — of conversation. Group silence is the least understood of the three forms and thus will earnthe most attention in this paper.This three-fold framework distinguishes silences by the person(s) responsible for producing them.What does it mean to assign ‘responsibility’ for a silence? Unlike talk, spilt milk, and left hooks, silence seemsto be no one’s doing in particular. Although commonsense, this view misconceives silence as meaninglessemptiness. In response, let us examine a number of silences in their social context and take careful account ofwho is responsible.Individual Pause (Intra-speaker Silence)Individual silence refers to breaks in speech while a single speaker ‘has the floor.’ Yet in what sense isindividual silence social? Mark Twain, expounding on the use of silence in public speaking, illustrates how anindividual is not only socially responsible for his own silences, but capable of deploying them with greatcommunicative precision:…the pause — that impressive silence, that eloquent silence, that geometrically progressivesilence which often achieves a desired effect where no combination of words howsoeverfelicitous could accomplish it. The pause is not of much use to the man who is reading from abook because he cannot know what the exact length of it ought to be; he is not the one todetermine the measurement — the audience must do that for him. He must perceive by theirfaces when the pause has reached the proper length… For one audience the pause will beshort, for another a little longer, for another a shade longer still; the performer must vary thelength of the pause to suit the shades of difference between audiences. (Twain & De Voto,1940, p. 226)Twain observes the subtle social contingencies of delivering a single break in public speech, notingthree elements that will be recurrent themes in this paper: 1) mutual attendance between speaker and listeners, 2)attention directed to expressive bodies (faces, in this case), 3) the normative claim that a silence should fit itssocial context. Twain’s main point is that the length of a pause is gauged by keen social awareness of theaudience’s developing reaction. Too short and it won’t have its desired ‘impressive’ effect, beingindistinguishable from an ordinary break between utterances. An over-long silence, on the other hand, may havetoo impressive an effect — an experience terrifyingly familiar to any public speaker who has momentarilyforgotten her speech. In other words, when further talk is expected but none is offered, the resulting silence maytake on an uncomfortable hue. Indeed, the impressive effect of a skilled speaker’s dramatic pause may beunderstood as playing deliberately close to the edge of uncomfortable silence — like a tight rope walker flirtingwith danger while we all watch, thrilled and anxious. One can imagine that this mixed emotion is precisely whatTwain’s orator looks for in the faces of his audience.As for who is responsible, in the case of public speech-giving, the orator is the only possible candidate:for any break in speech, he is locked into the position of next-speaker (Sacks & Jefferson, 1995, v.2:521).Generalizing this principle to ordinary conversation, if the next-speaker is determinate (e.g. when someone hasjust been asked a question), that person is responsible for any silence that ensues (Schegloff, 2007, p.19-20). Solong as an individual remains in the position of next-speaker, any silences are her responsibility. The situation isdifferent when there is more than one candidate for next-speaker and we get shared responsibility for silence —inter-speaker silence.Lapses in Conversation (Inter-speaker Silence)The field of conversation analysis, closely associated with the work of Harvey Sacks and Erving Goffman,pioneered the identification of 'rules' that implicitly govern the formal organization of conversational turn-takingand interaction rituals (Sacks, Schegloff & Jefferson, 1974; Goffman, 1967). According to Sacks and hiscollaborators, conversation is, properly speaking, no more than one person talking and no less than one persontalking. Now we all know that everyday conversation is full of lulls, interruptions, and overlaps. What Sacks’definition does is establish the unremarkable norm against which gaps and overlaps can be seen as accountabledeviations.Talk can be continuous or discontinuous. It is continuous when, for a sequence of transitionrelevance places, it continues (by another speaker, or by the same continuing) across atransition-relevance place, with a minimization of gap and overlap. Discontinuities occurwhen, at some transition-relevance place, a current speaker has stopped, no speaker starts (orcontinues), and the ensuing space of non-talk constitutes itself as more than a gap — not agap, but a lapse… (Sacks, Schegloff & Jefferson, 1974) [emphasis mine]ICLS 2014 Proceedings786© ISLSAs Sacks and colleagues suggest, accountable silences enter conversation as lapses, for they go againstthe expected norm of continuous talk — expected, at least, by members of Anglo-American culture. When aninterstitial gap is over-long and no speaker takes the floor, it is transformed from an unnoticed structural markerinto an acutely accountable moment lodged in the foreground of awareness — uncomfortable silence(McLaughlin & Cody, 1982). Case in point: the silence that falls between two people who have just met at acocktail party (that canonical laboratory for social interaction and self-presentation). If a moment should arisewhen newly acquainted persons run out of supplies for conversational material and a shared silence emerges, itmay be construed as an embarrassed or awkward silence, the embarrassment springing from conversationalists’mutually visible inability to keep to the expected ‘rule’ of continuous talk.Undue lulls come to be potential signs of having nothing in common, or of being insufficientlyself-possessed to create something to say, and hence must be avoided. (Goffman, 1967, p. 36)Once individuals enter a conversation they are obliged to continue it until they have the kindof basis for withdrawing that will neutralize the potentially offensive implications of takingleave of others. While engaged in the interaction it will be necessary for them to have subjectsat hand to talk about that fit the occasion and yet provide content enough to keep the talkgoing; in other words, safe supplies are needed. What we call “small talk” serves this purpose.When individuals use up their small talk, they find themselves officially lodged in a state oftalk but with nothing to talk about; interaction-consciousness experienced as a “painfulsilence” is the typical consequence. (Goffman, 1967, p. 120)Given its direct conflict with the implicit ‘rules’ of conversational turn-taking, it is no wonder thatsilence has come to have uncomfortable connotations. It evidences failure in communications — a breakdown inthe otherwise continuous flow of talk. Discontinuities are often hastily masked or repaired by noise-making ormeaningless filler talk: coughing, “ok, so...”, “anyway...” (McLaughlin & Cody, 1982; Newman, 1982).Perhaps, like the author, one may take the uncomfortable quiet itself as a conversation topic to banish thesilence.Group SilenceGroup silence is the least understood of the three silences discussed in this paper, partly because it transcendsthe boundaries of a single conversational turn-taking system, and so has not been a unit of analysis forconversation analysts. Yet any casual observer of social life has noticed these seemingly inexplicable quietingsin a room full of parallel conversations, such as at a cocktail party. Suddenly the room is quieter than it was amoment earlier. Speakers' voices drop in volume or cease altogether. For a fleeting moment, the socialboundaries between conversational huddles weaken or dissolve, and those present are drawn into one of themost transient of social organizations: group silence.Who is responsible for such a silence? Unlike the previous silences, where responsibility lies with thecandidate(s) for next-speaker, group silence appears to be an emergent social phenomenon, irreducible toparticular persons who are or are not speaking. Also, whereas the previous silences are discrete — present or notpresent —group silence has variable magnitude: the proportion of present persons who are participating in itsperformance. The limit case, when all talk momentarily ceases, can only be understood as a collaborativeachievement, for such a state of quiet requires the participation of everyone present; even a single nonconformer prevents the achievement.Group silence cannot be explained by simple logical extension of conversation and discourse analysisfor it passes beyond the analytic territory of these tools. What material explanation can account for groupsilences arising? That is, by what means are present persons synchronizing their sound-making behavior despitegiving no indication that their attentions are oriented to anything other than their private conversations? In orderto establish empirical ground on which to propose answers to these questions, I present the followingethnographic data, drawn from a study on group silence I conducted within a Quaker community. Thesematerials offer insight into how such silences unfold in realtime and why we must attend to the embodiedpractice of group silence in order to adequately explain it. After analyzing group silence in the Quaker context, Iwill return to the topic of group silence in general.Ethnographic Study of Quaker SilenceStudy Setting and MethodsIn order to investigate social silence ethnographically, I sought out naturalistic laboratories where silencesroutinely arise in the social soundscape. I marginalized myself at social gatherings in order to listen to the wholeroom at once. I let silences enter my conversations with others in order to (tactlessly) observe the consequences.The community that became the eventual focus of my research has made group silence their central religiousICLS 2014 Proceedings787© ISLSactivity for over three-and-a-half centuries. The Religious Society of Friends, commonly known as Quakers,gather regularly for practices known as ‘Meeting for Worship’ and ‘Worship Sharing,’ where participants sit ina circle, in deliberate silence, for religious contemplation. Silent worship is punctuated by brief, spontaneousspeech acts, known as ‘ministry,’ where participants share, if inwardly moved, insights that have just occurredto them in the silence.I conducted a four year ethnographic study of Pacific Friends Meeting, an established Quakercommunity on the West coast of the United States. The primary method was participant-observation in allaspects of community life: religious, social, and committee gatherings. In the final stage of research, I capturedthe first-ever video recordings of Quaker worship. This video study was designed to capture the embodiedpractice of group silence in fine detail. By combining participant-observation with software-based videoanalysis, I was able to verify key ethnographic findings with video evidence. The present paper offers a glimpseof this data diversity in a highly abbreviated form. For the whole picture, see (Steinbock, 2012).The video study was conducted over a six week period in weekly 90-minute sessions. I used a 360degree panoramic video camera to record groups of Quakers practicing ‘worship sharing,’ with groups rangingin size from six to thirteen participants, most attending multiple sessions. Due to the unusually specific nature ofthe data, I wrote custom software to analyze the video using computer vision and modeling techniques.Movement detection algorithms identified who was moving at any particular instant and the magnitude of theirmovement from one frame to the next (1152 x 320 pixel resolution, 15 frames per second). Counter-intuitively,this visual data turned out to be more representative of the perceivable soundscape of group silence than thecorresponding audio data. A video camera is a more sensitive detector of the nearly inaudible, small bodymovements that characterize Quaker silence, whereas a microphone is unable to distinguish such tiny soundsfrom background noise. More importantly, the video image locates the movement (and thus the sound) preciselyin space, so that I could justifiably assign responsibility to a specific participant (see Figure 1, showing Quakers’bodies delimited for movement analysis). On this basis, the structure and timing of participants’ movementsound and stillness-silence was precisely mapped and measured.Figure 1. A frame of panoramic video shows Quakers practicing group silence.Embodied Practice of Quaker Group SilenceOver the course of four years participating in Quaker silent worship, I listened to the soundscape of thisculturally-situated social silence and observed the embodied behaviors that constitute it. In result, I identifiedfive distinct ways that Quakers ‘do’ silence (Steinbock, 2012). Three occur during the formal practice ofworship, which I termed settling, ministering, and gathering silence. The remaining two, arriving andintegrating, appear immediately before and after formal worship, respectively. I focus on settling silence in thispaper for it illustrates the underlying embodied order for all the Quaker silences.When Quaker worship officially begins and participants settle into deliberate silence, the roombecomes much quieter than it was a moment earlier. Relative to its former clamor, the room is utterly silent.And yet, the disappearance of noise from the room makes it possible to hear what ‘silence’ actually consists of:the tiny sounds of movements that living bodies make (shifting posture, sighing, scratching, sniffling, and soon). Though ever-present, these sounds go unnoticed under the covering scuffle of ordinary activity and talk.But when silence falls over a Quaker gathering, these sounds become salient. We could say that the practice ofgroup silence ‘re-calibrates’ auditory perception such that quiet body sounds become accountable, noticeableevents. As I will attempt to show, by becoming accountable, they become consequential, modifying the socialinteraction field in observable ways.Given the inevitable noises produced by embodied beings, what sort of soundscape should we expect tofind in the silence of Quaker worship? Presumably individuals cough, sniffle and fidget on their ownphysiological schedules, so we would expect to find a more-or-less uniform distribution of individual soundmaking against a silent background, sometimes a little louder or softer, as chance would have independentphysiologies align in time.ICLS 2014 Proceedings788© ISLSThis is a reasonable expectation but it is not to be found in the Quaker silence. Instead, individualbody-sounds arise in definite group formation, clustered together in time, and separated by long gulfs of quiet.One person’s cough, for instance, is almost inevitably accompanied by a cascade of sounds from severalindividuals around the room. After the cascade has run its course, the soundscape returns to prolonged quietude,that is, before another ‘wave’ of sound inevitably emerges. This ebb and flow pattern of embodied synchrony(Condon & Ogston, 1966) was consistently observed across different days and participants. A similar cascadepattern was observed among British Quakers (Dandelion, 1996), though only in connection to overt causes likethe arrival of latecomers. When I attended to the soundscape of silence itself over scores of sessions, waves ofspontaneous, synchronized, embodied sound and silence proved to be the defining feature. These observationswere confirmed by quantitative analysis of movement in my video study of Quakers practicing group silence.See Table 1, showing movement events detected across all six 90-minute sessions, according to the number ofpeople synchronously moving at the same time (event size). The data show that Quakers tend to move together,i.e. it is relatively rare for a single person to move without others following suit. Averaged across all sessions,Quakers moved together 88.5% of the time, lending quantitative support for the ethnographically-observedfinding.Table 1: Synchronous movement events detected in all video-recorded sessions of Quaker worship, sorted byevent size. (Size is the number of participants moving synchronously (within 6 seconds of each other), from 1 toN. Bottom row shows the percentage of movement events where more than one person participated.)Event	  Size	  (#	  of	  participants)	  1	  	  2	  	  3	  	  4	  	  5	  	  6	  	  7	  	  8	  	  9	  	  10	  	  11	  	  12	  	  13	  	  Total	  	  Total	  >	  size	  1	  	  Percent	  of	  events	  >	  size	  1	  	  Session	  1	  (N=8)	  	  14	  	  22	  	  15	  	  20	  	  5	  	  11	  	  4	  	  4	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  95	  	  81	  	  Session	  2	  (N=11)	  	  12	  	  12	  	  12	  	  6	  	  9	  	  13	  	  4	  	  4	  	  2	  	  3	  0	  	  	  	  77	  	  65	  	  Session	  3	  (N=13)	  	  6	  	  3	  	  3	  	  6	  	  5	  	  1	  	  1	  	  2	  	  0	  1	  1	  	  5	  	  0	  	  34	  	  28	  	  Session	  4	  (N=12)	  	  1	  	  1	  	  2	  	  2	  	  6	  	  4	  	  4	  	  3	  	  1	  5	  3	  	  0	  	  	  	  32	  	  31	  	  Session	  5	  (N=6)	  	  8	  	  8	  	  12	  	  16	  	  8	  	  14	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  66	  	  58	  	  Session	  6	  (N=13)	  	  2	  	  1	  	  4	  	  6	  	  4	  	  7	  	  4	  2	  2	  1	  2	  2	  0	  37	  	  35	  	  0.85	  	  0.84	  	  0.82	  	  0.97	  	  0.88	  	  0.95	  	  Calibrating to the Social-Acoustic EnvironmentIn the deep quiet of Quaker worship, a sound as subtle as a scratch or as overt as a cough transforms the socialacoustic environment from one where a norm of quietude holds sway to one where a little sound is permitted.The initial transgression provides ‘cover’ for others to follow with apparently lower social cost, analogous to the‘broken windows’ theory of social norms (Keizer, et al., 2008). In turn, the sound contributions of additionalparticipants further transform the norm, making it even more permissive, and resulting in the cascade of sounddescribed above. As participants come to complete their posture changes, coughs, etc., silence once again settlesover the room, and this event, too, becomes something people normatively join in with. These dynamics couldbe described as complementary feedback loops, as seen in autopoietic complex systems (Maturana et al, 1973).The synchrony of Quakers’ sounds and silences illustrates a key idea: calibrating to the social-acousticenvironment is a basic way individual behavior is situated in its social context. Furthermore, the acousticenvironment is not an external given; everyone present co-participates in its creation. In this way, the groupcontinuously negotiates a working consensus as to the appropriate volume level for sound-making behavior.Thus is seen the difference between the official rules for culturally-appropriate behavior in a situation (e.g.Quakers worship in silence) and the actual practice of persons participating in contingent interaction, sharing theresponsibility of co-determining what constitutes appropriate behavior at any given moment.Given such precise synchrony in the Quaker practice of silence, we might go looking for thecommunications medium individuals use to announce their respective plans of action and work to agree on whatthe consensus will be at any given moment. Scholars have repeatedly shown the multiplex communicativeICLS 2014 Proceedings789© ISLSpower of embodiment in orchestrating realtime collaborative action (Schütz, 1951; Birdwhistell, 1970;McDermott, et al., 1978; Goodwin, 2011). In the Quaker case, we can say that the embodied practice of silenceis the communications medium in that deliberate group silence establishes an environment in which the socialorder can be co-managed by the subtle bodily manipulation of sound and silence.Is the embodied synchrony of Quakers merely an epiphenomenon of unconsciously negotiating a socialbehavior norm or it is possible that it plays a functional part in their purposeful practice? At the very least,Quakers’ synchronized sounds and silences imply they are more aware of each others’ bodily presence thantheir closed-eyed meditations might otherwise suggest. This inference was affirmed by study participants whenthey described how they experienced silence during worship. They spoke in various ways of the supportive rolethat the presence of others played in their personal meditative practice, specifically calling out bodily soundsand silences as reminders to focus on the group activity of worship:In both Quaker contexts and in Buddhist contexts, I’ve experienced the much greater power ofa group sitting together, worshipping or meditating as the case may be. There’s just somethingabout having a hundred people together in the room just being together in silence. (Sasha, 11Oct-2010)I am attuned to social cues of movement and body language — shifts in posture that speak ofyour restless searching, as my body says the same to you. I hear you with more than myears… These social cues of the presence of others in worship — the rustles, breathing, coughs— remind me that I am not alone, that you are here too. (August, 10-Apr-2011)We can begin to see what the bodily awareness of others affords to Quaker participants. Body soundsin close proximity remind the meditator that he or she is not alone and is gathered with others for thecollaborative task at hand: group religious contemplation. Recall that the soundscape to which participants arereferring when they speak of the reminding power of body sounds has a particular temporal structure, i.e. thevery shape of a recurrent reminder, repeatedly calling participants back to the meditation by re-asserting theembodied presence of others. Here lies the link between the social practice of group silence and thepsychological process of meditation.[W]hat’s different between an individual experience of prayer I have and one I have inMeeting for Worship is that there is an awareness of everyone else’s intentionality… we’rethere with the same or very similar intentions and that brings the experience a certain power.But with that also comes a responsibility… that I’m there too and I need to be aware of whyI’m there and keep coming back to it. It’s okay if for a minute I get distracted by somethingthat comes into my head, but out of that shared intentionality for the group comes this desirefor me to really stay focused in a way that I find difficult… to be mindful for the group, who’salso supporting me through their same intentionality as we all do this collective worshiptogether. (Thomas, 11-Oct-2010)Quaker silence is the sound of many people meditating in close proximity. While a person meditatingalone may be prone to distraction, Quaker silence provides an acoustic environment that recurrently renewsone’s intentionality. If the rustling of others reminds the meditator that he or she is not alone and is gatheredwith others for a shared purpose, the ensuing silence symbolizes that purpose: attention to the felt presence ofimmediate experience, the present moment. Thus the social-acoustic dynamics of group silence are linked to thepurposeful psycho-spiritual practices of those present. With the passing of each wave of body sound,participants gain the recurrent experience of a lasting silence settling over the room, reminding them of whythey are gathered.The Vietnamese Buddhist teacher, Thich Nhat Hahn, writes about how in his tradition thereare temple bells that chime, and hearing them, people are encouraged to pause and think tothemselves: “Listen, listen. This wonderful sound calls me back to my true self.” And hepoints out that in Western societies we don’t have so many temple bells that we can heareasily… In Friends Meetings, we worship in silence, and it’s the silence that calls me back tomy true self. (Andrew, 25-Oct-2010)In summary, as Quakers calibrate their sound-making behavior to the local environment, moments arerepeatedly organized for silence to become contagious. Participants are reminded to direct their attention to thepresent that silence exposes: people gathered together, alive to each other and an unfolding group experience.For Quakers and other contemplative practitioners, attention to the present is a practice for generating insight;by exposing the habitual patterns of mind that carry attention away from the present, insight emerges. Overtime, distraction may decrease as the mind settles on the present. Over the course of a single Quaker worshipICLS 2014 Proceedings790© ISLSsession, recurrent silence settles the congregation into more stable, longer-lasting periods of quiet. Only fromthese deeply quiet times can the other two silences of Quaker practice, ministering and gathering, emerge(Steinbock, 2012).An Explanation for Inexplicable Group SilenceTwo key insights have emerged from the preceding discussion: 1) Calibrating to the social-acoustic environmentis a basic way that individual behavior is situated in its social context. 2) Group silence directs collectiveattention to the present moment. Now we’re in a position to return to the canonical cocktail party and see both ofthese principles at work in the everyday phenomenon of spontaneous group silence. I’ll describe three kinds ofgroup silence in turn, each produced by the interaction of these two principles. All three are potential groundsfor discomfort.The first group silence has an obvious environmental cause. In any social setting, the social-acousticenvironment determines an appropriate volume range for talk and other sound-making. This has both social andpragmatic factors. One must speak loud enough to be heard by one’s interlocutors but not so loud as to exposeone’s talk beyond its intended audience. Appropriate speaking volume depends entirely on acoustic context: arock concert will differ from an art museum. Furthermore, contexts are acoustically dynamic, requiringcorrespondingly dynamic responses from participants: at a party, when the background music suddenly goessilent, speakers instantly drop their voices in adaptation. Someone who fails to do so is inadvertently thrust ‘onstage’ as their talk is exposed to a suddenly expanded audience. To be thus caught out of tune with theenvironment may be cause for embarrassment. Such is the importance of staying both socially and acousticallycalibrated to the immediate context.The second group silence has no obvious warrant and so people must go looking for it. As discussedearly in this paper, the implicit rule of conversation is to maintain continuous talk. At a party, where manyconversations are ongoing in parallel, clamor is the norm and silence a deviation for which warrant must bepresent. If, while one is speaking, other speakers in the room go quiet for no apparent reason, the appropriatelycalibrated response is to follow suit. This adds further power to the signal that stimulated the response. Whereasa change in background music is an external cause for social silence, here the operant signal is the sound ofsilence itself. Those present may momentarily turn away from the members of their conversation and lookaround in search of warrant for the silence: perhaps the birthday cake is being carried into the room. When theinexplicableness is resolved by an object or outlet for collective attention, we can say the group silence isindexical: it calls attention to something. This is a useful silence, a signal for collecting and directing groupattention, just as we saw in Quaker silence.The contagious and functional qualities of indexical group silence may indicate its evolutionary roots.Several animal species signal alarm to their mates through silence and motionlessness (Dapper, et al., 2011;Pereira et al., 2012). Joining in with group silence also corresponds to the contagious human behavior of grouplooking (Milgram, Bickman & Berkowitz, 1969), where there’s generally good reason to look where a group ofothers are looking: something dangerous or delicious this way comes.The third and final kind of group silence is seemingly inexplicable: the case where no warrant is found.Spontaneous silences may emerge, for instance, when inter-speaker silences coincidentally align across differentconversations, creating the impression of a warranted indexical silence. As above, conversations momentarilydrop in volume or cease altogether. The acoustic boundaries between different conversations weaken or breakdown altogether, making it difficult to speak for one’s intended audience alone, and further adding to thetendency toward not speaking. Drawn together into a shared awareness of their mutual silence, the group castsabout for an object or outlet for its now-gathered attention. Something is expected but nothing is happening.Painful associations with past conversational lapses may be triggered, except this silence is multiplied by N.Participants are now caught in a state from which it is difficult to escape: any utterance or overt bodysound/gesture produced in such a quiet environment will instantly become the outlet for pent-up attention,exposed on stage to a greatly expanded audience and to greater risk for embarrassment. Thus bodies tend tofreeze into motionlessness as voices fall quiet, everyone waiting to discover who will break the silence.(Classroom teachers are intimately familiar with a similar situation, when a question put to students is answeredwith silent, collective fear of taking the floor.)Fortunately for party-goers, repair is usually forthcoming, but not through individual heroics. AQuaker-like wave of synchronous noise or utterance is enough to pull everyone back into the comforting din ofsmall talk. In practice, a momentary group silence may be uncomfortably obvious or so brief as to beunnoticeable. In fact, upon inspection, the soundscapes of social gatherings always contain brief, spontaneousgroup silences that exhibit the dynamics described above. This only goes to show how sensitive and responsivepeople are to their social-acoustic environments. That extreme instances occasionally rise to the level ofconscious discomfort should not be taken as evidence of communicative failure, but rather as dazzling displaysof social awareness and collective action.ICLS 2014 Proceedings791© ISLSConclusionCalibrating to the social-acoustic environment is a basic way individual behavior is situated in its social context.With intra-speaker silence, we learned that an effective dramatic pause is performed by sensitivity to theaudience’s embodied social cues. With inter-speaker silence, we learned that turn-taking conversationalists aimto keep talk continuous, with a minimum of gap and overlap; this, too, is achieved by sensing the embodied cuesof others to anticipate the timing of their utterances. With group silence, we found a medium for collectinggroup attention, which serves Quakers’ contemplative purposes but may be cause for discomfort in someeveryday social settings.Future research could make a fruitful study of social soundscapes, particularly to examine howembodied synchronies of sound and silence show up outside the Quaker context. I have observed, for instance,that speakers in adjacent conversations unconsciously synchronize the cadence of their utterances and silences,especially when intimate subjects are being discussed, to collaboratively maintain mutual privacy.Social silence is an underappreciated element of everyday social interaction that deserves widerawareness, by both scholars and everyday conversationalists. Like laughter and applause, silence is a mediumfor sharing embodied experience: it says something important, without words, about the situation in which itoccurs. Perhaps the next time you find yourself in a group where an inexplicable silence is arising, the sense thatyou are falling into an uncomfortable void may be replaced by the sense that you have fallen into a moreintimate relationship with the people around you — something worthy of appreciation.ReferencesBirdwhistell, R. L. (1970). Kinesics and context: essays on body motion communication. Philadelphia:University of Pennsylvania Press.Condon, W. S., Ogston, W. D. (1966). Sound Film Analysis of Normal and Pathological Behavior Patterns.Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 143(4): 338-347.Dandelion, P. (1996). A Sociological Analysis of the Theology of Quakers: The Silent Revolution. Lampeter,UK: Edwin Mellen Press.Dapper, A.L., Baugh, A.T., Ryan, M.J. (2011). The Sounds of Silence as an Alarm Cue in Túngara Frogs,Physalaemus pustulosus. Biotropica. 43(3): 380–385.Goffman, E. (1967). Interaction Ritual: Essays on Face-to-Face Behavior. New York: Doubleday.Goodwin, C. (2011). Contextures of action. In J. Streeck, C. Goodwin & C.D. LeBaron (Eds.), EmbodiedInteraction: Language and body in the material world. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Keizer, K., Lindenberg, S., Steg, L. (2008). The Spreading of Disorder. Science, 322(5908): 1681-1685.Maturana, H. & Varela, F. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition: the Realization of the Living. In Robert S. Cohenand Marx W. Wartofsky (Eds.), Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 42. Dordecht: D. ReidelPub. Co.McDermott, R.P., Gospodinoff, K., Aron, J. (1978). Criteria for an ethnographically adequate description ofconcerted activities and their contexts. Semiotica, 24(3-4): 245-75.McLaughlin, M. & Cody, M. (1982). Awkward silences: Behavioral antecedents and consequences of theconversational lapse. Human Communication Research, 8(4): 299-316.Milgram, S., Bickman, L. Berkowitz, L. (1969). Note on the drawing power of crowds of different size. Journalof Personality and Social Psychology, 13(2): 79-82.Newman, H. M. (1982). The sounds of silence in communicative encounters. Communication Qtly., 30(2): 142149.Pereira, A.G., Cruz, A., Lima, S.Q., Moita, M.A. (2012). Silence resulting from the cessation of movementsignals danger. Current Biology, 22(16): R627-R628.Sacks, H., & Jefferson, G. (1995). Lectures on conversation. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.Sacks, H., Schegloff, E.A., Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking forconversation. Language 15(4): 696-735.Schegloff, E.A. (2007). Sequence	  Organization	  in	  Interaction.	  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Schütz, A. (1951). Making Music Together: A Study in Social Relationship. Social Research. 18(1): 76-97.Steinbock, D. (2012). Making Silence Together: Collaboration in the silent gatherings of Quakers. (DoctoralDissertation). Retrieved from www.steinbock.org/pubs/steinbock_dissertation.pdf‎Tannen, D., & Saville-Troike, M. (1985). Perspectives on silence. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex Pub. Corp.Twain, M. & De Voto, B.A. (1940). Mark Twain in eruption: hitherto unpublished pages about men and events.New York: Harper.AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by an NSF grant (NSF#0354453) to the LIFE Science of Learning Center. Thanks toHiroki Oura for comments on an early draft of this material.ICLS 2014 Proceedings792© ISLS