A Tale of Two Worlds: Using Bifocal Modeling to Find and Resolve“Discrepant Events” Between Physical Experiments and VirtualModels in BiologyTamar Fuhrmann, Shima Salehi and Paulo BliksteinTransformative Learning Technologies Lab, Stanford University, 520 Galvez Mall, CERAS 232, CA, USA.tamarrf@gmail.com, salehi@stanford.edu, paulob@stanford.eduAbstract: In this paper we demonstrate an approach to supporting students’ engagement incombined physical experimentation and virtual modeling. We present a study that utilizes ascientific inquiry framework which links students’ physical experimentation with their use ofcomputer modeling in real time, which we call “Bifocal Modeling.” In the case of the BifocalModeling activities discussed here, a group of high-school students designed computer modelsof bacterial growth through reference to a physical experiment they were conducting, and theywere able to validate the effectiveness of their model against the results from their experiment.Our findings suggests that as students compare their virtual models with physical experiments,they encounter “discrepant events” that contradict their existing conceptions and elicit adisequilibrium. This experience of conflict encourages students to further examine their ideasand hypothesis, seek more accurate explanations of the observed natural phenomena,improving the design of their computer models.IntroductionIn recent years virtual experimentation has received increasing emphasis as an alternative to conductingexperiments in a physical environment. Much of the research in this area has focused on the question of theadvantages of virtual experiments over physical experimentation (Jaakkola & Nurmi, 2008; Klahr et al., 2007),but more recently researchers have started to examine the effects of combining the virtual and physicalmodalities (Zacharia et al., 2008; Jaakkola et al., 2011; Liu, 2006). Additionally, studies report that alternationbetween these distinct experimental modalities in the course of individual experiments can often improvelearning outcomes (Zacharia, 2012; Smith, 2010; Gire et al., 2010). Zacharia and colleagues (2008, 2012)suggested that the best way to develop a framework portraying the optimal combinations of physical and virtualmanipulation is to employ the learning objectives of each experiment as the criteria for blending them.Nevertheless, there are two under researched areas in this literature. The first is that most of the virtualexperiments were simulated versions of a physical experiment, often mimicking the appearance of the labequipment, with the goal of trying to make the physical and virtual experiments as similar as possible (Blikstein,2014). The second is that the research has mostly focused on predesigned physical and virtual experimentation.Simulation tools have been among the preferred means for providing environments for virtual experiments, butthe rules and models behind these simulations often remain hidden from the students. Recent advances ininquiry learning research have sought to implement activities in which virtual experimentation is supplementedby opportunities to design computer models (Mulder et al., 2011), and the aim of our work is to examine thelearning outcomes of designing these computer models that are explicitly meant to be different than the physicalones, in order to promote students’ critical stance towards their own models and hypothesis. The creation andcritical evaluation of models are important components of scientific practice which have been increasinglyrecognized as a valued educational goal (Levy & Wilensky, 2008; Blikstein, 2010). Predesigned models canscaffold and direct students to attend to relevant aspects of a phenomenon, but they do not offer studentsopportunities to externalize and debug their models, or to evaluate their assumptions and their limitations.Bifocal Modeling (Blikstein et. al., 2012; Blikstein, 2010, 2014) is an approach to inquiry-drivenscience learning that challenges students to design and compare in real time physical and virtual models in orderto identify their respective differences and limitations. In these activities, students explore scientific phenomenasuch as heat diffusion, the properties of gases, and wave propagation by conducting physical experiments,designing virtual models, and connecting the experiments with the models in real time through iterativecomparisons with empirical data. During the physical phase of the process, students design and develop theirphysical experiment, and they run the experiment while collecting data with embedded sensors or a time lapsecamera. Concurrently, they design and develop a virtual model for the same phenomenon, and compare thebehavior of the virtual model with their observations from their physical experiment (figure 1). When theyidentify a discrepancy, students have the opportunity to redesign their models and re-iterate the process.ICLS 2014 Proceedings863© ISLSFigure 1. Two examples of Bifocal Models made by students for gas laws (left) and Newton’s cradle (right)Depending on the nature of the phenomenon, for a bifocal activity, students can use different programminglanguages to implement their virtual models. A common implementation software is NetLogo (Wilensky, 1999),a free, open-source environment for scientific modeling. NetLogo models typically consist of a set ofautonomous agents (such as gas particles or bacteria entities) moving through a virtual world and interacting toproduce emergent outcomes. Students define the variables for both the agents and their worlds, and specify setsof rules for agent-level behavior, such as, “if two gas particles collide, they exchange energy and bounce offeach other.” The students’ goal is to build a model with a behavior that matches or imitates the physical datathey collect. Through the comparison of the design of the virtual model and their experimental data, the studentsengage in the discovery of discrepancies between the results of each modality. Piaget (1985) argued that tofoster conceptual change students must be confronted with “discrepant events” that contradict their conceptionsand invoke a “disequilibration or cognitive conflict”. Following the forms of equilibration in Piaget’s theory,researchers (Hewson, 1988) identified two distinct types of cognitive conﬂicts: the conﬂict between the internaland external worlds of a student’s conception and experiences, and the purely conceptual conﬂict between twodifferent cognitive structures related to the same phenomenon. In our study, we found that when students wereinstructed to design a virtual model that imitates the bacterial growth curve, they used their previously acquiredknowledge about the curve and the physical appearance of the bacteria in the Petri dish as reference patterns toindicate what their model should generate. When the virtual model data did not match the observed data, theywere confronted by the discrepancy between the physical and conceptual worlds which led to the conceptualmismatch between two cognitive structures related to the same phenomenon.Bifocal Modeling FrameworkGiven that Bifocal Modeling comprises many different tools and techniques, there are multiple possibilities forclassroom implementation of each modality. To structure our studies, we divided the physical and the virtualassignments into a sequence of shorter activities (Figure 2):Figure 2. General structure of a Bifocal Modeling activity (Blikstein et al., 2012)a.b.c.Design: Students select research question, plan their observation, generate hypotheses, and designexperiments and virtual models that will potentially confirm them. In designing the virtual model,students define variables, and conceptualize micro-rules or equations to describe the phenomenon.Construct: Students structure both their physical experiment and virtual model.Interact: Students interact with their experiments through direct observation or embeddedsensors/cameras, and interact with their computer models by changing parameters, and recording data.Subject Matter of the Activity: Bacterial GrowthWe chose bacterial growth for their simple cellular structure, rapid reproduction, and complex ecologicaldynamics. The goal was for students to recognize the four distinctive patterns of the bacterial growth curve(Figure 3), understand the variables underlying them, and explain the underlying mechanisms of each stage.Figure 3. Bacterial growth curve over time (the number of cells is in the log scale)ICLS 2014 Proceedings864© ISLSA. Lag phase: Population remains temporarily unchanged; in this phase the bacteria are adjusting to theirnew environment, repressing or inducing enzyme synthesis, and initiating chromosome replication.B. Log phase: Bacteria growth proceeds by the division of bacterium into pairs in a process known as“binary fission.” Exponential growth cannot continue indefinitely because the medium is soon depletedof nutrients, which are replaced by waste products.C. Stationary phase: The population remains constant because the bacterial growth rate is equivalent tothe death rate.D. Death phase: In this final stage, the bacteria have exhausted their nutrients, lose their ability to divide,and die off. As in the rapid growth phase, the decay pattern characterizing the death phase isexponential (1)MethodsAudience and ResourcesThe study was conducted with 13 students (4 females and 9 males) and lasted for a total of three days in auniversity laboratory setting. Students came from a 70% minority high school located in a predominantly Latinourban setting and volunteered for a 4-week, 30 hour/week digital fabrication workshop at a local university. Thisworkshop took place during the school’s intersession, during which all students were required to enroll in amonth-long extracurricular course or internship outside of school. The selection of students was governed by acomplex allocation system developed by the school; consequently, since not all students ended up being able toenroll in their preferred choices, the final group was rather diverse in terms of school achievement. All studentswere videotaped and recorded during all activities, their computer usage was logged with screen-capturesoftware, the researchers conducted informal interviews and kept field notes, and all student notes and sketcheswere saved. The entire data (15 hours of video recordings) was analyzed by the researchers followingtranscriptions. Episodes explicitly showing moments of comparison between the virtual model and the realexperimentation were the focus of this study. In these episodes, in order to reveal the discrepancies, we analyzedthe content and the context of the situations in the videos to identify iterative moments of comparison.Instructional SequenceThe total time designated for the activity was 15 hours, divided across four smaller activities (Figure 4):Figure 4. Bacteria Growth-Bifocal Modeling – the four activities1. Introduction and physical experimentation. After the class was given an introduction to bacterial2.3.growth, the students’ had to grow real bacteria. They prepared a Petri dish with agar and collected abacteria sample from an object likely to be contaminated (e.g., a door knob, keyboard, toilet.). Theywere provided a time-lapse camera to capture images at 30-minute intervals over seven days. Theimages were automatically compiled into a video. In response to time restrictions, we also showed thestudents a video of a bacterial growth experiment conducted previously by the research team in thesame lab with the same toolkit.Web inquiry and presentation. Students were grouped into pairs and asked to make a list of questionsabout bacteria and bacterial growth. They were asked to conduct web research to answer theirquestions, and presented their information to the entire class in short slideshows.Collaborative “whiteboard programming.” Students were divided into three groups, each group with adedicated facilitator from the research team. The task for the groups was to come up with rules thatgovern bacteria growth. First, students listed all variables that they thought would affect bacterialgrowth. Next, the facilitator proposed the iterative building of a block-based “computer” program onthe whiteboard (figure 5), in which the students should generate the main stages in bacterial growth, aswell as account for how each stage would develop, and how the variables would interact. After threehours of “whiteboard modeling,” the groups split, and shared their ideas with two members from theICLS 2014 Proceedings865© ISLS4.other groups in a 45-minute discussion panel. After receiving feedback on their initial ideas frommembers of other groups, the groups reconvened and began programming their virtual experiment inNetLogo.Programming and comparing experiments and virtual models. In this last phase, the facilitator wouldsit before the each group in front of a large television used for displaying code; the facilitator’s rolehere was to “translate” the ideas of the students into NetLogo code. These last three hours of the studywere dedicated to coding the students’ virtual model, and comparing the coding results with the datacollected from the experiment in the Petri dish. Students discussed the results, developed hypothesesfor approaches to the validation of both models, and made changes to the virtual model in order tomake it similar to the real bacterial growth observed in the Petri dish.Figure 5. Physical experiment with time-lapse camera, “whiteboard modeling,” and virtual modelData and DiscussionDuring the unit, students created a whiteboard model; translated the whiteboard rules into a model’sspecifications, “ran” the model to envision how bacteria would multiply according to the model; and comparedthe modeled results with both the observed real Petri dish growth patterns and with the growth curve thestudents generated from the physical data. Finally, students refined the virtual model by adding rules andvariables to address the perceived differences between the model and the experiment. In figure 6, we present achronological list of the additions made by the students in one of the groups (4 students). This group repeatedthis processes a total of four times during the 1.5 hours of the final session (activity four) and, in the process;these students increased the accuracy of the model.Figure 6. Chronological list of the additions made by the students to the model and instances in which they ran itICLS 2014 Proceedings866© ISLSIn what follows, we present three sample episodes that demonstrate this iterative process by one of thegroups. This collection is presented as a representative example of the comparison moments and the discrepancyevents the students encountered during their participation in the activities.Episode # 1: How Do Bacteria Move?ContextIn the first episode, students were in the initial stages of designing their virtual model on the whiteboard. Theydecided to add agents such as bacteria and food, as well as a rule regarding reproduction. However, theyremained uncertain about the mechanism for bacterial motion: do bacteria move at all? Do they move towardfood? Do they move randomly? How do they actually move? Do they recognize one another?Following is students’ design process which we broke down into three phases for the purposes of this analysis:design, observe, and revise.Design Process• Design: as a first step, students made their virtual bacteria reproduce. ‘Running’ this model resulted inexponential growth. Each tick (time step in NetLogo) resulted in an increased bacteria populationconfined to its original location on the virtual Petri dish.• Observe: while corroborating the virtual model with the experiment in the Petri dish, students observeda mismatch; they saw that in the Petri dish, real bacteria colonies did not resemble the virtual coloniesof their model. In the experiment bacteria appear to have a specific and unique growth pattern. They donot grow on top of each other; rather they spread throughout the dish. At this point students askedquestions and sought to explain the phenomenon. How do bacteria’s unique patterns develop?• Revise: students added a new rule to their virtual model, which helped them simulated bacteria movingrandomly over the virtual Petri dish, resulting in colonies that spread across the virtual dish in a patternresembling that of the real dish.Excerpts from the EpisodeStudent 1:Do we know if they move around randomly, though, or –Student 2:How else would they move around?Student 4:Maybe in specific ways that we could understand …Student 1:I guess, like, where they scooted, go toward the food, but it could just do that…Student 2:What makes you think this is fine or not? How do you know?Student 2:I think it doesn't really matter how they move.Instructor:Doesn't really matter, for what?Student 2:What do you mean?Student 1:Like, how do you know it doesn't really matter, you know?Student 2:Well, I mean, they’ll eventually find food by moving randomlyResearcher’s ObservationIn this episode students face a specific conflict while comparing the virtual design results to the real colonies inthe Petri dish; they discovered that bacteria (in the physical Petri dish) do not reproduce in the same location;rather, they migrate. This comparison and observation of the experimental results to the modeling suggested theidea that bacteria do not grow on top of each other. While observing the real Petri dish and confronting themismatch with their virtual modeling results, students discussed possible mechanisms for bacterial motion inorder to debug their model, which, in turn, made them seek explanations for the natural process. The discussionthen progressed to physical mechanisms that might assist bacterial motion (e.g. the bacteria might be flagellateswith whip like cilia at their anterior ends.)Episode # 2: Do Bacteria Have an Infinite Life Cycle?ContextWhile examining and running their virtual model, the students discovered that the bacteria would never die.Students then sought to understand how to make bacteria die by manipulating their food resources. After facingthis discrepancy between what was observed in their virtual modeling as opposed to the physicalexperimentation, they began questioning the issues of bacterial death and life cycle.Following is students’ design process which we broke down into the same three phases.Design Process• Design: students made their virtual bacteria move randomly and reproduce after encountering specificenvironmental conditions (food, water, etc.)ICLS 2014 Proceedings867© ISLS••Observe: It appears that the bacteria in the physical experiment are dying from different causes.Bacteria do not live forever. Students observed that in the Petri dish, the bacteria colony remained thesame size for several days. Additionally, they noticed the bacterial growth curve, which includes adeath phase.Revise: Students added the “food” variable. The corresponding rule is that when food is exhausted,and no new food resources become available, the bacteria die. The new design included bacteria that donot have unlimited lifespans.Excerpts from the Episode:Student 2:Look at the death.Student 1:Death?Student 4:What should happen is that they run out of food.Student 3:Okay. How should we – how should we do that? Can we make some – write someimaginary code for that?Student 2:Made some of the patches disappear [patches in the NetLogo code represent food]Instructor:So can you give me more? Imagine that I’m, like, really like a dumb computer. Youneed to tell me the steps I need to take. Is it, like, when all that is gone, then they alldie?Student 1:The bacteria.Student 4:They slowly die. They still reproduce, but they slowly die.Student 1:Okay. And when is it, like, every tick or…?Student 2:Every ten.Student 3:If all patches – all 100 patches are gone, then bacteria die.Instructor:If all food is gone, then all bacteria die. Okay. Let’s run the model in our heads andthink about how we’re going to do it. So all the food is gone…eventually when theyrun out of food, boom, they die. They all die. That’s the code we have right now.Researcher’s ObservationIn this episode the students explore the significant effect of food resources on the bacteria population. In thisspecific excerpt of the dialog, the students were asked to think of a way to “translate” the role of resources intocode in Netlogo. They use “patches” (2) as “bacteria’s food”, and explained that when all food is gone, thebacteria die.Episode # 3: Is There a Lag Phase in Bacteria Growth Pattern?ContextAt one point after “running” the virtual model, a student observed a mismatch: the growth curve was increasingexponentially from the start. She noted that this finding was incorrect because the real growth curve had aninitial flat “lag phase” before beginning to grow. After a long discussion between group members, the studentsattempted to explain the lag phase of the bacterial growth, which commenced with the inoculation of the Petridish.Following is students’ design process:Design Process• Design: students made their virtual bacteria begin reproducing as soon as they are introduced into thePetri dish.• Observe: In comparing with the physical experiment, students become aware of the lag time thatoccurs before the bacterial reproduction becomes apparent. The students discovered that it takes aboutfive days before they are able to detect a colony on their Petri dish. The growth of the microscopicbacteria remains invisible until the population grows into the millions, at which point the colony hasbecome sufficiently large to be visible. This discovery led the students to realize that specificconditions must be met for bacteria to reproduce.• Revise: Students add variables and rank them so their modeled bacteria will reproduce only underfavorable conditions. For example, if the model’s food value is greater than 10, the bacteria willreproduce. If this value is less than 10, the bacteria will first enter a lag phase.Excerpts from the EpisodeInstructor:What about the, I am asking again because I’m really trying to make a point here,remember they didn’t start like this in the graph? They didn’t just reproduce? … andwe did it like that and we had this phase which they don’t change, … yeah. Whathappen there?ICLS 2014 Proceedings868© ISLSStudent 4:Student 3:Student 2:Student 3:Student 4:Instructor:Student 3:Student 4:Student 2:Student 1:Instructor:Student 2:Instructor:The lag?What is happening? Yeah, what is happening to them, the bacteria in real bacteriadish?Because it takes a while for it to form and like reproduce, as soon as they get the hangof it, they're like, yeah, to make more.So they get used to their, like they get used to their environment.Their place.So how can we do it in program? What do we need to add there?Maybe like a spurt where they're having a bunch of babies and they kind of stophaving babies, then they start having babies again. Have it slowly…Slowly so they won’t start at the beginning?Yeah then they start and then they don’t and then they start.Are you trying to make it like this?How can we turn this idea of the lag phase into a code?I guess we can use a wait about like twenty ticks oh that’s a lot, a lot of wait alike tenticks to get used to the environment so they can just say wait… ten days beforestarting to reproduce?.Good idea.Researcher’s ObservationIt took time for students to realize that there is “lag phase” at the outset of the bacterial growth process. In thereal Petri dish, it took five days before the students observed visible alterations and growth. However, instudents’ initial model bacteria grew and reproduced immediately. After the comparison between their computermodel and the results of both the experiment and a bacterial growth curve, students realized that the initial stageof the physical experiment evidenced no apparent change in bacteria population. This conflict engaged thestudents in rethinking the phenomena they were attempting to model, and it also led them to revise their modelaccording to their observations of the physical experiment. In order to succeed in this task, they had to find anexplanation for the stable phase for inclusion in their virtual model in order to achieve a better correspondencewith their observed results. In the process of generating a virtual model that better emulated the phenomena, thestudents added behavior parameters and behavior sequences in ways that related explicitly to real-worldbehaviors or included real-world constraints. In addition, they conducted similar processes to add the otherrelevant variables to their model.ConclusionThis study demonstrates one of the main elements of the Bifocal Modeling framework: how discrepanciesbetween a virtual model and physical experimentation can be generative. One of the main features of thisframework is the explicit comparison of virtual models designed by students with physical experiment in realtime. Our results suggest that the use of physical experimentation as a reference pattern in the creation andrefinement of the virtual model is effective. In designing a virtual model that recreated the bacterial growthcurve, students used their previously acquired knowledge about the curve and the physical cues of the bacteriacolonies as an initial reference pattern, which indicated what their model should generate. When the modelbehaviors did not match the observed ones, students faced a discrepant event that required resolution (Piaget,1985; Hewson, 1988). This mismatch led to debugging (Papert, 1980) and encouraged students to question theirassumptions, to rethink the results, to consider alternative conceptions. In this process, students were activelyengaged in hypothesis generation and testing. Throughout the entire activity, students acquired specific anddetailed evidence regarding the behavior of bacteria, but the value of this evidence almost exclusively becameapparent to them during their attempt to make their virtual model match their empirical observations. Duringtheir web research and physical experiment, the students took note of the fact that bacteria grow in specificpatterns, do not remain in their original spot, and do not grow indefinitely. All these detailed bits of evidencewould have remained inert knowledge had the students not engaged in “model matching”—and as a result, thestudents acknowledged this evidence opportunely when such knowledge was needed to design a more accuratevirtual model.In addition, without the real-time comparison with the physical model, their virtual model would havecontained a number of misconceptions. Studies report that students are capable of designing correct models(Mulder, 2011), but that they often fail to relate their knowledge of natural events to their models (e.g., Sins,Savelsbergh, & van Joolingen, 2005). This incomplete understanding of the modeling process could presentserious obstacles to learning through modeling. Traditionally, researchers have tried to argue that by makingvirtual models very similar to physical phenomena, and thus backgrounding their differences, learners couldachieve equally in both virtual and physical experimentation. Conversely, we argue that these differences shouldbe foregrounded and made apparent to students, and that combining the virtual and physical modalities andICLS 2014 Proceedings869© ISLSencouraging students to look for mismatches offers a promising way to make learning with models moreeffective.What is more, the process of model comparison encouraged the students to become engaged in thediscovery of “discrepant events” in a manner that is congruent with scientific professional practice. Students’desire to “fix” their models developed spontaneously throughout the activity. Even though we acknowledge thatfurther research is needed to fully validate our framework, the data seems to suggest that the main feature ofBifocal Modeling—real-time model comparison—was an effective in the generation of model debuggingmoments that engaged students in rich, agentive, and generative intellectual work.Endnotes(1) All phases can be slowed down by lowering the temperature – leaving the culture at an optimum temperature for growthover long periods will simply accelerate the death of the culture. Most dead bacteria cells closely resemble living cells,so a normal appearance of a colony on the Petri dish is no indication that its cells are actually alive.(2) The NetLogo world is a two dimensional world that is made up of “turtles” (moveable agents) and patches (stationaryagents). The patches are the “ground” over which the turtles move.ReferencesBlikstein, P. (2010). Connecting the science classroom and tangible interfaces: the Bifocal Modeling framework.In K. Gomez, L. Lyons, & J. Radinsky (Eds.), Learning in the Disciplines: Proceedings of the 9thInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2010) (pp. 128-130). University of Illinois atChicago: International Society of the Learning Sciences: Chicago, IL.Blikstein, P., Fuhrmann, T., Greene, D., & Salehi, S. (2012). Bifocal modeling: mixing real and virtual labs foradvanced science learning. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Designand Children (pp. 296-299). ACM.Blikstein, P. (2014). Bifocal Modeling: Promoting Authentic Scientific Inquiry Through Exploring andComparing Real and Ideal Systems Linked in Real-Time. In A. Nijholt (Ed.), Playful User Interfaces(pp. 317-352): Springer Singapore.Gire, E., Carmichael, A., Chini, J. J., Rouinfar, A., Rebello, S., Smith, G., & Puntambekar, S. (2010). TheEffects of Physical and Virtual Manipulatives on Students’ Conceptual Learning about Pulleys. In K.Gomez, L. Lyons, & J. Radinsky (Eds.), Learning in the Disciplines: Proceedings of the 9thInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2010) (pp. 937-943). University of Illinois atChicago: International Society of the Learning Sciences: Chicago, IL.Hewson, P., & Hewson, M. (1984). The role of conceptual conflict in conceptual change and the design ofscience instruction Instructional Science 13 (1), American Journal of Physics, Vol. 71, 618-29.Jaakkola, T., Nurmi, S., & Veermans, K. (2011). A comparison of students' conceptual understanding of electriccircuits in simulation only and simulation-­‐laboratory contexts. Journal of research in scienceteaching, 48(1), 71-93.Klahr, D., Triona, L. M., & Williams, C. (2007). Hands on what? The relative effectiveness of physical versusvirtual materials in an engineering design project by middle school children. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 44(1), 183-203.Liu, X. (2006). Effects of combined hands-on laboratory and computer modeling on student learning of gaslaws: A quasi-experimental study. Journal of Science Education and Technology, vol. 15, 89-100.Levy, S. T., & Wilensky, U. (2008). Inventing a “mid-level” to make ends meet: Reasoning through the levelsof complexity. Cognition and Instruction, 26(1), 1-47.Mulder, Y. G., Lazonder, A. W., & De Jong, T. (2011). Comparing two types of model progression in aninquiry learning environment with modelling facilities. Learning and Instruction, 21, 614-624.Olympiou, G., & Zacharia, Z. C. (2012). Blending physical and virtual manipulatives: An effort to improvestudents' conceptual understanding through science laboratory experimentation. ScienceEducation, 96(1), 21-47.Piaget, J., (1985). The equilibration of cognitive structures (B. Terrance & K. J. Thampy, Trans.) Chicago,IL:University of Chicago Press.Sins, P., Savelsbergh, E., & Van Joolingen, W. (2005). The Difficult Process of Scientific Modelling: Ananalysis of novices' reasoning during computer based modeling. International Journal of ScienceEducation, 27(14), 1695-1721.Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo [computer software]. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-BasedModeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.Zacharia, Z. C. & Constantinou, C. P. (2008). Comparing the influence of physical and virtual manipulatives inthe context of the Physics by Inquiry curriculum: The case of undergraduate students’ conceptualunderstanding of heat and temperature. American Journal of Physics, 76(4&5), 425-430.ICLS 2014 Proceedings870© ISLS