Using an Adaptive Expertise Lens to Understand the Quality ofTeachers’ Classroom Implementation of Computer-SupportedReform Curricula in High School ScienceSusan Yoon, Jessica Koehler, Joyce Wang, Emma Anderson, University of PennsylvaniaEmail: yoonsa@gse.upenn.edu, jkoehl@gse.upenn.edu, joycew@gse.upenn.edu, ejanderso@gmail.comEric Klopfer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, klopfer@mit.eduAbstract: The exploratory study reported here is part of a larger-scale research project aimedat building theoretical and practical knowledge of complex systems in students and teacherswith the goal of improving high school biology learning. In this paper we propose a model ofadaptive expertise to better understand teachers’ classroom practices. Through three casestudies, we further illustrate the characteristics of adaptive expertise of more or less successfulteaching and learning.Introduction and Framing the IssueThe study of complex systems in the sciences and social sciences has become increasingly essential tounderstanding disciplinary and interdisciplinary content and practices (The National Academies, 2009).Likewise, in education, research on teaching and learning about complex systems has achieved solid groundingas an important field within learning sciences research (Hmelo-Silver & Kafai, 2011). In terms of educationalpolicy and classroom enactment, the study of systems is also featured prominently in the Next GenerationScience Standards (NGSS). Complex systems are generally defined as existing when any given numbers ofinterconnected and interdependent parts interact. The patterns of interactions form a network of relationshipsthat exhibit emergent properties that cannot be observed or decomposed at subsystem levels.Over the last couple of decades, learning sciences researchers have developed valuable resources andcomputational models for learning about complex systems such as StarLogo and NetLogo. However, fewstudies have focused on how best to scaffold the learning experiences for students in classrooms when thecomplex systems resources are expected to be integrated into standard science courses. Many studies insteadhave investigated the efficacy of those resources on learning (e.g., Yoon, 2008; 2011) without fully consideringthe contextual factors, including teacher differences that may be in play when implementing new resources.Because of the situated nature of teachers, classrooms, and schools, teachers’ implementation of projects maydiverge from developers’ intentions in order to fit the learning needs of their contexts (Penuel et al., 2011).Hmelo-Silver & Azevedo (2006) have also pointed out that more research is needed on how to train teachers incomplex systems resources and approaches to better support curricular and instructional experiences.Given the importance of systems in the NGSS, the time is ripe to address these needs for developingteachers’ knowledge and skills. A preliminary question to ask in terms of research design is what theoreticallens might be appropriate for understanding how to in-service teachers, and furthermore, for assessing theefficacy of teacher development. In one prominent line of research focused on understanding technologyintegration, researchers have identified barriers such as teacher beliefs, readiness, and a steep learning curve(e.g., Aldunate & Nussbaum, 2013; Ertmer et al., 2012). Others have discussed the importance of moreexposure to computers (Mueller et al., 2008) or extensive computer training (Pierson et al., 2001). However,none of these studies offer information about or images of teachers who are in the process of becoming expertsin computer-supported curricular integration. Thus, capturing how teachers enact reforms and evaluating theirability to adapt in order to identify levels of expertise can be instructive for teacher training purposes. We arguein this paper, that an adaptive expertise lens can offer support for understanding how teachers are able tonavigate contextual factors (Penuel et al., 2011) while at the same time providing a framework to understand thequality of classroom implementation of computer-supported complex systems reform curricula in high schoolscience. The exploratory study reported here is part of a larger-scale research project aimed at buildingtheoretical and practical knowledge of complex systems in students and teachers with the goal of improvinghigh school biology learning. In this paper we propose a model of adaptive expertise. Through three casestudies, we illustrate the characteristics of adaptive expertise of more or less successful teaching and learning.By doing this research, it is our ultimate goal to contribute to scholarship on practices and training that teachersparticipate in to support complex systems teaching in classrooms.Adaptive ExpertiseImproving high school science teaching in the US has increasingly become a policy and practical imperative.High on the list of reasons are to meet the needs of a STEM-literate workforce (NRC, 2011); to produce betterICLS 2014 Proceedings118© ISLSproblem-solvers (OECD, 2011); and to support better decision-making about issues that can impact students’daily lives (Yoon, 2011). The number of reform-oriented STEM projects are far too numerous and varied todiscuss here. However, the millions of dollars that the National Science Foundation alone pours into researchand development every year for teaching and learning in science attests to the importance of reforming practiceto improve student learning and participation. What many of these programs attempt to do is to build teachingexpertise using new resources, new knowledge, and new skills. At the same time, it is widely known thatsituational issues like socioeconomic stress, lack of adequate resources, and few professional developmentopportunities (PD) (e.g., Ingersoll & May, 2012) make the work of teaching, especially in science, challengingto do. How can teachers successfully balance the calls for reform and the needs to consider their teachingcontexts? A look into the adaptive expertise literature may provide insights into how to do this.There is a robust tradition on the study of expertise in the learning sciences (e.g., Bereiter &Scardamalia, 1993) and teaching (e.g., Berliner, 2001). In our research, we are interested in understanding whatexpertise might look like and how it can be developed with new or reform-oriented curricula and instruction.How to enhance performance on novel problems has been characterized as adaptive expertise (Barnett &Koslowski, 2002; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1993). Adaptive expertise goes beyond simply having more years ofexperience or possessing more knowledge in a content domain. The complex nature of teaching requiresteachers to be able to orchestrate myriad of often unobservable variables, see multiple perspectives, recognizeproblems, and identify possibilities in existing and emergent situations (Bransford et al., 2005; Fairbanks et al.,2010). In other words, teachers need to constantly be adaptive with new or non-routine events. Adaptive expertsactively seek to extend their capabilities and are always working at the edge of their competence. In this way, asBereiter and Scardamalia (1993) suggest, expertise should be understood as a process rather than a state. Thus,searching for qualities that represent what adaptive experts look like necessarily requires us to identify actions.With respect to actions, a review of the literature reveals three important characteristics: flexibility,ability to demonstrate deeper level understanding, and deliberate practice. Berliner (2001) writes that comparedto non-experts, experts are more flexible, opportunistic in their planning, and can change enactments fasterwhen it is appropriate. Adaptive experts flexibly and critically apply their knowledge (Ferrari, 2002) in newsituations (Bransford, 1999) and are constantly learning while doing it (Chi, 2011). Flexibility is also manifestedin teachers’ abilities to integrate aspects of teacher knowledge in relation to the teaching act while responding totheir specific contexts (Tsui, 2009). In terms of the characteristic of deeper level understanding, expertsrepresent problems in qualitatively different ways than novices and can recognize meaningful patterns faster(Berliner, 2001). Routines are automatized, which frees up cognitive load to attend to deeper level problemsolving or other tasks (Bransford, 1999; Hammerness et al., 2005) and allows experts to perform at a higherlevel (Ferrari, 2002; Ericsson et al., 2006). Experts are also recognized by their ability to engage in reflectionand conscious deliberation (Tsui, 2009). They are highly motivated, self-regulated, and constantly seek toimprove performance by identifying problems, addressing them, and finding new problems to work on (Bereiter& Scardamalia 1993; Berliner, 2001; Tsui, 2009).In the next section, we operationalize these descriptions of adaptive expertise by applying them to threecases of teachers we worked with on a project aimed at implementing computer supported complex systemsreform curricula in high school science.MethodologyContextOur NSF-funded project engages teachers and students in learning experiences that build knowledge ofscientific practices using computational models and knowledge in complex systems and biology. The projectentails building a curricular and instructional sequence in five high school biology units. Participants usebiology simulations built on an agent-based modeling platform that combines graphical blocks-basedprogramming with a 3-D game-like interface. We have developed classroom curricular materials that lay out thescope and sequence of two to three day units in each of the biology topics and constructed PD experiencesduring the summer and school year to support teachers’ implementation of the project. All project activities areunderpinned by a complex systems curriculum and instruction framework that includes: i) curricular relevancein 21st century needs, standards alignment, and collaboration between researchers and teachers; ii) cognitivelyrich pedagogies instantiated in social constructivist strategies such as argumentation and constructionist learningfor building computational models; iii) tools for teaching and learning including agent-based computer modelsand student and teacher curricular guides; and iv) content expertise in complex systems, biology, andcomputational thinking (see Yoon et al., 2013). Teachers are expected to integrate project units into their regularBiology curricula throughout the year. During the implementation, teachers have access to project facilitatorswho assist them in their classrooms; they also have access to other teachers in the project community through ashared online resource tool and periodic face-to-face Saturday PD meetings. The data reported here are from thefirst pilot year of the project’s implementation from 2011–2012.ICLS 2014 Proceedings119© ISLSCase Study Methodology, Participants, and Data SourcesSince the goal of this exploratory research is to provide a model that defines and illustrates characteristics ofadaptive expertise, we have chosen a case study methodology to provide rich descriptions of enactments inclassrooms. Case studies enable investigators to explore multiple bounded systems over time through in-depthand multiple data collection and analyses (Creswell, 2007). Furthermore, they afford researchers perspectives onthe impact of project activities in naturalistic settings (Creswell, 2007) whereby evidence can be collected andinterpretations can be made based on how events unfold in real-world scenarios.The three cases in the study have been constructed around three participants with fairly differingteacher level and school level demographics. The first participant was Imelda, who had taught for 16 years. Interms of school demographics, her school had the highest achievement of the three with 47% of students scoringin the advanced range in science and just 6% registering on free and reduced priced lunch. The secondparticipant was Jenny, who had 9 years of high school teaching experience and advanced levels of contentknowledge (the year after she participated in the project, she was accepted into the Ph.D. program at Harvard tostudy biology). Of the three schools, her school had the lowest achievement levels with just 14% of students inthe advanced range in science on the state test and a high proportion (58%) of students on free and reducedpriced lunch. The third participant was Matt, who at the time of the project had 6 years of high school teachingexperience. In his school, 20% of students scored in the advanced range in science with 30% of students on freeand reduced priced lunch. Across the three cases, the classes were taught at the freshman and sophomore levels.We collected information from five data sources: i) classroom observations that averaged in total 18hours for each teacher; ii) exit summer PD and post-implementation interviews which probed teachers’knowledge, and beliefs about the project, their contribution, and perspectives on success of the implementation;iii) teacher surveys; iv) a focus group interview with project facilitators that captured informal insights into howthe implementation in each class occurred; and v) student learning outcomes as measured by growth in studentunderstanding of complex systems in an open-ended question on ecological systems.Data AnalysisTranscriptions of the data sources were analyzed qualitatively for instances which demonstrated adaptiveexpertise in the three categories of flexibility, ability to demonstrate deeper level understanding, and deliberatepractice. The definitions of the categories were derived from the literature review of adaptive expertise. Levelsof expertise were identified through an iterative mining of participant observation and interview data of thelarger cohort of project participants. Examples that appeared to be upper and lower anchors of each categorywere discussed and agreed upon by the research team and used to construct the coding manual found in Table 1.Moderate or medium levels of each category were assigned if they fit in the category between the low and highanchors. The medium codes will eventually be added to the coding scheme with further iterations of analyses.While external validation of the coding manual is forthcoming, we attempted to achieve internal validity byassigning the analysis of each case to two members of the research team who did the coding independently andthen compared results. Any discrepancies in the codes were negotiated until consensus was reached.Table 1: Categorization Manual for Adaptive Expertise.Category and DefinitionFlexibilityThis category is defined by actions of the teacherthat demonstrate the ability to incorporate projectactivities into their daily practice. Demonstratingflexibility includes an awareness of their studentpopulation and needs, an awareness of the schoolcontext, and an ability to respond to unexpectedissues that arise through implementation. They areable to adapt their practice by incorporatingproject expectations in their situated context.(Simply eliminating parts of the curriculum isNOT flexible because there is no consideration ofhow to adapt within the constraints).Deeper level of understandingThis category is defined by actions of the teacherthat demonstrate their ability to go beyond whatthey are required to do with the project. They haveassimilated the information and are able toimplement extensions or make connections thatbuild or address deeper level of knowledgeconstruction or problem solving. They are able toICLS 2014 ProceedingsExamplesHigh: Teacher instructs the students that when they get to[argumentation], they need to stop and talk with another group andthey should turn off their monitors when they are ready to discuss.(Here the inference is that he understands that students will continueto play with the simulation without taking the argumentationseriously and then puts instructions into place that will forceproductive behaviors).Low: Teacher informed us that 17 of the 30 students in this classwere failing. He had also NOT prepped the students at all in terms ofintroducing them to the simulation environment beforehand. I don’tthink he reviewed the evolution concepts beforehand either. (Despitethe fact that students are failing in this class, the teacher makes noattempt to scaffold project activities for them).High: Teacher told the students who finished early to “mess withwhat you’ve done.” The students were able to create their own miniexperiments by changing one of the variables in the model. This keptthe group engaged while waiting for slower students. This alsoallowed the students space to explore and ask new questions. (Theproject at this point did not require students to go under the hoodand program. He recognized that for advanced students this mightbe an interesting thing to do).120© ISLSbring in variation from outside the present systemof activity (inclusive of the classroom and schoolcontext and the project).Deliberate practiceThis category is defined by actions of the teacherthat demonstrate their ability to show motivation,focus, and repeated effort to monitor theirpractice, and to devise and subsequently attemptnew approaches to improve implementation.Teachers exhibit explicit evidence of reflecting ona problem and how to improve.Low: From here on, the teacher is completely hands-off. It is clearsome students are very confused and don’t know where to start. (Heis unable to go deeper with his students).High: Teacher was surprised in the first class that the students didn’t“fly though it” and make it through the whole activity. He said thathe could have prepared a bit better (making it his responsibility toorganize class better). “You lose some of your game if you don’tpractice.” (Here he is metacognitive about what needs to beimproved in his practice).Low: In debrief with the teacher: He did not prepare his studentsbefore implementing the evolution activity. He seemed to think it‘went OK’ and reiterated that this a tough group of students. (Herehe is not metacognitive about what needs to be improved in hispractice and instead blames students for being “tough”).Case Study ResultsIn this section, we present instances that emerged from the study data sources that illustrate the case teacher’slevels of adaptive expertise in each of the three categories. The cases are presented in a semi-hierarchical orderof low adaptive expertise to medium/high. The instances selected are representative of the average level of theteacher over time although there may be other instances that diverged from those levels not reported here. In thepilot year, we did not see any teachers with solidly high levels of adaptive expertise, which we expect wouldimprove as teachers continue to implement project activities in following years.ImeldaOver all, Imelda demonstrated lower adaptive expertise characteristics than the other teachers. In terms offlexibility, she had some challenges in effectively adapting her practice and responding to students’ confusionabout particular aspects of the simulations. During one classroom observation, it was noted that there was“confusion regarding what the curds [were]. It was written on the board, but the students jumped in withoutreading it” (10/4/2011). Here, it seemed that Imelda had anticipated students’ difficulties in identifying parts ofthe simulation by writing a key on the board beforehand to help students organize these pieces. However, theeffectiveness of this scaffold was limited as she failed to direct students’ attention to the key. Observations ofthe same unit revealed that she attempted later to alert students to the key, but that this too resulted in limitedimpact as “some eyes [were] still on the computer/worksheets [and therefore] not sure how many peoplefollowed” (10/5/2011). This example demonstrates Imelda’s low flexibility because it illustrates her inability toadapt her instructional practices to set students up to work with and navigate through the simulation. Even whenshe tried to respond to students’ needs, her redirection lacked the facility to effectively support students.Imelda also demonstrated a low level of deeper understanding of the project’s tasks and goals. Thiswas most evident in her inability to teach parts of the project’s curriculum related to her understanding of howcomplex systems were instantiated in the computer simulations. In classroom observations, Imelda appeared toask a lot of simple to answer questions with no active student discussion and no student questions probing moredeeply into the material. Her lack of understanding of the content prohibited her from delving into conversationswith students that would help them acquire a deeper understanding of the information. For example, whenstudents asked her about how to answer the complex systems questions in the student activity packet,observation notes state that she “deferred to [the facilitator]” (10/6/2011) to answer the questions. Despite thefact that the summer PD focused a good deal of time on definitions of complex systems, how characteristicswere built into the simulations, and examining resources meant to improve teacher knowledge, evidentlyImelda’s inability to assimilate the information herself prevented her from extending it to her students.In the third category of expertise, Imelda showed a moderate level of deliberate practice. In her postimplementation interview reflecting on how different students progressed through the activities, she explained,What I saw was…how different stages are for each topic we cover. There were some studentswho finished the whole thing and there were some who just got to the 2nd section…Given eachclass there were students at all different levels, putting them in smaller individual groupshelped me understand where they were. But I found a lot of students moving ahead just tofinish the page and move onto the next, I’m not sure if they understood what they were doing.I didn’t have time to go over all the answers in class. (04/2012)Observation notes showed that Imelda tried different configurations of student activity groups through differentgrouping arrangements and organization of desks. In response to seeing the disparate paces at which studentscompleted their work, she purposefully placed her students in smaller groups to better monitor their progress.This reflects a concerted effort on her part to understand students’ levels of progress, which locates her at aICLS 2014 Proceedings121© ISLSmoderate level of deliberate practice. However, she stopped short of improving her practice, in this example, bynot following up on whether the smaller groups made a difference in her ability to monitor student learning.JennyIn contrast to Imelda, Jenny demonstrated higher levels of expertise in her classroom implementation. Withrespect to the category of flexibility, it was evident from observations that she needed to be flexible in being ableto navigate how she would use the computers available to her in the school. One observation showed that shemade room switches with her colleagues in order to use the school computer lab rather than the laptop cart,which held computers that were not compatible with the project’s software. In this example, she showed evenfurther flexibility in terms of dealing with the limitations of the computer room set up. In a study survey Jennycommented, “The challenge with the computer lab is that it is nearly impossible to hold class discussions in thatroom due to the layout. I overcame this by doing discussions before and after the activities, in our regularclassroom, and only very infrequently pausing the students while they were working in the lab” (7/12/2012).She identified that, for her students to be able to learn from a group discussion, the layout of the room needed tobe different, thus she was able to shift when and where she conducted discussion. However, while Jennyshowed flexibility around adapting her practice for optimal computer use, she was only moderately flexible withthe content of the curriculum. Observation notes showed that the level at which she pitched her instruction wassomewhat higher than her students could comprehend. Her deep content knowledge and ability to connectcontent to complex systems was the highest of the three teachers and yet, often, she dwelled on aspects of thescience that were not necessary for students to understand the simulation.With respect to demonstrating deeper level understanding, Jenny exhibited challenges in helping herstudents understand how simulations and computational thinking were related to complex systems or biology.The following excerpt from observation notes on an introduction to complex systems illustrates this point.[Jenny] ran the simulation a few times and made various changes, explaining some parts ofthe code and engaging the students to consider “what if” questions. A few students activelyresponded but a few others started commenting out loud “what does this have to do withbiology?” “What does this have to with science?” “Isn’t this computer science?” (11/15/2011)In this episode, Jenny did not appear to be able to answer student questions even though she intentionally triedto bring in computational thinking by posing “what if” questions. The fact that she did however, try to bringcomputational thinking into the science curriculum shows that she exhibited a moderate deeper level ofunderstanding.Finally, Jenny showed a high level of deliberate practice. In her exit interview after the summer PD,Jenny expressed concern that she would not be allowed to mold the units to fit her students’ needs. She asked,“So one of my questions is to what extent, if any, am I allowed to tweak in this year? Like we have these lessonhandouts that are on the flash drive that presumably are already used. I mean I always want to modify thingsjust because of my own particular students or whatever, and I don’t feel like I have a good sense at this pointabout that” (08/2011). In thinking about the upcoming school year, Jenny was concerned that she would not beallowed to tailor the reform activities to her students needs. It is evident that during the summer PD, Jenny wasalready thinking about her classroom practice, which continued into the school year. For example, after one ofthe classroom implementations of the enzyme activity in the Human Body unit, Jenny reflected,[The] Potato + hydrogen peroxide lab (which they did before this) is LESS abstract than this.But maybe this was just boring because they already knew so much (or at least had so muchexposure) from that experience. For sugar transport, let's try the [project simulation] activityearlier in the sequence to see if that makes it more engaging. (11/18/2011)In this comment, Jenny reflected on the students’ experience and began already planning how to create a betterlearning environment for her students with the next unit. Here she was motivated and focused on improving thelearning experience for her students and demonstrated a high level of deliberate practice.MattSimilar to Jenny, Matt exhibited moderate to high levels of expertise. In the category of flexibility, he showedmoderate ability to adapt project materials into his daily practice. This was most prominent in his attempts atworking with the students to complete the required activities in each unit despite other issues getting in the way.For example, when time constraints were an obstacle, rather than simply not completing the activity oreliminating certain portions of the lesson, Matt was open to rearranging the class schedule. One observer noted,“The lab took longer than Matt had wanted, so he changed the plan and said they should complete part 2 fortoday. He said he would probably need to book the lab for another period to let them complete the whole thing”ICLS 2014 Proceedings122© ISLS(11/15/11). Matt was not only flexible in the amount of time required for the activities he also worked to ensureevery student participated. He stated in a post-implementation survey,This [computational thinking] is not a way in which students are used to thinking. Somestudents can become frustrated and confused when asked to think in a new way. As aconsequence there is a balance that needs to be found to help enhance some students withcomputational thinking, while not losing the other students. (6/20/2012)However, occasionally Matt did not seem to be successful at this. For example, an observer reported, “many[student] pairs having only one student working and the other not paying attention. There were also numerousdistractions, with students walking through the computer lab and stopping to talk” (11/16/2011) These examplesof Matt’s inconsistent successes to adapt to external obstacles such as student behavior and time constraints areevidence of Matt’s moderate flexibility.In terms of the category of deeper level understanding, Matt showed moderate ability. Severalobservations noted that he contextualized the project lessons by embellishing the content with demonstrations,“Matt did two demonstrations about diffusion: match (odor) and dye-in-water (liquids)," and questioning, "Mattpointing graphically to the different simulation shapes and asking questions about what components are"(11/10/2011). He also led the class in discussions before and after the lesson each day. For example in onelesson, "Matt did a wrap-up as a class: He summarized: 'the first run was random, was any one color alwaysdominant?” This session continued with a class discussion. Matt occasionally circulated the room, answeringstudents’ questions, probing student understanding, and further explaining concepts (4/11/2011), but as onefacilitator noted in the focus group interview, “Just comparing him [Matt] to the other teachers, he was muchmore hands off. He'd hand out the worksheets. He'd actually contextualize the activity, which is nice becausenot all the teachers did that but then he just kind of let the students go” (5/18/13). Matt’s incorporation of simpledemonstrations, asking and responding to questions, and leading discussions that supported lesson content areevidence of deeper understanding of the goals of the reform, but because these efforts lacked more robustbiology and complex systems content and his hands-off approach during the activities indicate that he did notnecessarily facilitate student learning on a deeper level beyond basic conceptual understanding.Regarding deliberate practice, facilitators viewed Matt as one of the most reflective teachers in thiscohort. As one facilitator reported in the focus group interview, “He was the most open to feedback of any ofthe teachers and spent the most time with us debriefing during and after implementations on how he couldimprove and how he could change things and how we could change things to make them better for him”(5/18/13). His intention to continue honing his approach to incorporating the reform curriculum was clear. Onthe post-implementation survey at the end of the year he wrote,In the future I plan on being more conscious of complex systems in biology and expressingand exploring these ideas more explicitly in my teaching…I hoped that themes of randomness,complex systems, and emergence would carry over into other parts of the curriculum that didnot happen to the degree that I hoped, but still intend to pursue this further, next year.(6/20/2012)While there is no evidence of the frequency and consistency with which Matt practiced deliberately, suchstatements indicate his interest and intent to improve his practice, which were higher than the other two caseteachers.In the next section, we provide a summary of our efforts in this research. We discuss implications forusing an adaptive expertise model as a lens to understand classroom enactments of computer supported complexsystems reform curricula with the goal of improving teachers’ instructional practices.DiscussionWe were motivated to do this research for several reasons. The study of complex systems has become aprominent research focus in the science and social sciences (The National Academies, 2009) with equallyincreasing emphasis on learning and instruction particularly in the recently constructed Next Generation ScienceStandards. Although curricular and computational resources to support the learning of complex systems withstudents has been a focus in the learning sciences, relatively little attention has been paid to understanding howteachers can best support classroom learning experiences, how they can become experts in this support, andwhat this expertise might look like. Acknowledging the importance of addressing the situated nature of teachers,classrooms, and schools (Penuel et al., 2011), in this paper, we have proposed an adaptive expertise model forevaluating implementation experiences that aims to illustrate the differential qualities of teachers’ abilities toadapt complex systems curricula and tools in their biology courses. The model outlines three importantcharacteristics of adaptive expertise: flexibility in accommodating project activities into daily classroom andICLS 2014 Proceedings123© ISLScourse requirements, ability to demonstrate deeper level understanding, and intending or showing efforts towarddeliberate practice to improve instruction.The examples above do not provide evidence of every level of expertise within each category definedby the model, but there was sufficient data to rank the teachers’ levels of adaptive expertise relative to oneanother. Ultimately this overarching assessment was determined not only by quality of expertise exhibited byeach teacher, but by the frequency and consistency of such observations. For example, Imelda showed little tono effort to incorporate project activities into her classroom. Jenny exhibited high levels of flexibility at times,but only with respect to technology use, and this flexibility was not consistent. Although there are severalinstances in which Matt’s flexibility was high in his response to student engagement or time constraints, hedemonstrated some hands-off behaviors at times when students may have needed some further scaffolding.Regarding exhibiting deeper levels of understanding, Imelda’s implementation of the lessons was limited andrarely deviated from the teacher’s guide. Although Jenny’s biology content knowledge was extensive, she oftenover-reached in terms of students’ abilities to comprehend the science. Matt most frequently contextualized thelessons to make the science accessible to students though his efforts were somewhat superficial. All threeparticipants shared reflections regarding their teaching practice, but Matt also initiated dialogue with and soughtfeedback from project facilitators in order to further reflect upon and improve his practice.We believe that using an adaptive expertise model helps professional developers and researchersinterested in learning how to train teachers to teach with complex systems resources and approaches (HmeloSilver & Azevedo, 2006) by illustrating the range of contextualized classroom enactments. As Fairbanks et al.(2010) and others suggest, the complex nature of teaching requires the orchestration of many variables andresponses to emergent situations that often cannot be predicted a priori. Particularly with computer-supportedlearning, where teachers’ knowledge of and exposure to technology can impact integration success, (Aldunate& Nussbaum, 2013; Ertmer et al., 2012; Mueller et al., 2008), understanding why or how integration ischallenging can be instructive in PD activities. Furthermore, by investigating and identifying instances inpractice that illustrate the characteristics of an adaptive expertise continuum, we aim to articulate a processrather than a state (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1993) that can actively extend teachers’ capabilities beyond theircurrent competencies. From our small sample of cases, we have already begun to construct tools for developingteachers’ adaptive expertise. For example, we have matched teachers who have the same school demographicsand provided release or substitute teacher funds for teachers to conduct peer observations. We have selectedteachers who have exhibited higher levels of expertise and arranged videotaping of a project unit in action forother teachers to view and discuss. During our most recent summer PD workshop, we invited teachers to leaddiscussions about challenges in implementation, and we structured multiple peer sharing sessions for teachers tobe able to listen and learn about alternative instructional approaches. These sessions were even extended to peerconstruction of differentiated lessons for English Language Learners and students with special learning needs.This example specifically encourages deeper level problem solving (Bransford, 1999; Hammerness et al., 2005)that ideally will enable our teachers to perform at a higher level (Ferrari, 2002; Ericsson et al., 2006).Another area of interest for this research involves providing authentic examples of teachers in actionwho are working with these reform oriented complex systems curricula. Although we aim to articulate a modelof adaptive expertise, we also aim to use the model to map teacher practices to provide other researchers withmodular images and descriptions that may be expected of their participants in such projects. Knowing the rangecan help researchers intentionally plan PD activities that will best support all teacher learners from the start. Weare also ultimately interested in seeing whether our categorization of adaptive expertise correlates with, or evenbetter, predicts student-learning outcomes. In this area, we have already begun to compare the three cases ofteacher expertise to the amount of student gain of complex systems understanding which was measured throughopen ended short answer responses to questions on ecological systems. We hypothesized that findings wouldreveal a link between higher levels of adaptive expertise as defined by this framework and higher studentlearning outcomes. Interestingly, across the three teachers, Imelda’s students showed negative significantgrowth in complex systems understanding (F(1,16) = 6.572, p = .012). Jenny’s students showed no growth (F(1,6) = 3.769, p = .110) and Matt’s students showed marginal significant growth (F(1, 53) = 3.656, p = .061). Weare aware of the unevenness of sample sizes in each of the classrooms, which is why we have not offered theseresults as official evidence at this point. But the student learning outcomes analyses serve as someencouragement that our adaptive expertise model may be able to help in assessing the success of teachers’contextualized implementation of complex systems resources and approaches. Currently, we are analyzing moredata with a larger number of teachers and students to see whether this hypothesis is true.ReferencesAldunate, R. & Nussbaum, M. (2013). Teacher adoption of technology. Computers in Human Behavior, 29,519-524.Barnett, S., & Koslowski, B. (2002). Adaptive expertise: Effects of type of experience and the level oftheoretical understanding it generates. Thinking and Reasoning, 8(4), 237-267.ICLS 2014 Proceedings124© ISLSBereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1993). Surpassing ourselves: An inquiry into the nature and implications ofexpertise. Illinois: Open Court.Berliner, D. (2001). Learning about and learning from expert teachers. International Journal of EducationalResearch, 35, 463-482.Bransford, J., Darling-Hammond, L., & LePage, P. (2005). Introduction. In L. Darling-Hammond & J.Bransford (Eds.), Preparing teachers for a changing world: What teachers should learn and be able todo (pp. 1-39). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Bransford, J.D., Brown, A.L., & Cocking, R.R. (1999). How experts differ from novices. In Bransford, J.D.,Brown, A.L., & Cocking, R.R. (Eds.). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School (pp.19-38). Washington DC: National Academy PressChi, T. (2011). Theoretical perspectives, methodological approaches, and trends in the study of expertise. In Y.Li and G. Kaiser (Eds.), Expertise in mathematics instruction: An international perspective (pp. 19-39).New York: Springer.Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative inquiry & research design: Choosing among five approaches SagePublications, Inc.Darling-Hammond, L., & Youngs, P. (2002). Defining Highly Qualified Teachers: What does ScientificallyBased Research actually tell us? Educational Researcher, 31(9), 13-25.Ericsson, KA., Charness, N., Feltovich, P.J., Hoffman, R.R. (2006). The Cambridge Handbook of Expertise andExpert Performance. New York: Cambridge University Press.Ertmer, P.A., Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A.T., Sendurur, E., & Sendurur, P. (2012). Teacher beliefs and technologyintegration practices: A critical relationship. Computers and Education, 59, 423-435.Fairbanks, C.M., Duffy, G.G., Faircloth, B.S., He, Y., Levin, B. et al. (2010). Beyond knowledge: Exploringwhy some teachers are more thoughtfully adaptive than others. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1-2),161-171.Ferrari, M. (2002). The Pursuit of Excellence Through Education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Grotzer, T.A. (2012). Learning causality in a complex world: Understandings of consequence. Lanham, MD:Rowman Littlefield.Hammerness, K., Darling-Hammond, L., Bransford, J., Berliner, D., Cochran-Smith, M., McDonald, M., &Zeichner, K. (2005). In L. Darling-Hammond and J. Bransford (Eds.), Preparing teachers for achanging world: What teachers should learn and be able to do (pp. 358-389). San Francisco, CA:Jossey-Bass.Mueller, J., Wood, E., Willoughby, T., Ross, C., & Specht, J. (2008). Identifying discriminating variablesbetween teachers who fully integrate computers and teachers with limited integration. Computers &Education, 51, 1523-1537.National Research Council. (2011). Successful K–12 STEM education: Identifying effective approaches inscience, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.OECD (2011), Lessons from PISA for the United States, strong performers and successful reformers ineducation. OECD Publishing. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264096660-enPierson, M.E. (2001). Technology integration practice as a function of pedagogical expertise. Journal ofResearch on Technology in Education, 33(4), 413-430.Salas, E., & Rosen, M. (2010). Experts at work: Principles for developing expertise in organization. In S.Kozlowski and E. Salas (Eds.), Learning, training, and development in organizations, (pp. 99-134).NY: Routledge.Tsui A.B.M. (2009). Distinctive qualities of expert teachers. Teachers and Teaching: theory and practice, 15(4),421-439.Yoon, S. A. (2011). Using social network graphs as visualization tools to influence peer selection decisionmaking strategies to access information about complex socioscientific issues. Journal of the LearningSciences, 20(4), 549-588.Yoon, S. (2008). An evolutionary approach to harnessing complex systems thinking in the science andtechnology classroom. International Journal of Science Education, 30(1), 1–32.Yoon, S., Klopfer, E., Wang, J., Sheldon, J., Wendel, D., Schoenfeld, I., Scheintaub, H., & Reider, D. (2013).Designing to improve biology understanding through complex systems in high school classrooms: Nosimple matter! In the proceedings of the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, Madison,Wisconsin.AcknowledgmentsThis research is supported by a grant from the U.S. National Science Foundation under the program DiscoveryResearch K-12 (DRL 1019228). Many thanks to our other project collaborators, Josh Sheldon (MIT), IlanaSchoenfeld (MIT), Daniel Wendel (MIT), Hal Scheintaub (Governor's Academy), and David Reider (EducationDesign, INC).ICLS 2014 Proceedings125© ISLS