Tensions and Possibilities for Political Workin the Learning SciencesAngela N. Booker, UC San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093, angelabooker@ucsd.eduShirin Vossoughi, Stanford University, 485 Lasuen Mall, Stanford, CA, 94305, shirinvossoughi@gmail.comPaula K. Hooper, Exploratorium, Pier 15, San Francisco, CA 94111, phooper@exploratorium.eduAbstract: How can the learning sciences engage more directly with the political dimensionsof defining and studying learning? What might this engagement offer for democratizinglearning? This paper delineates a tension between deep studies of learning and explicitattention to issues of power, inequality and human dignity. We frame this as a productivetension that will generate new insights, as well as conceptual and methodological tools thatcontribute to the democratization of learning. We identify a history of ideas inside and outsidethe learning sciences that inform this objective, including the political dimensions of thefield’s founding theorists. We then offer examples of ways these tensions manifest in our ownempirical work, and conclude by considering how explicit attention to political dimensions oflearning can advance our theories about what learning is, about what it is for, and about theconditions that give rise to deep forms of learning for all.Expanding Space for Politics in the Learning Sciences?In this article we are grappling with the following questions: How can the learning sciences engage moredirectly with the political dimensions of defining and studying learning? What might that engagement offer fordemocratizing learning? Addressing these questions is crucial to educators and designers of learningenvironments who share a commitment to working with youth and communities contending withmarginalization. The work is underway (Bang, et. al, 2012; Gutiérrez, 2008; Lee, 2001; Nasir, Roseberry,Warren & Lee, 2006). We believe the time is ripe for making this a more central preoccupation of the field. Inour view the learning sciences has a political tension—a tension that has emerged as a shared thread across ourwork. Here, politics refers to explicit attention to issues of power, hierarchy and inequity, and to the roots ofthose issues. The field also has an edge that can ground and inform the work of colleagues in other fields whodirectly address political dimensions of education—we know how to investigate learning with methods thattrust and are informed by locally situated social actors and their multiple forms of practice and knowledge.Here, we will describe the boundaries of this tension, ground the discussion in examples from our own work andpropose a theoretical stance that privileges human dignity as a central concern.A key strength of scholarship in the learning sciences is in the combined commitment to theories thatexplore learning as situated in the lives and practices of people (Dewey, 1942; Vygotsky, 1978; Lave, 1987Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003) while drawing on grassroots methods in research design (Hawkins & Pea, 1987;Barab, et al., 2004; Barab & Squire, 2004;). Theory offers a way of explaining phenomena of concern, but wesense an apparent contradiction within our field about what we want to explain. At times, learning sciences canorient toward a dominant frame regarding the purposes of education and learning: educational achievement andcompetition in a global marketplace. This frame was not created by the learning sciences, but the field isresponsive to it. This frame is expressed in a variety of ways, yet competition remains the organizing feature. Inthis view individuals prepare to compete within an economic system and, through that system, collectivelycontribute to a country’s economic standing—and in turn, degree of control (Eckert, 1989; Varenne &McDermott, 2008). In the learning sciences, this looks like a commitment to developing expert knowledge anddeep conceptual understanding without a broader attention to the political and economic factors that shape andconstrain trajectories of learning. We have operated as a future-oriented field, researching and designing towardlearning environments that can consistently yield deep conceptual understanding, reflection, and expertknowledge that can serve our practice in the world (Sawyer, 2006). The challenge arises when we fail to orchoose not to articulate to what end. In those cases, the dominant narrative is ready and waiting to absorb thatfuture as its own. Put another way, it is one thing to marshal support for strong systems of education throughcalls to prepare people to be effectively competitive—people tend to envision being on the succeeding end ofimagined competitions. It is the same thing, although not often articulated, to establish losers in the competition.This is where the political tension becomes taut.An alternative frame places its emphasis on human dignity as a mode of inclusion. Again, thisalternative frame did not originate within the learning sciences, but the field clearly desires to be responsive to it(Esmonde & Caswell, 2010; Nasir & Hand, 2006; Nasir, et al., 2006). In this view, varied, localized, culturalways of knowing can yield respect, reflection, and cooperation—if not riches. Notably, voices in the fieldorganized in this way tend to express the politics at play in the work of learning and knowing. In this frame,deep conceptual understanding and the practices of novices and experts are still key features of the work. TheICLS 2014 Proceedings919© ISLSdistinction is in making human dignity and social equity the primary commitments. With this commitmentcomes a more explicit attention to the kind of future that is embodied and potentially engendered by alternativeeducational designs and practices. Where new social and political visions are made explicit, research ondeepening conceptual understanding and expertise also takes shape differently: intellectual activity isunderstood as embedded in social relations; those social relations can either reproduce or reimagine andtransform the hierarchies (raced, classed, gendered, aged, nationalized, etc.) and forms of competition thatuphold the status quo. Thus, in addition to treating learning as a cognitive, affective and social process,understanding human learning as a fundamentally political process can lead to distinct empirical insights,designs and methods. Where we do not actively attend to political dimensions in learning, we can reproducedepoliticizing currents that weaken our analyses, making it more difficult to scale our work across settings.Building on Two Active Modes of TheorizingOne way to illuminate this distinction is to consider two active modes of theorizing in the learning sciences. Oneapproach is to theorize in ways that yield scalable designs to support learning in various disciplinary contexts:Unlike these previous generations of educational research, learning scientists spend a lot oftime in schools—many of us were full time teachers before we became researchers. Andlearning scientists are committed to improving classroom teaching and learning—many arein schools every week, working directly with teachers and districts. Some even take timeoff from university duties and return to the classroom, teaching alongside teachers andlearning how to make theories work in the real world. This is a new kind of science, with agoal of providing a sound scientific foundation for education (Sawyer, 2006, p. 15).When we theorize from this place, we emphasize science that is grounded in real practices and lived experiencesof students, teachers, novices, experts, and professionals. We also tend to prioritize schooling, even as we drawfrom understandings of learning in everyday life. In and of themselves, these are not overtly political moves.Rather they allow us to reveal practices—local or disciplinary—around which knowledge can be jointlyproduced. Learning, then, is understood in terms of its depth and effectiveness for yielding flexible and adaptiveexpertise. This is the bread and butter of the field and we are making meaningful progress. Still, systems thatprivilege some and marginalize others persist. This is a concern the learning sciences also takes seriously.A second mode of theorizing holds tightly to local practices that are culturally mediated. With this lens,practices that support learning are somewhat freed from the disciplines and can be rooted in a wide variety ofactivities and cultural spaces (e.g. sports and games, shopping, organizing and activism, etc.). When our lens isfocused on cultural ways of knowing and doing, politics have more freedom to emerge through processes ofnegotiating meaning. We are interested in extending these situated, sociocultural modes of theorizing byinvestigating what it would mean for the method to scale while the design itself may not. If the learning sciencesis to emphasize human dignity, we need to theorize in ways that may not be scalable in a strictly scientific sense.That is, “a sound scientific foundation for education” might be upgraded to sound human-centered methods forlearning where knowledge is not only co-constructed but also politically active.A Good ProblemThis is a problem—a good one—because the tension here is productive. The field is primed to debate the meritsof how learning is characterized—as learning for its own sake, as a necessity for democratic life, as a necessityfor economic participation, as a necessity for humanization. Ours is not the first field to take up theseoverlapping roles, but ours is positioned to provide leadership on what to privilege, why to privilege it, and howwhat we design leads us to these ends. This is so because our methods merge cognitive and computational waysof investigating understanding, ethnographic attention to the meaning people make together, and designpractices that are iterative and rooted in a sociocultural theoretical stance. For these reasons, we are arguing forthe learning sciences to become more attuned to the field’s own dominant and marginal voices. Ourinterdisciplinary work is still situated in a stratified world, and we must take seriously the reality that we arealso susceptible to being organized by dominant ideologies. This practice will organize us to think about how toinclude work that engages directly with political aspects of learning in ways that push and grow the field indirections that urgently reimagine social relations and the systems that support them. This is a critical intention,so we will dwell here for a moment.The tension we are highlighting has a longer history in arguments that pit science against politics andemotion and ensnare scientific discourse and rationality. In search of universal principles, the humans can getlost. Yet too much emphasis on the local particularities of lived experiences might impede the effectiveapplication of what is learned more broadly. Harris and Shultz (1993) took this up in the field of law from thestandpoint of reason and emotion—in the law, it seems, emotion has had an unscientific reputation. In thearticle, the authors called for reunification of reason and emotion:ICLS 2014 Proceedings920© ISLSEmotion ruled off the official educational agenda remains unchallenged, unexamined, andundisciplined by reflection and analysis. Emotion made impermissible becomes emotiondisowned, emotion for which no one is responsible….If emotions are successfully repressed,rationality suffers in any case. Draining intellectual arguments of emotion also drains them ofmeaning….Rationality unchallenged by emotion makes legal analysis an abstract exercise.The result is not only boredom but legal thought this both technically precious and practicallyirrelevant (Harris & Shultz, 1993, p. 1780).Similarly, this phenomenon is reflected in research on learning and education – where politics may have anunscientific reputation. This is a tension that persists between researchers and educators. Indeed, it can interruptpractical and intellectual momentum. Happily, the learning sciences are organized to confront this reality.The wedding of interdisciplinary theories (e.g. sociocultural and cognitive), with interdisciplinarymethods (e.g. ethnographic, design-based, and computational) allows for ecologically grounded empiricalresearch that can effectively take up politics that permeate learning both as practice and becoming. This is whywe are concerned with what can at times feel like a depoliticizing context of research and theorizing. Studyinglearning in a highly stratified and competitive world is not a neutral act. All research has a perspective and istherefore political. But some research gets seen from a positivist perspective as “political” and thus subjectiveand advocacy driven—qualities which are in turn framed as less legitimate. We are suggesting this is one of themechanisms through which more political voices get marginalized. In this way, we are viewing ourselves—scholars engaged with the learning sciences—as learners and our sites where intellectual work is shared anddebated, as a learning environment. If we are interested in what the learning sciences can offer for how todemocratize learning, we need our theoretical and methodological tools to help us wrestle with inequity anddehumanization. We need them to organize our investigations to ensure that teaching and learning arehumanizing experiences and to understand the myriad ways this can look. When political approaches areembraced as a valid and necessary thread of work, the learning sciences themselves will be strengthened.Concepts Related to Political Dimensions of Learning: A History of IdeasIn arguing for a more direct engagement with the political dimensions of learning, we situate ourselves within ahistory of ideas and research in the learning sciences that has sought to develop adequately complex and humancentered conceptual and methodological tools. This includes, for example, work that treats learning as afundamentally cultural process and draws explicit connections between this approach and the wider social,political and economic constraints on learning for youth and communities (Gonzalez, 2005; Nasir, et. al., 2006).The recent special issue of Human Development organized by Nasir and Bang (Eds., 2012) is an example of thisapproach. As Lee (2012) writes: “The problem space the contributors to this volume have taken on is inherentlycomplex because it entails multiple levels of context: the immediate setting in which individuals participate;relationships across the multiple settings that people navigate; the broader cultural, political, economic, and,indeed, ideological belief systems and institutional configurations in which these micro-level settings exist.”In our own work, we are drawn to micro-level analysis for the ways it helps ground research inmoment-to-moment pedagogical practice and the perspectives of children, youth and adults in educationalsettings—both inside and outside of schools. This close attention to micro-level practice is one of the hallmarksof research in the learning sciences. At the same time, if our analysis only focuses on the learning of disciplinarycontent without attending to the ways developing new understandings intersects with questions of epistemologyand identity that in turn reflect broader political and economic inequalities, then the theories that emerge fromour analysis may be inadequate as tools for equity oriented design and pedagogy. This is where embracingpolitical dimensions of learning can help imbue the learning sciences with analytic tools that allow us to studyeducational relationships, interactions and experiences as deeply connected to broader social problems andvisions. The theories and methods we develop are our technologies for reconnecting with the more political sideof the history of ideas around learning. These tools are essential to carrying forward the field’s stated goals.What are some of these tools? Within the field, we are drawn to socio-cultural or cultural-historicalapproaches for their attention to the centrality of cultural mediation (Wertsch, 1998), to human activity orcultural practices (rather than individual behavior) as units of analysis (Cole, 1996), to the deeply socialdimensions of learning and their relationship to human potential and possibility (Vygotksy, 1978; 1986), totensions and contradictions as progenitors of change (Engeström, 1991; Gutiérrez, Baquedano-Lopez, & Tejeda,1999) and to ecologically valid forms of research (Cole, Hood, & McDermott, 1997). Many of these conceptshave their roots in political problems and concerns. For example, ecological validity emerged in part from acritique of research that measured human intelligence based on normative cultural tasks, leading to deeplyproblematic conclusions about the intellectual capacities of non-Western communities, both inside and outsidethe United States. This political and humanistic critique was attuned to relationships betweenpsychological/educational research and colonial ideologies and practices and to the need for researchers toICLS 2014 Proceedings921© ISLSreflect on their own assumptions. Such critical and reflective modes of research engendered new methods thatunderstood cognition as embedded in cultural practices (Scribner & Cole, 1988) and studied learning as asituated activity, an approach that revealed intelligence and ingenuity where deficit had been assumed.Thus, while some of these concepts and approaches sit comfortably within the learning sciences, weare interested in what can be learned from making explicit the political critiques that brought them into being—and what openings might emerge in future strands of work. Similarly, we seek to explore both the politicalcommitments of founding figures within the field, such as Dewey, Piaget, Vygotsky, Papert and Bruner, andhow these concerns gave shape to their ideas about learning. Highlighting these concerns can help connect theirtheoretical contributions to the economic and political tensions outlined above—namely the purpose ofeducation in a democracy, and the role alternative assumptions and approaches to learning can play in helpingbring about an egalitarian future. This theoretical work can help counter currents of de-politicization—wheretheories of learning are explicitly or implicitly stripped of their critical bent. Revisiting the political contextwithin which such foundational contributions emerged can also help us understand their/our blind spots (aroundrace, or gender for example) and what these mean for our thinking today.At the same time, some of the ideas and scholars we are drawn to may hold a more marginal placewithin the field. For example, the work of Paulo Freire (1985) and the traditions that grew from hiscontributions directly attend to problems of dehumanization and humanization, oppression and liberation as tiedto educational theory and practice. Similarly, critical race and decolonizing approaches to education makecentral the role of race and racism in the educational experiences of students of color, and offer alternativemethodologies for community-based research (Paris & Winn, 2014; Smith, 1999; Tejeda, Espinosa, &Gutiérrez, 2003). Do these ideas have a place within the learning sciences? Are they seen as overtly political andtherefore less “scientific”? What new tools might emerge from greater dialogue across these traditions? In hiscommentary on the aforementioned special issue of Human Development Cole (2012) writes,What is much less certain is whether it is possible, on a mass scale, to so reform schooling thatthe kinds of exceptional interactions that appear to unleash student creativity become thenorm, not the exception. However persuasive the arguments for reframing and desettlingeducational practices may be, they run directly against the powerful forces that seek toamplify the effectiveness of a scientific world view in which triumph over nature, and overother humans considered less-than-human, is considered an economic and political imperative(p. 346).Though many within the field of learning sciences would agree with the goal of making ‘exceptionalinteractions that appear to unleash student creativity the norm rather than the exception’—and are activelyinvolved in research that works towards these ends—we are interested in the kinds of shared thinking, dialogueand research that would become possible through equal and explicit engagement with the ‘powerful forces’ thatblunt the fulfillment of this possibility for all students.Political Possibilities: Some Examples from Our Empirical WorkOur proposed framework therefore problematizes the overt or subtle de-politicization of learning—includingdominant assumptions about what constitutes legitimate empirical research—and seeks to illuminate when andhow moving towards rather than away from politics may yield practice-based alignment with the theoreticalgoals and premises of the learning sciences. One narrative suggests foregrounding the researcher’s valuesmakes both a weaker researcher and weaker research. But if, in turn, we ignore the presence of values in ourdata and analysis, that also weakens the research. This tension opens a kind of critique that expands where thefield can go and what it can do. When and how are political perspectives necessary for thorough research onlearning, and what kind of future are we implicitly working to bring forward? In our work, these questionsemerge in a wide range of contexts and disciplinary orientations. In this section we consider what we gain bytaking a political view of learning in each of our settings and how that is connected to democratizing learning inthose settings and more broadly.Civic and Political PracticeBooker conducts community-based research with youth and attends to how they learn to engage as civic andpolitical participants. Her studies are framed by a combination of sociocultural theory, cultural studies, andpolitical sociology. Sites for research have included community, family, and school contexts, particularly attheir points of intersection where learners can privilege their own expertise while generating meaningfullearning opportunities (Goldman, Booker, & McDermott, 2007; Booker, et al. 2011). The focus on civicparticipation and political development derives from a concern with democratized learning and barriers thatlimit access to political analyses and critiques.In a study of a student advisory board of high school students attempting to influence school districtICLS 2014 Proceedings922© ISLSpolicy making, three aspects of civic and political development became critical: technical, pragmatic, andpolitical framing of their work (Booker, 2010). Technical frames were based in learning and applying civicknowledge (e.g. how policy is made and implemented). Pragmatic and political frames defined actions (e.g.organizing supporters, engaging the media, explicitly engaging in power analysis, etc.). Two analyticalunderstandings of their work emerged. When examining the data for learning and outcomes, a tidy linearprogression emerged that suggested students first had to learn the technical requirements for doing policy work.This was followed by a period of pragmatism where the group acted in ways most likely to receive support fromadult decision makers while addressing important student concerns. Finally, they used political frames to maketheir views known in a contentious public debate, criticizing the Superintendent’s signature school reformprogram and calling on her to renegotiate her contract in response to severe budget cuts. A second analyticalstrategy foregrounded politics to examine where youth, community groups, district leaders, adult allies, andmembers of the press gave explicit attention to issues of power, hierarchy and inequity. This analysis revealedthe students’ nearly constant use of technical, pragmatic, and political frames to negotiate meaning and action.The linear picture, by itself, left substantial room for interpretation. The journey from technical topragmatic and then political frame could be a straightforward learning trajectory. Or, it could suggest thatpolitical frames came into play as a form of hubris at best or co-opting by opportunistic adults at worst; theactions of oppositional adults implied this interpretation. A third read was that youth were selecting politicalframes to advance their agenda, and it was a sign of sophistication. This was an interpretation shared by youthand allied adults. Analyzing data with specific attention to politics as a fundamental aspect of the learningenvironment as well as policy-making practice revealed all three frames were evident in practically every eventin which the student advisory board engaged. They constantly negotiated the meaning of their collective workby filtering possible actions through these frames and addressing the vulnerability of their positions inhierarchies of power—as youth from a variety of backgrounds, students who were subject to the authority ofadults, elected representatives of their peers, advisors with no real vote, etc. They made political choices, evenwhen the outcomes of those choices appeared technical or pragmatic.What was gained by engaging political dimensions of learning? The yield distinguished practicesemployed by youth to democratize their own learning and participation experiences and the consequences theysuffered for it. Possibilities for youth and communities alike were constrained simply by defining the studentadvisory board as a place for learning—as opposed to participation. Politics were implied in the actions,negotiations of meaning, and contradictions that emerged as the students discovered their influence, worked towield it, and encountered resistance and support. It was necessary but not sufficient to examine whathappened—it was also imperative to examine competing historical interpretations in relation to contestedvisions for possible futures. Dreaming possible futures and negotiating for their existence are fundamentallydemocratic practices. Nurturing possible futures requires the development of political practices because thosefutures do not develop in a vacuum. They develop largely to the degree that they displace existing practices.Programmable MediaHooper has studied children’s learning with programmable media and construction of computational ideas froma sociocultural perspective. Her work has focused on classroom settings where teachers are explicitly engaged insupporting the learning of African American and Latino elementary school children. She has examined how thetheoretical and design tools of constructionism (Papert, 1993) explain from a cognitive perspective that creatingprojects with classic constructionist tools such as Logo and Lego Mindstorms supports children’s learning ofmath and science ideas. Her work has illuminated the role of a political stance through studies of programmablemedia in classrooms where teachers seek to include cultural experience in their pedagogical choices.One study of second-grade students’ explorations of geometry with programming in Logo revealed thatstudents’ use of turtle graphics supported their construction of geometric designs. It also revealed that thestudents’ engagement with problem-solving and extending each others’ ideas expanded when the pedagogicalcontext included the use of discourse practices that were familiar to them. The teacher had a socio-politicalvalue orientation to using these practices as well as a constructivist one. From this stance, she instituted asharing time for students to present and discuss successes and challenges in their projects with the whole class.This was similar to a math talk or poetry sharing time that had immersed the class in practices of sharingapproaches to solving problems, offering writing for communal critique and review, and affirming each others’progress. She encouraged a discourse formed by children’s everyday ways of expressing their ideas anddeveloping academic discourse that was mutually constituted by her modeling and interactions between studentsthat were comfortable and respectful. Her stated goal was for each student to “have a voice” in sharing theirideas, no matter what the subject-matter or level of academic achievement or English-language proficiency thestudent brought to the experience. In this class, all the students learned to believe they could share their ideasand their ideas would be heard and respected.For example, during one of the sessions where this sharing practice was used, a student who was low inher academic achievement initiated a lively discussion of the trial-and-error process that she used to figure outICLS 2014 Proceedings923© ISLShow to draw a hexagon using turtle graphics commands. This discussion placed her mathematical ideas in avalued position in the co-construction of computational ideas within class. This example illustrates the politicalnature of the teacher’s choice to apply the sharing practice that had been appropriated by the class to work withprogrammable media. This pedagogical move supported students’ negotiation of everyday voices with theirlearning in the new academic realm of computational thinking. Over time and close examination of thesesharing sessions, it became clear that this practice was a scaffold for all students sharing ideas that took theirlearning with programmable media to levels of complexity they could not easily reach by using the tools ontheir own. Analysis of data from this study suggests the need for explicit attention to: 1) elements of learningenvironments such as socio-politically valued classroom practices, and 2) the designs of programmable mediabecause these aspects are operating in concert to support children’s learning of and with computational ideas.Hooper has extended examination of learning based on constructionist design principles to learnersworking with digital design fabrication in informal settings. Based on her earlier work, this new work exploresboth the affordances of digital design fabrication as a constructionist tool and the importance of an explicitpedagogical approach that scaffolds learners in bringing their social and culturally rooted epistemologies to theirwork. The Spiro Inquiry (Hooper & Freed, 2013) explores creating spirograph-like designs with a constructionkit that is made up of pre-fabricated shapes for exploring physical construction of designs, an app forconstructing designs on-screen, and features of the app that enable the fabrication of gears and designs onlasercutters or craft cutters. Workshops have been designed based on a structure for inquiry-based science(Institute for Inquiry, 2006) that is designed to engage learners in identifying and pursuing their personalinterests related to the mathematical ideas embedded in the work.This work has implications for examining the political contexts of making and tinkering environments.It emphasizes that pedagogical structure can be designed to accompany the process of making withcomputational tools as a way to insure that multiple pathways to learning are supported. There is a politicalconnection between equity and learning when multiple pathways are explicitly supported. This workexemplifies critical engagement with discourse in emerging fields of making and tinkering and the political andeconomic tensions that exist when design for multiple pathways to learning are not made explicit.Migrant Youth in Hybrid SettingsVossoughi has been engaged in ethnographic research on learning in hybrid settings that seek to meaningfullyconnect the development of disciplinary understandings with students’ lived experiences. These settings blendformal and informal elements (school-like academic tasks and modes of engagement with apprenticeshipmodels, play, familial social relations, and everyday language practices). In one setting, high school age migrantstudents worked with graduate students to analyze social problems relevant to the migrant community(displacement, economic exploitation, educational inequity, gender/patriarchy) through complex socialtheoretical texts and written genres. Here, she studies the ways social analytic tools became consequential tostudents—serving to deepen intellectual engagement and reshape social relations.In this case, studying learning as a political process helped make visible the social and political workstudents were engaged in when drawing on academic tools to analyze social problems (a male student workingto discuss patriarchy in careful ways, a student who was dominant in English reconfiguring the leader of herreading group so that a student who was dominant in Spanish could contribute his own words). Resistingcommon dichotomies (theory/practice, intellectual/political activity) this perspective can help us see classroomdiscourse as a site of struggle and change. At the same time, treating political conversations as arenas oflearning highlights the intellectual work students were engaged in as they analyzed particular problems andexperiences. This view can be used to organize and assert the value of political education as a potentially richcontext for academic development, and to identify the specific forms of guidance and expertise involved therein.Vossoughi draws on Matusov’s (1998) work to identify the forms of development valued in thissetting. According to this approach, we must not only ask ‘did development happen?’ – a question that assumesnormative interpretations of what constitutes valued forms of academic engagement. Rather, we must first ask:what are the valued forms of development in this setting? This question moves us towards a more situated andemic understanding of learning, but it can also be used to surface dimensions of intellectual activity that may beundervalued by dominant measures and argue for educational self-determination (Vossoughi, Under Review).STEM Learning Through Tinkering and MakingIn a second study, Vossoughi is working with a team of educators and researchers to look closely at STEMlearning in an equity-oriented after-school setting organized around tinkering and making (Vossoughi, et. al.,2013). This setting serves as a prime example of the shift towards scientific practices emphasized by the NextGeneration Science Standards. Children work with facilitators to design artifacts that embed STEM practices inpurposeful and artistic activity. However, her analysis of learning in this setting explicitly pushes back ondiscourses that treat equity (only) as a matter of expanding access among communities historicallyunderrepresented in STEM fields and professions (or Making spaces) without critically engaging with the natureICLS 2014 Proceedings924© ISLSand purposes of scientific labor and with the larger “Maker Movement.”These political concerns directly influence the ways she analyzes learning within the after-schoolsetting: what counts as scientific? Are multiple ways of knowing supported or marginalized? When and how doSTEM practices become meaningful tools? What measures are used to assess effectiveness—persistentparticipation in STEM fields and/or a palpably deeper curiosity and intellectual disposition towards tinkeringthat may manifest across a range of contexts? Here, studying learning as a political process allows us to includedisciplinary content and expertise as objects of analysis, leading to distinct interpretations regarding youngpeople’s engagement with STEM. For example, students’ complex and sometimes tension-filled relationshipswith “Science” as a discipline are not treated as misconceptions to be solved on the linear path towardsdiversifying STEM fields, but as legitimate efforts to make sense of a field replete with its own history andpolitics. In this way, critical questions about goals and assumptions of “Science” become seeds for imaginingalternative possibilities with regard to who can engage in science, with what meanings, and towards what ends.Advancing Learning TheoryWhat would effectiveness in this endeavor look like? Learning sciences can put to rest the remarkably persistentpresence of deficit as a valid way to approach humans and learning. As a field, we already believe this and worktoward it, but our work has not put this to rest. Rather it has responded to it. Here is a theoretical proposition:Where knowledge is depoliticized and deficit organizes the practices around learning, dehumanization is likelyto occur through the reduction of what is seen to what is missing. The learning sciences can devise andinvestigate an alternative proposition because we are a field that merges cultural, cognitive, computational, anddemocratic design in service of deep reflection and understanding: Where knowledge is openly recognized aspolitical and contested, and humans are always making sense through social and historical practices,humanization is likely to occur as we contemplate one another through disciplined reflection. The formerproposition emphasizes what should be learned and whether it is effectively learned. The latter propositionemphasizes how learning occurs through practices of seeing and re-seeing each other.This year’s conference theme invited dialogue about practice, and each of us was experiencing a riftbetween theory and practice in our own work. Practice draws us into the lived experience of people—thelocation of our learning and becoming. Yet, if those experiences draw us toward political conclusions ratherthan discipline based, epistemic conclusions or scalable designs, it is an open question whether the political pathis an open one within learning sciences scholarship. The fields’ leadership in sociocultural theory opens thedoor, but it isn’t swung wide. As a field, how are we learning and becoming? Do our practices allow us tobecome openly political actors in relation to our scholarship? Certainly, foundational thinkers of the field wereengaged in these ways. Where can we carry those commitments today?ReferencesBang, M., Warren, B., Rosebery, A. S., & Medin, D. (2012). Desettling expectations in science education.Human Development, 55(5-6), 302-318.Barab, S., Thomas, M. K., Dodge, T., Squire, K., & Newell, M. (2004). Critical design ethnography: Designingfor change. Anthropology and Education Quarterly 35(2), 254-268.Barab, S. & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. Journal of the LearningSciences, 13(1), 1-14.Booker, A. (2010). Framing youth civic participation: Technical, pragmatic, and political learning. In L. Lin, H.Varenne, & E. W. Gordon. (Eds.) Educating comprehensively: Varieties of educational experiences(pp. 209-231). Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press.Booker, A., Montgomery-Block, K., Scott, Z., Reyes, b., & Onyewuenyi, A. (2011). Public scholarship withinan urban school district: A community and university partnership approach to service-learning. Journalof Public Scholarship in Higher Education, 1, 67-87.Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Cole, M. (2012) Commentary on conceptualizing cultural and racialized process in learning. HumanDevelopment. 55(5-6), 340-347.Cole, M., Hood, L., & McDermott, R. P. (1997). Concepts of ecological validity: Their differing implicationsfor comparative cognitive research. Mind, culture and activity: Seminal papers from the Laboratory ofComparative Human Cognition, 49-56.Dewey, J. (2012/1916). Democracy and education. New York: Dover Publications.Eckert, P. (1989). Jocks & burnouts: Social categories and identity in the high school. New York: TeachersCollege Press.Engeström, Y. (1991). Toward overcoming the encapsulation of school learning. Learning and Instruction, 1,243-259.Esmonde, I. & Caswell, B. (2010). Teaching mathematics for social justice in multicultural, multilingualelementary classrooms. Canadian Journal for Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education, 10(3),ICLS 2014 Proceedings925© ISLS244-254.Freire, P. (1985). The politics of education: Culture, power, and liberation. New York: Bergin & Garvey.Harris, A. P. & Schultz, M. M. (1993). “A(nother) critique of pure reason”: Toward civic virtue in legaleducation. Stanford Law Review, 45, 1773-1805.Hawkins, J., & Pea, R. D. (1987). Tools for bridging the cultures of everyday and scientific thinking. Journal forResearch in Science Teaching, 24, 291-307.Hooper, P. & Freed, N. (2013). "The Spiro Inquiry": Exploring the application of an inquiry structure forlearning science content to teaching with a digital design fabrication tool. Proceedings Interaction andDesign for Children 2013 New York: ACM.Goldman, S., Booker, A., & McDermott, M. (2007). Mixing the digital, social, and cultural: Learning, identityand agency in youth participation. In D. Buckingham. (Ed.) Youth, identity, and digital media (pp. 185206). MacArthur Foundation Series on Digital Media and Learning.Gonzalez, N. (2005). Beyond culture: The hybridity of funds of knowledge. In N. González, L. Moll, & C.Amanti (Eds.), Funds of knowledge: Theorizing practices in households, communities and classrooms(pp. 29-46). Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Gutiérrez, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading Research Quarterly,43(2), 148-164.Gutiérrez, K., Baquedano-Lopez, P., & Tejeda, C. (1999). Rethinking diversity. Hybridity and hybrid languagepractices in the third space. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 6(4), 286-303.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice.Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19-25.Institute for Inquiry. (2006). Inquiry structure for science learning. Fundamentals of Inquiry Facilitator’s Guide.http://www.exploratorium.edu/ifi/workshops/fundamentals/index.html San Francisco: Exploratorium.Lee, C. D. (2001). Is October Brown Chinese?: A cultural modeling activity system for underachievingstudents. American Educational Research Journal, 38, 97-141.Lee, C. D. (2012). Conceptualizing cultural and racialized process in learning. Human Development, 55(5-6),348-355.Lave, J. (1987). Cognition in practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.Matusov, E. (1998). When solo activity is not privileged: Participation and internalization models ofdevelopment. Human Development, 41, 326-349.Nasir, N. S. & Bang, M. (2012). Conceptualizingcultural and racialized process in learning. Human Development, 55(5-6), 247-249.Nasir, N. S. & Bang, M. (2012). Conceptualizing cultural and racialized process in learning. HumanDevelopment, 55(5-6), 247-249.Nasir, N. S., Rosebery, A. S., Warren B., & Lee, C. D. (2006). Learning as a cultural process: Achieving equitythrough diversity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 489504). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Papert, S. (1993). The Children’s Machine: Rethinking School in the Age of the Computer. New York: BasicBooks.Paris, D., & Winn, M. T. (Eds.). (2014). Humanizing research: Decolonizing qualitative inquiry with youth andcommunities. Los Angeles: Sage.Sawyer, R. K. (2006). The new science of learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of theLearning Sciences (pp. 1-16). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Scribner, S. & Cole, M. (1988). Unpackaging literacy. In E. Kintgen, B. Kroll, & M. Rose (Eds.), Perspectiveson literacy (pp. 57-70). Carbondale: Southern Illinois Press.Smith, L. T. (1999). Decolonizing methodologies: Research and indigenous peoples. London: Zed Books.Tejeda, C., Espinoza, M., Gutiérrez, K. (2003). Toward a decolonizing pedagogy: Social justice reconsidered. InP. Trifonas (Ed.), Pedagogies of difference (pp. 10-40). New York: RoutledgeFalmer Press.Varenne, H. & McDermott, R. P. (1998). Successful failure: The school America Builds. Boulder, CO:Westivew Press.Vossoughi, S. (Under Review). Social analytic artifacts made concrete.Vossoughi, S., Escudé, M., Kong, F., & Hooper, P. (2013). Tinkering, Learning & Equity in the After-SchoolSetting. Paper presented at the FabLearn Conference, Stanford University.Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Wertsch, J. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University PressAcknowledgmentWe thank Michael Cole for reading a draft of this paper and talking with us about the ideas presented here.ICLS 2014 Proceedings926© ISLS