What Does “Doing” Science Mean in the Elementary SchoolClassroom? Bruno Latour, Inscriptional Transformations, and aNew Look at Children’s Interactions with PhenomenaKathryn Lanouette, University of California, Berkeley, kathryn.lanouette@berkeley.eduEric Berson, Stanford University, eberson@standford.eduKathleen E. Metz, University of California, Berkeley, kmetz@berkeley.eduAbstract: Redesigning the way children interact with phenomena is critical to supportinglearning science’s core ideas through authentic scientific practices. Examining one designexperiment through the lens of Latour, we analyze how 2nd and 3rd grade students interact withphenomena at a botanical garden and how their inscriptional transformations parallel Latour’sobservations of scientists’ field research and laboratory interpretation. Our analysis suggeststhese practices support children understanding science’s “big ideas” as they learn in multiplecontexts.The NRC’s Framework for K-12 Science Education (2012) calls for integrating crosscutting concepts, coreideas and scientific practices. This conceptualization of science teaching represents a fundamentally differentrelationship between phenomena and science learning, engaging children in “doing” authentic science instead ofenacting “hands-on” activities that lack deeper conceptual understanding. Given the central role that modelbuilding plays in scientists’ interaction with real world phenomena (Mayr, 1997; Giere, 1997), we focused ouranalysis on this interaction in the context of an elementary school design-based research project.Latour’s (1990, 1999) “cascade of representation” framework is particularly fruitful for conceptualizingof the bidirectional connections between phenomena and model building. His research describes scientists’interaction with phenomena, detailing: (a) how scientists use tools, inscriptions, and the transformation ofinscriptions to make sense of complex phenomena; and (b) how this “cascade of representations” enables coreaspects of phenomena to travel between disparate physical contexts. In our case study analysis of three lessons,we used Latour’s framework as an analytical tool for understanding a more synergistic relationship betweenelementary school science classrooms and phenomena. We examined how children’s interactions withphenomena at a botanical garden and their ensuing inscriptional transformations parallel Latour’s observationsof scientists conducting field research and laboratory analysis. In detailing this parallel, we also explored howthese practices simultaneously support children’s understanding of science’s core concepts and synergisticallyconnect children’s science learning in varied contexts.MethodThe case study analysis drew from a larger research project that studied 2nd and 3rd graders’ developingunderstanding of the conceptual underpinnings of evolution, in the context of their study of plants or animals(Metz, 2013; Metz et al., 2010). The project took place at a public school classroom and a summer school in anurban metropolitan area serving mostly low SES, ethnically diverse students. This case study was based on asequence of three lessons, drawn from the 30-hour curriculum module. Data for this study includes: (1) students’written and illustrated work, (2) teacher-generated visual artifacts of instruction, and (3) video recordings of theclassroom and field-based instruction. Video recordings of children’s work in the three lessons were coded forthe scientists’ inscriptional phases articulated by Latour. Then teacher actions were coded for support ofstudents’ inscriptional transformations and interpretations. Students’ written and illustrated work and teachergenerated artifacts were examined for evidence of inscriptional transformations and abstraction of patterns.ResultsLatour (1999) noted that scientists’ field research in the Amazon rainforest was motivated by a distinct question:Is the savannah advancing or retreating on the rainforest? To motivate the children’s field research at a botanicalgarden, the instructional module posed a “big” question - “How do differences in plants’ structures help themget what they need in different environments?” - and fostered initial puzzlement about plants’ form, function,and fit through class discussions and a variety of media. Building from these questions, students wereintroduced to tools that allowed them to query the botanical garden’s phenomena. The tools included a “skycover instrument” to measure canopy coverage, a “green strip instrument” to measure plant chlorophyllconcentration, and thermometers.Latour observed scientists in the field using tools to generate initial inscriptions. Working in pairs at thebotanical garden using selected tools, children transformed biological phenomena into words, tally marks,numbers, shaded squares, sketches, and photographs. In the rainforest and desert greenhouses, children recordedICLS 2014 Proceedings1537© ISLSenvironmental data (skycover, humidity, and temperature) and plant data (green scale measurements, sketchesand photographs of plants) using observation sheets and digital cameras.Upon returning to the laboratory, Latour noted how scientists repeatedly transformed their fieldinscriptions to explore patterns in the data. Back in the classroom, children continued transforming theirinscriptions through a “cascade of representations”, ultimately generating two aggregated data charts. In thephotographs below (see Figure 1) showing part of one cascade, children used a green strip instrument totransform desert plants’ chlorophyll data into tally marks and later, each pairs’ chlorophyll data mode was usedto construct a histogram. These charts, coupled with teacher support, were used to engage children in makinginferences about the complex patterns among plants’ form, function, and the environment in which they live.Child using green strip instrument to quantify the amount ofchlorophyll in desert plants at botanical gardenChildren’s initial chlorophyllinscriptionsChlorophyll data assembled into a histogram (part of largeraggregated data classroom chart with environmental and plant data)Figure 1. “Cascade of representation” of children’s chlorophyll dataMovement between objects and symbolic representations can be challenging for children and adultsalike (Roth, Pozzer-Ardenghi & Yan, 2005). Two categories of teacher actions that supported this movementwere identified: reversing the “cascade of representations” and mathematizing the data. Both teacher moveswere crucial in facilitating students’ understanding of the “big ideas” and engagement with the practices thatLatour describes. Through these parallel practices and specific teacher supports, children were aided in makingnumerous complex comparisons between the plant and environmental data in different biomes, connections thatwould be extremely challenging to make at the botanical gardens themselves or back in the classroom withoutthese transformed inscriptional charts and teacher supports.ConclusionsLatour’s observations of scientists at work provides a powerful framework for conceptualizing elementaryschool science that embodies the knowledge-building practices of science and meaningfully integratesphenomena into science instruction. Analyses of children engaged in this module reveal rich interaction withphenomena and engagement with the representation transformation process, in many ways echoing the scientists’activities documented by Latour. By providing children with multiple opportunities to interact directly withcomplex phenomena, inscribe their observations, and transform these inscriptions through a “cascade ofrepresentations” - both outside and inside the school walls - this module supports a more synergistic andepistemologically authentic relationship between phenomena and knowledge building in the elementary scienceclassroom.ReferencesGiere, R. (1997). Understanding scientific reasoning (4th ed). New York: Harcourt Brace.Latour, B. (1990). Drawing things together. In M. Lynch & S. Woolgar (Eds.), Representations in scientificpractice (pp. 19-68). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Latour, B. (1999). Pandora’s hope: Essays on the reality of science studies. London: Cambridge UniversityPress.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Mayr, E. (1997). This is biology: The science of the living world. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Metz, K.E. (2013). Scaffolding the mechanism of natural selection at the system level ofmicroevolution. Symposium Presentation at the International Meetings of the National Association ofResearch in Science Teaching, San Juan Puerto Rico, April 6-10.Metz, K.E., Sisk-Hilton, S., & Berson, E. (2010). Scaffolding children’s understanding of the fit betweenorganisms and their environment in the context of the practices of science. Proceedings of the 9th InternationalConference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2010), Vol.1, Full Papers. International Society of theLearning Sciences: Chicago IL.Roth, W.M., Pozzer-Ardenghi, L., & Han, J. (2005). Critical graphicacy: Understanding visual representationsin school science. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: SpringerICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1538© ISLS