Moving Beyond Case Studies: Using Social Network Analysis toStudy Learning as Participation in Communities of PracticeJulia Eberle, Karsten Stegmann, Frank FischerLudwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Leopoldstr. 13, 80802 Munich, Germanyjulia.eberle@psy.lmu.de, karsten.stegmann@psy.lmu.de, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.deAbstract: We argue that social network analysis is a useful methodology to study learningunder the participation metaphor and to extend scholarly knowledge on the process oflegitimate peripheral participation in communities of practice. We emphasize that it isnecessary to extend current research about the epistemic aspects of participative learning andto take also the social aspects into account; we first review work on legitimate peripheralparticipation and how research on this topic is currently conducted. Then we describe thetheoretical and methodological foundations of social network analysis. Exemplary studies thatuse social network analysis including studies on legitimate peripheral participation arepresented. We conclude that social network analysis can enable us to make inferences aboutparticipative learning across specific setting and individual communities. For the future, thechallenge is to relate dynamically changing patterns of legitimate peripheral participation toemerging and changing epistemic practices of a community.IntroductionThe perspective of learning as becoming in practice is closely related to what Sfard (1991) termed theparticipation metaphor of learning. Learning as seen through the lens of this metaphor focuses on thedevelopment of individuals’ identity by engaging in certain practices and participating that way in a specificsocial environment. This approach seems especially valuable for research on informal and workplace learning inwhich learning goals and paths are very individual and can often hardly be defined by outsiders. Learning underthe participation metaphor takes into account that the process of learning and the individual learning goals aresituated in the learner’s social and epistemic environment. However, most research in this direction still focuseson the epistemic dimension of participation, by analyzing practices and artifacts produced by participativelearners. The social dimension has only rarely been the focus of research, probably in part because of a lack inresearch methodologies that would allow for meaningful ways of analysis.In this paper, we argue that social network analysis (SNA) is a very promising methodology to studylearning under the participation metaphor. SNA is not a new methodology to the ISLS community. Yoon(2011), for example, introduced SNA as a visualization tool to foster students’ interaction. It also has been usedto analyze community building in scientific communities (Hoadley, 2005). However, using SNA in a puremethodological way to operationalize and analyze learning processes and outcomes is still a mostly unexploredfield in the Learning Sciences.To show how SNA can be applied as a research methodology to enhance our understanding of learningas participation, we first review work on the theoretical approach behind the view of learning as participationand the empirical evidence gathered so far. We will then argue how SNA can be applied to study learning underthe participation metaphor, followed by two exemplary studies in which this methodology has been applied. Inthe conclusion, we come back to the question to what extent SNA is a useful methodology to study learning andwhat possibilities it provides for future research.Learning as ParticipationResearch with the perspective of learning as participation mostly focusses on the understanding of real-worldlearning occurring outside of formal learning situations. It is a situated approach to learning based on the idea oflegitimate peripheral participation of a learner in a community of practice which is considered to lead to atransformation of the learner's identity (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998). Through participation inactivities which are specific to the community of practice, a newcomer is confronted with the community'sartifacts, and has opportunities to learn the relevant practices, and participates in the community’s process ofnegotiating meaning.Learning as Legitimate Peripheral Participation in Communities of PracticeOne of the central aspects of learning under the participation metaphor is the epistemic and social context inwhich learning takes place. Lave and Wenger (1991) termed this context “community of practice” (CoP).Capturing the CoP concept adequately is tricky, although (or probably even because) it is widely used andapplied by researchers and practitioners in several disciplines and professions. However, Barab and colleagueshave worked on a comprehensive set of characteristics that define a CoP and make the concept graspable andICLS 2014 Proceedings463© ISLSworkable with for Learning Scientists (Barab & Duffy, 2000; Barab, MaKinster, & Scheckler, 2003). Theydefine a CoP by several epistemic and social aspects: shared knowledge, values and beliefs, overlappinghistories and mutual interdependence among members, mechanisms for reproduction, a common practice and/ormutual enterprise, opportunities for interactions and participation, meaningful relationships, and respect fordiverse perspectives and minority views.This set of characteristics clearly shows the importance of both epistemic and social aspects thatcharacterize the CoP concept, although most research based on the concept has so far emphasized the epistemicpart, especially the shared practices, and more or less neglected the social aspects. However, Wenger,McDermott, and Snyder (2002) have made some further claims on the social structure of a CoP and differentiatebetween members that belong to a small core group that leads the CoP, a larger group of active members thatrun the CoP, an often even larger group of peripheral members that only participate irregularly in the CoP, andfinally outsiders who might be influenced by the CoP but are not directly involved. Some CoPs also have acoordinator to facilitate the actions among the CoP members. Another way of speaking about the socialstructure, especially relevant for learning, is the differentiation between newcomers and old-timers who engagein the CoP in different ways. The transition process from being a newcomer to becoming an experienced oldtimer in the CoP was described by Lave and Wenger (1991) as legitimate peripheral participation (LPP).They describe LPP as a natural form of learning which happens all the time, no matter whether there isan intended educational situation or not. The main focus of this perspective on learning is an increase ofnewcomers’ level of participation within a specific CoP. A newcomer usually starts as a mostly passive outsiderand becomes a more capable and active member over time, accompanied by a transformation of his or heridentity. This transformation includes a change in cognition, communication, and behavior towards the sharedpractices of a CoP and is based on a CoP-specific, socially shared learning history. These changes cannotmerely be found in individual minds but also in the increased participation in CoP practices and tasks. Also, therelations between newcomers and more experienced members develop with the newcomers’ engagement in thepractices of a CoP practices.Peripheral participation means an increase of newcomers’ involvement, starting with rather passiveactivities in the beginning like observing how old-timers talk, interpret new situations, react to them, and dealwith problems. Newcomers can take over simple and easily manageable tasks that do not require muchknowledge about the CoP. Later, when newcomers have learned more, they can take over less peripheral andmore complex tasks that require more responsibility and are more important to the CoP. One of the remarkabledifferences between LPPand learning in deliberately designed educational settings is the “design” of thecurriculum. The curriculum in the LPP process is based on the practices and activities that occur in usualsituations the CoP faces, but does not follow the steps an old-timer would follow to achieve a CoP goal (Lave &Wenger, 1991). Newcomers are only allowed to contribute to these activities of goal achievement that do notrequire more than they can accomplish because this would bare the danger for the whole CoP to fail their goal.This gives newcomers opportunities to actively participate in CoP life and get insight into its practices withouthaving the role of a non-involved visitor. Newcomers have access to practices that are typically not explicated,like how individual members of the CoP interact with each other and with outsiders of the CoP..The second important aspect of this kind of learning is the question of legitimation of newcomers’participation. Lave and Wenger (1991) assume that there are more or less strict entry criteria or barriers in eachCoP. These entry criteria regulate newcomers’ possibilities for learning. Only legitimate newcomers get accessto community activities, information and resources and those are important for peripheral participation. Severalcase studies (for example Back, 2011; Fuller, Hodkinson, Hodkinson, & Unwin, 2005) have illustrated therelation between newcomers’ legitimation in the CoP and their access to possibilities for peripheralparticipation. Members to whom the CoP does not grant access as legitimate members for some reason, cannotbecome more active participants. They form a special type of peripheral members, called marginalizedmembers. Marginalization can have various reasons, most common are reasons related to the broader context ofthe group like hierarchies or positions in an organization that prevent that some persons can become members ofa particular CoP. Certain characteristics, like gender, age, or ethnicity of marginalized persons can be otherreasons for marginalization.Lave and Wenger (1991) stated that the LPP process is dependent on how the resources that areimportant for newcomers’ learning are structured in the community or how transparent the CoPs artifacts are.There is usually not much explicit teaching involved, but there can be masters, sponsors, and other newcomerswho might help structure the learning process and make invisible artifacts a little more transparent.Communication plays therefore an important role for learning in CoPs, not only for transferring information butalso to guide the attention of newcomers, engage them and coordinate collaboration. But according to theauthors, most important for newcomers’ learning are possibilities for participation. It can therefore be assumedthat newcomer’s exposure time to a CoP will play an important role for the learning process: The more time anewcomer can spend with CoP activities and other members of the CoP, the more opportunities for learning willarise. LPP should not be understood as “mere exposure effect” in which the amount of time spent in a CoP is theICLS 2014 Proceedings464© ISLSonly crucial factor for a newcomer’s level of participation, as Lave and Wenger’s examples of influencingfactors show. They identify a research gap at that point wondering how the knowledge of CoPs can be madetransparent to newcomers.Research on Legitimate Peripheral ParticipationCompared to the CoP concept, the LPP concept as the core element of the initial theory has been studied lessintensively. However, it was applied to workplace learning and has proven to be a useful approach, for examplein workplace learning of nurse teachers (Boyd & Lawley, 2009) and of police officers (Campbell, Verinikina, &Herrington, 2009). Researchers have also investigated, if online environments can be created to build CoPs forprofessionals in order to support newcomers to professions in which they usually have to work alone, forexample coordinators of Canadian Community Adult Learning Councils (Gray, 2004), or teachers (Barab,MaKinster, & Scheckler, 2003).Several researchers have found evidence for the importance of legitimacy and issues of power for LPP(e.g. Davies, 2005). The case study by Back (2011) on the LPP process of two newcomers in an Andeanfolkloric music band also supports the argument that legitimacy is the key to opportunities for learning. In thisstudy, the cases of two band members were explored using ethnographic methods. Both newcomers had startedwith similar conditions regarding their experience as musicians and also their lack of speaking skills in thetraditional Quichua language in which the band’s music was performed. This language is closely related to thetraditions of the long suppressed Otavalo culture, and it made a significant difference for the integration processof both members, to what extent they felt connected to this culture. Although both persons were willing to learnthe language and to engage in the music business of the group, only the person who showed a personalconnection to the Otavalo culture was fully integrated and granted access to opportunities for learning what wasnecessary for the CoP, namely the language, while the other person was marginalized.Only little research has focused on the second part of the participative learning approach, the peripheralparticipation. An example of such a study is provided by Lambson (2010), who investigated the participativelearning process of three newcomers in a CoP of literacy teachers who met regularly to discuss ideas about howto improve their teaching and to share classroom stories about teaching experiences. Legitimation was in thisCoP never a problem for the three newcomers who were new teachers at the school. In the beginning, the twocomplete newcomers participated mostly passively and described feelings of insecurity because of theirnewcomer status, while the one who had already known the other teachers for some time, participated moreactively. Over time, all of them showed more active forms of participation and reported that they felt moresecure in their role as a teacher. Also changes in newcomers' talks was observed from mere reports of how theyhad designed the teaching in a class in the beginning towards a focus on students' reactions to the ways ofteaching they tried.In this CoP, also certain ways of facilitation of the LPP process were observed. The CoP had a leaderwho took care that every member was heard and often asked newcomers directly when she felt that they couldcontribute something. She engaged all members, including the newcomers, in conversations with herself and therest of the community, shared her own experiences on questions relevant to newcomers, and provided access torelevant information and resources. This study points to the importance of the question of what exactly happensduring peripheral participation. However, this question has attracted little attention so far and lacks systematicanalysis.Both studies are representative examples for current research on participative learning that focusesmostly on the epistemic parts of participative learning (newcomers’ engagement in CoP practices) and onlymarginally explores the social aspects of the integration into a CoP.Social Network Perspective on Learning as ParticipationIn the context of the LPP approach, process and outcome of learning are closely related, interdependent, and arenecessary conditions for each other. There is no end of the learning process which would facilitate themeasurement of a learning outcome. This is especially the case, because not only the individual person learns,but also the CoP as a whole develops during the learning processes of its individual members. For the learner inthe CoP, learning is not only the acquisition of knowledge, but concerns identity. These conditions do hardlyallow for applying “standard quantitative methodology” and we see that most research on CoPs and learning inCoPs is ethnographic and of qualitative nature so far and only few quantitative studies have been conducted(Nistor & Fischer, 2012). Another reason for the sparseness of quantitative methods on the topic might be thatresearchers have mostly focused on the epistemic/practice part of CoPs in their studies and practices are highlycomplex, often seemingly unique and require in-depths analyses. However, the social aspects of learning inCoPs is also very important within this concept and this aspects better allows for the use of quantitativemeasures.ICLS 2014 Proceedings465© ISLSA corresponding statement that relations between newcomers and old-timers in the CoP and theirchanges over time are central aspects of LPP, can also be found in the original book on LPP (Lave & Wenger,1991, p. 59/60):“[...] learning as increasing participation in communities of practice concerns the wholeperson acting in the world. Conceiving of learning in terms of participation focuses attentionon ways in which it is an evolving, continuously renewed set of relations; this is, of course,consistent with a relational view, of persons, their actions, and the world, typical of a theoryof social practice.”On this background we suggest that SNA is suitable way for the investigation of LPP in CoPs, becauseit has the potential to extend our current knowledge on LPP in ways other methodological approaches cannotprovide.Social Network Theory as a Methodology to Analyze LPP in CoPThe basis of all social networks are relations between individuals, called ties. Individuals are usually persons,but can also be organizations or larger groups of persons. Two individuals in a social network can be linked bythree different types of ties (Borgatti, Mehra, Brass, & Labianca, 2009). (1) a tie can be based on similarities;this can be being member of the same group or sharing an attribute. (2) a tie can be based on social roles withinthe social network; these roles can e.g. be based on forms of cohabitation like being friends or colleagues, butalso based on affective (e.g. liking, or hating each other) or cognitive states (e.g. knowing something aboutsomeone). (3) a tie can be based on interactions between individuals, e.g. if two individuals talk to each other.Additionally, ties can either be seen as absent, weak or strong (Granovetter, 1973). The strength of a tiebetween two individuals depends on the amount of time they spend with each other, the intensity of theiremotional attachment, or the reciprocal services. Granovetter (1973) argues, and his hypotheses have beensupported by empirical findings (e.g. Granovetter, 1983) that individuals live in close knit social networks withstrong ties (like family and friends), which support them in many ways. However, individuals have also severalweak ties (acquaintances), which are bridges to the otherwise unrelated close knit networks of theacquaintances. These weak ties can therefore have positive attributes that cannot be found in strong ties, aprominent example is the access to new information like job offers. Wenger (1998) states that CoPs arenetworks of strong ties (with a focus on the practice and not only on information flow). However, it can beassumed that many forms of strong ties have developed from weak ties.The second element of social network theory (Borgatti, Mehra, Brass, & Labianca, 2009) is theimportance of structure. Social network research revealed several underlying structures and rules which affectthe development of human interaction. For a social network as a whole, social network theory provides evidencethat not only the composition of the network regarding important attributes of its individual actors can explainits functioning, but that the relations between the individuals are of high importance; for instance teamperformance is not only subject to the skills and knowledge of the team members but to a high extent of therelations between the members and the way they interact with each other. For an individual, on the other hand,her position and embeddedness in a specific social network as well as the structure of the person's own socialnetwork are also of high importance and of a great predictive value.Social network research is, furthermore, characterized by specific types of research questions that taketies between individuals and/or the structure of a social network into account, which distinguishes it from othertypes of research in the social sciences, and it focuses on specific varieties of networks in different contexts,which distinguishes SNA from network research in science. A typical set of research questions deals with theconsequences of social network structures, trying to predict various kinds of outcomes leading them back tovariances in the social network structures of groups. Another research focus is on the antecedents of networkformation, mostly focusing on dyads. This research investigates for examples factors that can predict a dyad'slikelihood to form a friendships tie (Borgatti, Mehra, Brass, & Labianca, 2009).The usually underlying theoretical mechanisms of SNA are adaption, binding, and exclusion (Borgatti,Mehra, Brass, & Labianca, 2009). It is assumed that something relevant, such as knowledge, flows between theties of a social network. This flow can either lead to adaption in form of convergence between the connectedindividuals, or to a binding which can be understood similar to a chemical binding in which two elements form anew entity when they connect. Exclusion as the third mechanism applies to situations in which the number ofpossible relations is restricted and the formation of one tie means that other ties cannot be formed.Methodological Foundations of Social NetworksA social network consists of two elements: The individuals, which are in SNA termed as actors or nodes, andthe relations that connect them, which are usually referred to as ties or edges (Scott, 2000). Analysis andpresentation of social networks relies on the one hand on sociograms which visualize the social network usingdots of various shapes to display the actors and lines or arrows as representations for ties. A social network is aICLS 2014 Proceedings466© ISLSmultidimensional object, with each additional actor requiring a further dimension, which makes visualization intwo dimensions (or three at a maximum) a challenging task. Additionally, more complex mathematicalapproaches are used to satisfy the requirements of the multidimensional complexity of social networks. Matrixalgebra and graph-theory form the basis for SNA (Borgatti, Mehra, Brass, & Labianca, 2009).From a researcher's perspective, two forms of SNA are possible (Hatala, 2006). An ego-network is thesocial network of one particular actor. The main actor, called ego, is the center of the network and all actors towhich ego has ties appear in that network. A complete network analysis, by contrast, focuses on the wholenetwork consisting of a defined set of actors and the ties between all the actors are collected. A complete socialnetwork can be analyzed on three different levels (Hatala, 2006). (1) The level of the whole network allowsdescribing its structure. Some of the most popular measures on that level are density or cohesion, which indicateif a network is dense or loose regarding the amount of ties between the actors. Another prominent measure iscentralization, which describes the network's structure as more centralized with a clear core or as ratherdistributed. Also modularity is a relevant measure; it indicates if a network consists of many small clusters or ifall members are evenly connected to each other.(2) On the actor level, the situation of individual actors within the network can be analyzed. On thatlevel, the most studied concept is centrality which measures the structural importance and prominence of anactor within a social network (Borgatti, Mehra, Brass, & Labianca, 2009). Degree centrality is the simplestcentrality measures and is, in short, the sum of all ties of an actor. In larger networks, it can be relevant todistinguish between global degree centrality which is the sum of all ties an actor has in the whole network, andlocal degree centrality which indicates the actor's centrality between several clusters of the network (Hatala,2006). Additionally, the measurement of the tie influences the computation of centrality. There are cases inwhich a tie is undirected, like actor A and actor B are in the same class, and so a simple measure of centralitycan be computed, but the tie can also be directed which means it can be seen differently by actor A and B, likeA gives information to B, but B does not give information to A. In this case, it is necessary to distinguishbetween indegree-centrality and outdegree-centrality. Indegree-centrality is based on the amount of ties that aredirected towards an actor, whereas outdegree-centrality is based on the amount of ties that are direct from theactor to the others. Also others, more complex measures for centrality were developed like betweennesscentrality which is not only based on an actor's direct ties, but also the indirect ties that an actors has over theactors to whom she is connected (Scott, 2000). Closeness-centrality, as a further measure, is even morecomplex. It measures an actor's closeness to all other actors in the network (Freeman, 1979). However, degreecentrality is the most common centrality measure and it allows for a more straight forward interpretation thanthe other centrality measures.(3) The third level for SNA is the tie-level which usually deals with dyads and how two actors arerelated. For each dyad can be said, if a certain type of relation is present or not. Sometimes, it is also useful tohave not yes or no outcome for a relation, but a valued relation which represents the intensity of the relation. Forexample, it can be asked if two persons had talked to each other, and also how long or how often they had talkedto each other.With the emergence of online social networks sites, the awareness of people about their own socialnetwork increases. Also research on social network can increase participants' awareness on their social network.Borgatti and colleagues (2009) see this as similar to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle of which researchersshould be aware. However, this effect provides also potential for constructive use, when network visualizationsare used to enhance actors' awareness of the structure or risky positions of individual actors in the socialnetwork, and provides possibilities to intervene. The work of Yoon (2011) builds on that idea.As we argued before, participative learning in the form of LPP can be understood as an increase ofnewcomers' participation within a social network. Therefore, the social network as a whole is not as relevant, asthe person-level and the tie-level are for the investigation of learning. On the person-level, one of the most usedindicators is centrality, a measure, which is also relevant for studying participative learning. Centrality measuresto what extent an individual is related to other persons in the network. So, successful LPP can be operationalizedas an increase of newcomer's centrality. But also the tie-level can be relevant, to study which factors haveinfluence of a tie's probability to turn into a certain type of relation.Examples of Applied Social Network Analysis to Study LearningIn the Learning Sciences SNA is not yet a standard approach, but also not unknown. Some studies can be foundthat are based on this methodology. CSCL, for example, has been studied in formal settings using SNAapproaches. Nurmela, Lethinen, and Palonen (1999), for instance, applied a social network approach in a studyon students who participated in a university course on educational psychology and worked on a learningplatform. The students worked in dyads for a semester and had to complete weekly assignments. The onlinelearning environment allowed the joint writing of assignment texts and commenting to texts of other students'assignment texts. A tutor encouraged interaction across the student dyads. SNA was used to analyze logfiles ofthe joint writing process and the interaction of students via the commenting tool. The social network approachICLS 2014 Proceedings467© ISLSprovided a way to display the interaction of students in a structured way, to identify central actors in thecommenting process, to show inequalities between the dyads and to identify the key documents of jointengagement in the commenting process.Another social network study on CSCL by Reffai and Chanier (2000) investigated cohesion in a largescale distance-learning course on French as a foreign language. Cohesion, in the sense of regular participationand commitment to the class, is considered as highly important for collaborative learning as it is the basis for thelearners' motivation and ability to benefit from the teaching approach. Similar to the study by Nurmela andcolleagues (1999), social network measures were applied to make the complex communication in the virtuallearning platform visible, finding cliques as well as central or isolated students in the discussions. Reffai andChanier (2000) conclude that such measures can be very useful for tutors and lecturers to monitor the complexcommunication and a monitoring tool based on SNA would be a helpful tool.In contrast to formal learning settings, SNA has rarely been applied in informal settings to studylearning. As we argued, especially for these settings and when studying learning as participation, SNA has highpotential to push research forward. To illustrate this kind of research, we will describe two studies we conductedwith the aim to bring further our understanding of learning as participation by focusing on the social aspects ofthis approach.Using SNA to Study the Role of Integration Tactics on Newcomers ParticipationAs our review of research on legitimate peripheral participation has shown, the role of old-timers facilitation ofthe LPP process has rarely been explored although scattered findings indicate its importance. Therefore, weconducted a study with the goal to investigate how old-timers of CoPs structure the participative learningprocess of newcomers (Eberle, Stegmann, & Fischer, 2014).Our sample consisted of the members of 14 faculty student councils, which are CoPs of universitystudents at one particular faculty sharing the goal to improve student life and education from the studentperspective. We implemented a mixed-method approach including SNA to tackle the question. To capture howold-timers’ facilitate and influence the participative learning process of newcomers in their CoP, we interviewedan experienced member of each CoP and extracted several distinct integration strategies using qualitativecontent analysis. We then assigned a quantified value for the use of each of the integration strategies within theindividual CoPs to allow for a regression analysis to explore the relation of these integration tactics to the stateof participative learning in the newcomers of the CoPs.SNA methodology was applied to identify newcomers’ states of participative learning. We asked allmembers to fill a social network questionnaire and to indicate on a Likert-scale for each of the other members towhat extent they had collaborated with them during the last three months. We received a collaboration networkwith valued ties for each of the CoPs and decided to take the indegree-centrality measure of the newcomers asindicator for their state of participative learning, taking only the ratings of old-timers into account. We opted fora degree-centrality measure as its interpretation is the easiest compared to other centrality measures. Thedecision for using the indegree-centrality was based on the finding that old-timers rated much more conservativethen newcomers who probably lacked the experience to estimate the intensity collaboration can have in theparticular CoP as it is perceived by experienced members.HLM models based on our measures for integration tactics of the CoPs and individual states ofparticipative learning of their newcomers showed that certain tactics (especially the tactic to make specificcommunity knowledge accessible to the newcomers) seem to be influential during the LPP process ofnewcomers across several CoPs. Our focus on the social aspects of LPP using SNA gave as the possibility toinvestigate LPP across the very specific individual conditions in CoPs which would have hardly been possible ifwe had focused on epistemic aspects like identifying newcomers’ use of certain CoP specific practices. In thisstudy, SNA was the key to go beyond case studies within one CoP and to make comparison betweenparticipative learning processes in different CoPs possible.Using SNA to Study the Role of Integration Tactics on Newcomers ParticipationIn our second study (Eberle et al., 2013), we wanted to explore if the most promising integration tactic we foundin faculty student councils is also influential in another type of CoP and investigate the detailed effects of thistactic more in depth. The integration tactic we looked at was the provision of access to community knowledgewhich can be implemented in several ways from written information to oral instructions, and from informationabout community practices to information about individual community members.We set up a quasi-experimental study in a scientific community and studied the differences thatoccurred between members who had received supportive access to community knowledge and those who didnot receive this support measure during a scientific event. Our support measure was a brochure with informationabout the other members.This study was solely based on an SNA approach and several ways of data collection about the socialnetwork structure and ties between individuals were implemented: (1) we tracked the interaction between theICLS 2014 Proceedings468© ISLSCoP members during the scientific event using RFID devices that captured who interacted with whom, (2) wedistributed SNA questionnaires asking the members with whom they had collaborated before the event and withwhom they planned to collaborate afterwards, and (3) we run a google scholar search 1.5 years after the event toidentify coauthored publications. The analysis focused on the emerging ties between the members and revealedthat our intervention had an influence on the interactions between members at the event with those in the groupwho received access to community knowledge interacting with less other members than those without access tocommunity knowledge, leaving more time for longer interactions; longer interaction times, furthermore, lead toa higher probability of identifying potential for future collaboration.Our SNA based study design allowed for a very detailed data collection of occurring collaboration andinteraction that would not have been possible with traditional approaches like video studies. We were able tofollow the participants’ behavior during a 4 day period during the whole day and in a wide locational rangewithout disturbing or hindering spontaneously occurring interaction. Through the combination of the behavioralmeasures for interaction and the SNA questionnaire, we were able to capture natural interaction behavior as wellas the individuals’ interpretations of these interactions had for the observed persons. We were even able toidentify to what extent intended behavior had culminated in productivity and the production of artifacts that areof high value for the particular community. The triangulation of these different aspects of embeddedness in thesocial structures of the CoP allowed us to identify the current state of a person within the CoP in a sophisticatedmulti-facetted way.ConclusionsWe have argued that research based on the metaphor of learning as participation, which is closely related to theapproach of LPP in CoPs, has so far focused mostly on the development an re-instantiations of practices –which can be seen as the epistemic aspect of participative learning. We suggest taking the social aspects, namelythe integration of newcomers into the social network of a CoP more into account. From a methodologicalperspective, the two studies we presented on learning as participation using an SNA approach are rare cases ofquantitative research in the field of learning in CoPs (Nistor & Fischer, 2012). Case studies are so far thedominant research method for participative learning in CoPs. An important reason for that probably is that eachCoP is a complex and distinct constellation of factors; some practices are only relevant in that specific CoP andalso the way how members mutually engage do differ remarkably between CoP. Therefore, it is a criticalquestion to what extent findings from one CoP can be transferred to another or if these results are only valid forthe specific context. However, learning has always be seen as a complex process with important individual andcontextual influences, no matter under which paradigm it is investigated. It is a main characteristic ofquantitative research that it aims at identifying re-occuring and hence maybe generalizable patterns that are validacross individual and contextual characteristics. Such general patterns are still missing in research onparticipative learning in CoPs. In contrast to this, the use of SNA that allows for research across individual CoPscan also show which aspects are indeed specific for certain CoPs and cannot be transferred. At the moment, wejust have a scattered body of research that neither allows for conclusions about CoPs and participative learningin general, nor for the argumentation that findings are specific to certain CoPs or types of CoPs. Instead, theaccumulated body of research is very diverse and full of different understandings of the core concept. Aftermore than 30 years of research in this field, it seems not too early to explore the concepts also moresystematically including also quantitative means.Taking a look at the social aspects of participative learning instead of only on the epistemic aspectsseems to be a promising approach in this direction. Means of SNA have turned out to be a promising approachfor this endeavor. The focus on social aspects identified by applying means of SNA allow for comparison acrossspecific epistemic settings and individual cases. It allows research in so far under-investigated areas of learning,especially in informal learning settings that can hardly be approached using traditional methodology because itis impossible to predict when and where informal learning opportunities occur and what they will be about.Developing technological means like the use of RFID devices attached to individuals in physically co-presentcommunities allow new approaches to collect data in these areas that have mostly been “un-researchable” untilnow. Also developments in data analysis methods, like dynamic SNA and other means of capturing networkevolution, allow for new research questions and extension of the current focus. The combination of newlydeveloping and more traditional methods like questionnaires and interviews seems especially promising, as itnot only allows for capturing different types of data but also for triangulating and validating these data.However, only very few of the possibilities that SNA theory and methods offers have been applied inthe Learning Sciences so far. Not only research on learning on CoPs could benefit from SNA, disciplines likeeducation and the learning sciences have not yet identified the full potential of this approach for theunderstanding learning and social factors related to education. However, the most beneficial step would be tointegrate both perspectives, the epistemic and the social perspective for further investigation of learning underthe participation metaphor, by looking at emerging and changing practices in communities in relation to theemerging and dynamically changing participation processes of individuals and groups of individuals.ICLS 2014 Proceedings469© ISLSReferencesEberle, J., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2014). Legitimate Peripheral Participation in Communities ofPractice—Participation Support Structures for Newcomers in Faculty Student Councils. Journal of theLearning Sciences, doi:10.1080/10508406.2014.883978.Eberle, J., Stegmann, K., Lund, K., Barrat, A., Sailer, M., & Fischer, F. (2013). The development ofcollaborations in a scientific community – evidence from an experiment using sociometric RFIDdevices. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), To See the World and a Grainof Sand: Learning across Levels of Space, Time, and Scale: CSCL 2013 Conference ProceedingsVolume 1 – Full Papers & Symposia (pp. 169-175). International Society of the Learning Sciences:Madison, WI, USA.Back, M. (2011). Legitimate Peripheral Participation and Language Learning: Two Quichua Learners in aTransnational Community. Language Learning, 61(4), 1039-1057.Barab, S.A., & Duffy, T.M. (2000). From Practice Fields to Communities of Practice. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.),Theoretical foundations of learning environments. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Barab, S.A., MaKinster, J.G., & Scheckler, R. (2003). Designing system dualities: characterizing a websupported professional development community. The Information Society, 19(3), 237-256.Borgatti, S.P., Mehra, A., Brass, D.J., & Labianca, G. (2009). Network Analysis in the Social Sciences. Sciences,323, 892-895.Boyd, P., & Lawley, L. (2009). Becoming a Lecturer in Nurse Education: the workplace learning of ClinicalExperts as Newcomers. Learning in Health and Social Care, 8(4), 292–300.Campbell, M., Verenikina, I., & Herrington, A. (2009). Intersection of trajectories: a newcomer in a communityof practice. Journal of Workplace Learning, 21(8), 647-657.Collins, A. (2006). Cognitive Apprenticeship. In R.K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the LearningSciences (pp. 47-60). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Davies, B. (2005). Communities of Practice: Legitimacy not Choice. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 9(4), 557-581.Fuller, A., Hodkinson, H., Hodkinson, P., & Unwin, L. (2005). Learning as Peripheral Participation inCommunities of Practice: a Reassessment of Key Concepts in Workplace Learning. BritishEducational Research Journal, 31(1), 49-68.Granovetter, M (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78, 1360-1380.Granovetter, M (1983). The strength of weak ties: a network theory revisited. Sociological Theory, 1, 203-233.Gray, B. (2004). Informal learning in an online community of practice. Journal of Distance Education, 19(1),20-35.Hatala, J.-P. (2006). Social network analysis in human resource development: a new methodology. HumanResource Development Review, 5, 45-71.Hoadley, C.M. (2005). The shape of the elephant: scope and membership of the CSCL community. In T.Koschman, D.D. Suthers, & T.-W. Chan (eds.), Computer supported collaborative learning: the next 10years! Proceedings of the international conference on computer supported collaborative learning 2005(pp. 205-2010). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Lambson, D. (2010). Novice teachers learning through participation in a teacher study group. Teaching andTeacher Education, 26(8), 1660–1668.Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: CambridgeUniv. Pr.Nistor, N. & Fischer, F. (2012). Communities of practice in academia: testing a quantitative model. Learning,Culture and Social interaction, 1, 114-128.Nurmela, K.A., Lehtinen, E., Palonen, T. (1999). Evaluating CSCL log files by Social Network Analysis. In C.M. Hoadley and J. Roschelle (Eds.), Proceedings of the Computer Support for Collaborative Learning(CSCL) 1999 Conference. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University, 434-444.Reffai, C., & Chanier, T. (2000). How social network analysis can help to measure cohesion in collaborativedistance-learning. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the danger of choosing just one. Educational Researcher,29(4), 4-13.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice. Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Wenger, E., McDermott, R., & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating communities of practice: A guide to managingknowledge. Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press.Yoon, S. (2011). Using social network graphs as visualization tools to influence peer selection decision-makingstrategies to access information about complex socioscientific issues. Journal of the learning sciences,20(4), 549-588.ICLS 2014 Proceedings470© ISLS