Distributed Cognition and Gesture:Propagating a Functional System Through Impromptu TeachingRobert F. Williams, Lawrence University, robert.f.williams@lawrence.eduSimon Harrison, University of Nottingham, Ningbo, simon.harrison@nottingham.edu.cnAbstract: On a beach in France, a lifeguard makes three attempts to teach a colleague how touse a wristwatch and the sun to find compass directions. Each attempt involves constructingand coordinating representations in multiple spaces: sand, surroundings, watch, and air(gesture space). Close examination reveals how the hands, eyes, and body construct andconnect these representations and enact their coordination in a cognitive functional system.OverviewIn keeping with the conference theme of “Learning and Becoming in Practice,” this poster examines aspects ofdistributed cognition and gesture (Williams 2013) in impromptu teaching in an outdoor work setting. The dataconsist of a video-recording of a lifeguard on a beach in southwestern France teaching a colleague how to locatecardinal directions using an analog wristwatch and the position of the sun. The lifeguard makes three attempts toteach his colleague how to coordinate these elements to fix south and from there to locate north, east, and west.Our poster examines in each of these attempts, rendered as a sequence of annotated images, how orchestratedmovements of the hands, eyes, and body guide conceptualization (Williams 2008ab). From this analysis, weargue for a distributed view of human cognition, situated view of instruction, and embodied view of teaching.Distributed Cognition: Cognitive Functional SystemsAmong the most distinguishing features of human cognition is how brain, body, and world interact to produceimpressive cultural and cognitive achievements (Clark 1997). Hutchins (1995) argues for a distributedperspective on human cognition: he claims that cognitive activites are accomplished through coordinations ofconceptual and material elements in functional systems. In moments of human practice, we instantiatefunctional systems to transform inputs (say, a configuration of hands on a clock face) into outputs (a timereading [Williams 2008ab]). Functional systems involve ways of perceiving and acting that coordinate systemelements to fix the targeted outcomes. Cultural processes preserve and perpetuate the material artifacts,cognitive models, and bodily practices of conventional functional systems. Much of schooling is devoted tomastering these systems so children can instantiate them in everyday life and keep them extant in our culture.A Functional System for Finding DirectionsThe data analyzed in this poster relate to the functional system shown in Figure 1, reproduced from “Use yourwristwatch as a compass” at lifehacker.com. The directions on the lifehacker website are simple: “Hold a watchwith 12 o’clock at left. Move your arm so the hour hand points at the sun. The spot halfway between the hourhand and the 12 is south.” During Daylight Saving Time, find the spot halfway between the hour hand and 1.This system works in the northern hemisphere when the sun is visible and an analog wristwatch is present.Once south is fixed, the user can use a mental model of the compass rose to locate north, east, and west.Figure 1. Using a Wristwatch to Find South.The Teaching Situation: On the BeachThe data were recorded by Simon Harrison on the beach at Anglet, in southwestern France, in July 2011. In thevideo, the lead lifeguard is trying to teach another lifeguard how to find south using this system, while a thirdlifeguard watches. It is early afternoon and the sun is visible, but the lead lifeguard is wearing a digital (notanalog!) wristwatch, and there are no traditional drawing or writing tools readily at hand. The lifeguard isconfronted with the problem of how to represent: (1) the elements of the system, and (2) the process of bringingthem into coordination to locate south. In particular, the expert needs to represent the elements and operationsin such a way that the novice can understand the system and use it successfully; in this case, the expert needs todo so while simultaneously monitoring the swim zone, his primary work task.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1655© ISLSFirst Attempt: Sand and SurroundingsThe first attempt at instruction is rendered on the poster in filmstrip form as in Figure 2 (below), adapted fromWilliams & Harrison (2012). It involves the construction of a diagram in the sand, gestural enactments over thediagram, and coordinated gesture and gaze shifts to link represented elements to the geographic surroundings.Second Attempt: Sand, Digital Watch, and Air (Personal Gesture Space)The second attempt is rendered in filmstrip form (a portion is shown in Figure 2) with annotations of bodilyactions in representational spaces coded by color (sand in blue, digital wristwatch in lavender, and the air infront of the speaker [personal gesture space] in red). Speech is rendered as text in English (translated fromFrench). Most of the instructional gestures are enacted over material representations, with only a brief interludeof gesturing in personal space, first to establish a virtual structure and then to model an object in relation to it.you’ve got the little hand(on the 7)the little hand is atthe bottomit is herewhen it’s 7 o’clock, in themorning, or 19 o’clockyou’ve got 1-2-3-4-5-6the little hand, your little hand,it is…, it’s at the level of the 7Figure 2. A Portion of the Second AttemptThird Attempt: Watch, Surroundings, and EnactmentThe third attempt is likewise rendered in filmstrip form (as in Figure 2) and includes a full-body enactment ofthe process of coordinating the represented virtual elements of the functional system to fix south.DiscussionIn his instructional discourse, the lifeguard constructs and coordinates representations in four differentrepresentational spaces: in the sand, in the surrounding environment, on top of his digital wristwatch, and in theair in front of his body (personal gesture space). The poster considers the different affordances of each of thesespaces and analyzes the following: (1) how the lifeguard creates representations in the different spaces; (2) howhe signals shifts between representational spaces while linking their counterpart elements; and (3) how he enactsthe process of coordinating these elements in a functional system to find directions. In particular, the analysisfocuses on the use of the body in situated instruction, highlighting how bodily orientation, gaze, gesture,movement, and speech are orchestrated to guide conceptualization. The poster closes with implications for ourunderstanding of teaching as an embodied, situated activity and of the functions of gesture during instruction.Selected ReferencesClark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain, body, and world together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Williams, R. F. (2008a). Gesture as a conceptual mapping tool. In A. Cienki & C. Müller (Eds.), Metaphor andgesture (pp. 55-92). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.Williams, R. F. (2008b). Guided conceptualization: Mental spaces in instructional discourse. In T. Oakley & A.Hougaard (Eds.), Mental spaces in discourse and interaction (pp. 209-234). John Benjamins.Williams, R. F., & Harrison, S. (2012, July 26). Constructing and coordinating representations in multiplegesture spaces. Paper presented at the 5th conf of Int’l Society for Gesture Studies, Lund, Sweden.Williams, R. F. (2013). Distributed cognition and gesture. In C. Müller, A Cienki, E. Fricke, S. Ladewig, D.McNeill, & S. Tessendorf (Eds.), Body – Language – Communication: An International Handbook onMultimodality in Human Interaction, Vol. 1. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1656© ISLS