Promoting Diversity within the Maker Movement in Schools:New Assessments and Preliminary ResultsPaulo Blikstein, Vivian Chen, and Andrew MartinTransformative Learning Technologies Lab, Stanford University, 520 Galvez Mall, CA, USA.paulob@stanford.edu, vachen@stanford.edu, am1982@gmail.comAbstract: In recent years, FabLabs and Makerspaces have opened all over the globe,including in schools. However, notwithstanding the popularity of this movement, its trackrecord with diverse populations is still dismal. In this work, we discuss a pedagogicalframework for a more inclusive “maker movement” and show results from the creation of newassessments for such environments.IntroductionIn recent years, laser cutters and 3D printers have dramatically dropped in price, and open source hardware haspopularized these technologies. FabLabs have opened all over the globe (Gershenfeld, 2007; Mikhak et al.,2002), the MAKE Magazine was created, and soon after the Maker Faire was established, and now severalschools have their own labs (Blikstein, 2013): the Maker Movement is upon us. But despite its popularity, themaker movement and FabLabs carried with them the culture of its creators: high-end engineers (from theFabLab community) and publishers (from the MAKE Magazine). These professional cultures did not have atradition of working in diverse schools. FabLabs were designed for expert hackers, and the “make” publicationscatered to a “teenage hacker” subculture overwhelmingly dominated by suburban white males with abundantresources (Buechley, 2013), characterized by a strong self-selection of elite students into autodidactic andrelatively closed communities. Despite the fact that the “maker” movement went much beyond its origins, theseroots influenced its modus operandi until these days: Buechley (2013) showed that since its inception, 90% ofthe covers of the MAKE Magazine have had white males on them, and 70% of the projects were cars or robots.When considering the expansion of this movement to public education there is an urgent need to considerdiversity as a crucial component, as well as how the movement would fit into non-dominant cultures and context(Lee, Spencer, & Harpalani, 2003).In previous work (Blikstein, 2008) we discussed how many of the projects proposed in makerworkshops are irrelevant to the culture of diverse learners. In this paper, we will focus on the issue of diversityand cultural relevance, and comment on two studies that touch on these issues. Given the space limitations, wewill only present a summary of the results. In a pilot study, we ran a survey instrument for approximately 400students in two schools (one high SES, 10% minority, and one low SES, 99% minority). The survey’s goal wasto find differences in how students would engage in “maker” activities. The data showed that in both schools,students had a similar level of unfamiliarity with programming and robotics (both schools had 2.4 forprogramming and 1.7 for robotics on a 1-6 scale, “6” being “very familiar”). However, a significant differenceappeared in the questions that were probing psychological constructs. Students in the high-SES school weremore likely to say that they “had a good imagination” (5.1 vs. 4.7, p < 0.001), that intelligence is a malleableentity that can be changed (4.8 vs. 4.0, p < 0.001), and that they have had at least one idea for an invention (45%vs. 20%, p < 0.01). These and other survey results show that these two populations would engage verydifferently in activities characterized by autodidactism and in which self-efficacy play a significant role. Basedon these data, we set out to develop a research-based curriculum for a maker workshop that would address—andpotentially reduce—those differences. We started with ethnographic research in the schools, and realized that inthe low-SES school, students would often report that they used to ‘make’ and build things with their parents andfriends, and often had jobs in garages or carpentry shops: these students were already makers, but were notaware of it. Thus, we designed a curriculum to re-value familiar practices drawn from students’ funds ofknowledge, rather than replace existing ones (Freire, 1974; Moll, Amanti, Neff, & González, 1992). Studentsbrought familiar practices to the lab (craft, carpentry), and they got augmented using socially-valued skills suchas computation, fabrication, and mathematics.To evaluate the results of this intervention, we developed many instruments for measuring theeffectiveness of the curriculum, especially in terms of its reach to diverse populations. For example, wedeveloped a test called “logic flow,” in which students had to create a block diagram with computer pseudocode describing the functioning of everyday objects. We administered this test before and after the workshop toa group of 15 students. Our coding scheme had eight dimensions of complexity and completeness of these logicflows. The results showed that while students from all expertise groups improved, the bottom third of the classimproved almost twice as much as the top third, considering the medians, thus reducing the gap incomputational knowledge between the students with high (typically white males) and low (typically minorities)previous knowledge about computer programming and making.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1669© ISLSFigure 1. An example of a pre-post “Logic Flow” (left), and the results by starting group (right)A second instrument that we developed was the “maker table:” students would write and draw all stepsof a fabrication process, along with their confidence in their ability to perform each step. Again, weadministered the test before and after the workshop, and the results were quite positive in terms of reducinginequality (see Figure 2). Not only did the scores improve equally for both boys and girls, but the gain asmeasured by the median of both groups overwhelmingly favored girls: while the improvement for boys was ofone point, girls improves 3.4 median points from the beginning until the end of the workshop.Figure 2. The “Maker’s Table” (left) and the pre-post results (right)These preliminary results point to (1) the great inequality in high- and low-SES schools in howstudents consume the “maker” movement, (2) the possibility and need of designing curricula todisproportionally benefit low-SES students, (3) the fact that improvement in these open-ended environments canbe measured by customized instruments. Despite the potential of digital fabrication labs and ‘making’ ineducation, educators and scholars must remember that the real power of this movement is in its potential toreduce rather than amplify inequality, and that researchers have a crucial role in raising awareness to diversity,culturally-aware curricula, and new research methodologies for studying these environments.ReferencesBlikstein, P. (2013). Digital Fabrication and ’Making’ in Education: The Democratization of Invention. In J.Walter-Herrmann & C. Büching (Eds.), FabLabs: Of Machines, Makers and Inventors. Bielefeld,Germany: Transcript Publishers.Buechley, L. (2013). Plenary talk at FabLearn 2013. Paper presented at the FabLearn 2013, Stanford.http://edstream.stanford.edu/Video/Play/883b61dd951d4d3f90abeec65eead2911dFreire, P. (1974). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Seabury Press.Gershenfeld, N. (2007). Fab: the coming revolution on your desktop--from personal computers to personalfabrication: Basic Books.Lee, C. D., Spencer, M. B., & Harpalani, V. (2003). "Every shut eye ain't sleep": Studying how people liveculturally. Educational Researcher, 32(5), 6-13.Mikhak, B., Lyon, C., Gorton, T., Gershenfeld, N., McEnnis, C., & Taylor, J. (2002). Fab Lab: An AlternativeModel of ICT for Development.“development by design”(dyd02). ThinkCycle.Moll, L. C., Amanti, C., Neff, D., & González, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitativeapproach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory into Practice, 31(2), 132-141.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1670© ISLS