Collective Engagement in a Technologically Mediated ScienceLearning Experience: A Case Study in a Botanical GardenFariha H. Salman, Heather T. Zimmerman, Susan M. Land, Penn State University, University Park PA 16802Email: fxh139@psu.edu, heather@psu.edu, sland@psu.eduAbstract: This paper presents an interactional case study from Tree Investigators, a researchstudy designed as a technologically mediated tour of an arboretum where children aged 7-11collaboratively learn about the characteristic features of different types of trees. Throughoutthe tour, children are facilitated by a Naturalist and use mobile technology (e.g., iPads) tofocus on specific characteristics of trees on their touch screens while observing the trees anddiscussing about them. This analysis focuses on a group activity where children use a mobileapp to identify a mystery tree, analyzed through video-based Interaction Analysis. Thefindings reveal a collective engagement afforded by a coordinated interaction between sensorymodes (verbal, gaze, touch, spatial) and mobile technologies (iPads, AR content). The purposeof this analysis is to help researchers and educators utilize the analytical concept of thecollective when designing or examining mobile learning activities outside of school.The Tree Investigators research and design project investigates science learning within technologicallyenhanced outdoor informal learning institutions (ILIs) such as nature centers and arboretums. Tree Investigatorsincludes a field tour at an arboretum where families and children are facilitated by naturalists to collaborativelylearn about the characteristic features of different types of trees. Throughout the tour activity, children areaccompanied by their families and are encouraged to use mobile technology (e.g., iPads) to discuss the scientificcharacteristics of trees as they observe trees. The analysis in this paper focuses on the coordination of sensoryobservations, interactions, technology, and science content when children were facilitated to use a mobileapplication to identify an unknown tree, called the mystery tree. This paper contributes an account of collectiveengagement, coupled with learners’ sensory interactions, as a theoretical tool that can aid in the research anddesign of mobile computing to support out-of-school learning in ILIs.Conceptual FrameworkThis paper focuses on interactions between learners, mobile computers, and an outdoor learning center toexemplify a collaborative educational design which includes learner-centered pedagogy relevant to learningoutside of school. With this focus, our work draws on two theoretical literatures: collective engagement(Thomas & Brown, 2011) and learners’ interactions with technologies. The structure of our mobile learningactivity includes learner-centered, small group engagement facilitated by a Naturalist where learners work onauthentic problems to acquire new scientific information as part of a visit to the Arboretum at Penn State.The learners’ activities occur within the context of emerging technologies, which present a potential foranalyzing what Thomas and Brown (2011) call the collective, which is a highly collaborative problem solvingsystem relying on the complex, real time coordination of various resources — including people, skills,technologies, and interactions. The concept of the collective relates to the framework of distributed intelligence(Pea, 1993, White & Pea, 2011) whereby intelligence is seen as spread across social and material resources. Inthe same vein, “collective intelligence” is enlisted amongst the eleven core social and educational skills forchildren in the emerging participatory culture of the future (MacArthur Foundation, 2006, p. 4). Also, variousattempts at re-imagining education, such as the Centre for Educational Research and Innovation (e.g.,‘Schooling for Tomorrow’ and ‘Future of Higher Education’), direct educators towards a future where learningwill require cross-disciplinary expertise encompassing multiple ways of knowing. Concepts like distributedintelligence and the collective enable researchers to understand that these multiple ways of knowing do notreside within the individual; rather, knowing locates itself in the dynamics of coordinated interactions of humanand technological resources. An important characteristic of the collective as emphasized by Thomas and Brown(2011) is that the collective is “defined by an active engagement with the process of learning” (p. 52) while“providing access to an increasing number of resources managed by a technological infrastructure” (p. 53) sinceit is “well designed to facilitate peer-to peer learning, their raison d’être” (p.53). We rephrase thesecharacteristics as: (1) active engagement with the learning process and (2) accessing multiple human andtechnological resources.It is important to note that collective engagement invokes the concept of multimodality or multiplesemiotic modes (Hodge & Kress, 1988; Kress, 2005; Kress, et al., 2001; Lemke, 2002) from the field of socialsemiotics. Kress et al. (2001) explains multiple modes within learning “when learners actively engage with allmodes as a complex activity in which speech or writing are involved among a number of modes” (Kress et al.,2001, p.1). The importance of multiple modes in learning specifically science literacy is furthered by LemkeICLS 2014 Proceedings378© ISLS(2002) who asserts that all meaning resides in the integration of complex material systems that span acrosstemporal, spatial scales which can be seen as semiotic resource systems—separable only analytically. Onesemiotic resource is digital technology (Baldry & Thibault, 2006) that combines and unfolds other semioticresources in new and innovative ways (O'Halloran, 2009). Researchers (e.g., Mann & Reimann, 2007) alsoemphasize the role of mobile learning technologies as mediating tools—acting as a cultural intermediarybetween the learner and his or her social and physical environment. In keeping with this view, we understandthat mobile technology serves as a semiotic resource for families’ meaning making.Studies (e.g., Kahr- Højland, 2011; Sung et al., 2010) where out-of-school learning activities utilizedmobile technologies have recommendations that align with characteristics of the collective. Sung et al. (2010) intheir museum-based study found that students using a mobile problem solving guide system fared well in termsof interactions and learning-related discussions. Kahr- Højland’s (2011) findings from a science centre studyfavor a narrative-based exploratory design for meaningful technological scaffolding. However, both studieslament learners’ disengagement with the exhibits, and a lack of deeper analysis, especially when utilizingtechnologies. They recommend a detail-oriented design that explicitly directs learner’s attention to somespecific aspect of the materiality (e.g., texture, actual size) on-site in order to engage learners in in-depthdiscussions and careful study of the exhibits, instead of a focus on just the technology (Hsi, 2003).Research QuestionHow do mobile computers interact with sensory semiotic modes to support collective engagement of learnerswhile exploring trees in an ILI?MethodologySetting and ParticipantsThe study is set at the Arboretum at Penn State, a botanical garden that displays trees from across the world.The Arboretum at Penn State is a 370-acre ILI; it features 35 acres of groomed gardens, a children’s gardenfocusing on Pennsylvania natural history, and an old growth stand of hardwood trees with walking trails. ThisILI offers an outdoor space that could be designed to enable a participatory, immersive science learningexperience. This aligned with the Tree Investigators’ intent to focus on informal spaces where families canenjoy and learn from in situ scientific phenomena related to trees.Ten families were recruited for the Tree Investigators; they were members of a nature center close tothe Arboretum. The families were strategically selected: (a) as heavy users of ILIs and (b) because of theiraffinity for outdoor experience of life sciences. Our strategic selection of ILI visitors is aligned to researchpractices commonly used in empirical museum studies (e.g., Allen, 2004; Leinhart, Crowley & Knutson, 2002).The Tree Investigators project uses Augmented Reality (AR) to bring web-based media to a smartphone or tablet such as an iPad. In designing the mobile website (Zimmerman, Land, McClain, Mohney, Choi,& Salman, 2013), we aligned with recommendations for mobile computers on (a) the importance ofpersonalization to the learners’ agendas (Kearney, et al., 2012), (b) brief just-in-time interaction with the device,to facilitate learning through conversation (Hsi, 2003; Kahr-Højland, 2011), and (c) matching the learners’expectations of the experience to the affordances of the device (Looi, et al., 2010; Sung et al., 2010). Afterinteracting with the mobile website, learners were presented with a cumulating task to identify a mystery tree.Data Collection TechniquesData was collected in the Fall of 2011 with 10 families (25 participants) including 15 children aged 7 to 11.Data collection occurred on weekdays when the schools were closed for teacher professional development. Theresearch team organized families in smaller groups, which were each facilitated by a Naturalist during the 60minute tour for each group. Videos of each of the 5 field tours were recorded, resulting in 5 hours of recordeddata. The video data were transcribed into approximately 150 single-spaced pages of text.Data Analysis ProceduresIn accordance with our research question, a video-based Interaction Analysis was conducted (Derry et al., 2010;Heath & Hindmarsh, 2002; Jordan & Henderson, 1995) to explain the interaction between the children’s sensorymodes and mobile technological modes (e.g., apps & AR content) in identifying a mystery tree as a collectiveengagement enterprise. Interaction Analysis aligned with the research question as it seeks to “investigate humanactivities such as talk, nonverbal interaction and the use of artifacts and technologies identifying routinepractices and problems and the resources for their solutions.” (Derry et al., 2010, p.1). Also, interaction analysisis best suited to ethnographic approaches (Heath & Hindmarsh, 2002), and the video-recorded field tour of theTree Investigators followed ethnographic methods. These analytical procedures allow for capturing thecomplexity of interaction in its various steps including: video review sessions, cannibalizing, transcription,selecting events, and extracting fragments; these are described below.ICLS 2014 Proceedings379© ISLSData analysis involved reorganizing the video-based transcripts into multimodal transcripts (Kress etal., 2001), which included the descriptive dimensions of the sensory modes like gaze, speech, and body postureand positioning. Reorganizing the transcripts to highlight both verbal and nonverbal elements allowed theresearchers to make analytical insights related to collective engagement. Both verbal and nonverbal aspectswere recorded using time as an anchor. Another criterion of data reorganization was preserving the interactionalsequence in which sensory modes appeared (e.g., if the action preceded the verbal or if the mobile app wasbeing used in conjunction with a sensory mode such as talk or touch).The criteria for recognizing instances as events according to Jordan & Henderson (1995) are“coherence in some manner” along with “official beginnings and ending” (p. 20). Heath, Knoblauch and Luff(2000) add an additional criterion that events allow for the “enabling retrieval of critical information” (p. 313).Using these principles, the learners’ engagement with the mystery tree task episodes each formed one event.The events selected for analysis in this paper were: (a) related to collective engagement around the mystery treetask episodes, which totaled approximately 100 minutes of video, and (b) focused on the video sections wherethe interaction between sensory and technological modes were visible. The segments were identified based onthe problem solving event of recognizing six scientifically relevant tree features (i.e., branching patterns,leaves/needles [shape, arrangement, margin/edge], fruit elements [color], flowers [shape, color]); these sixscientifically relevant tree identifiers were included on the Tree Investigator mobile website and app. The USTrees app was used during the mystery tree task which has an interface that presents the identifying features oftrees to support identification. US Trees is designed so that the user sees multiple possible options for eachfeature and can select one option after observing that feature on a real, virtual tree or an image of the tree. Theselected options are then configured as possible tree identities in the app’s database.This paper presents one analysis of one mystery tree task event, within which seven segments arepresented to explain the interaction between the learners’ sensory modes (e.g., gaze, touch, verbal, spatial) andthe available mobile technologies (mobile app, AR content) in the process of collective engagement to identify atree. The seven segments are those identifying features that are noticed by the group in this particular event; theseventh segment is where the results are discussed. Moreover, the order in which these segments appear reflectsthe participants’ learning agenda during their collective engagement.Data and FindingsFrom the analysis of the data, we found the two characteristics of the collective (Thomas & Brown, 2011) in theinteractions of the children equipped with both sensory and mobile technological resources in the informaleducation design of the mystery tree activity. We first analyze the interactions within each of the sevensegments while referring to the data transcripts. Next, we discuss the event as a whole, guided by the twocharacteristics of the collective: (1) active engagement with the learning process, and (2) accessing multiplehuman and technological resources.The collective engagement event using the mobile computer began when the three children, Lydia(aged 8), Emmy (aged 8), and Greg (aged 11), were introduced to the US Trees app to identify a tree’sscientifically relevant features as a means to identify an unknown tree (i.e., mystery tree). The Naturalist onlyintervened where the children needed facilitation. In the first two segments (below), Greg expressed curiosityabout the flower (line 867) whereby the Naturalist used the AR content to show a digital photograph of thespringtime flower (lines 867-893) and fruit (lines 897-911), to the learners.ICLS 2014 Proceedings380© ISLSThe third segment (below) includes a conflict that arose between the children due to different possibletrees showing up as possible mystery tree solutions on the US Trees app, which meant that there was someconfusion in identifying the tree’s salient features. As a result, the Naturalist suggested the three children to“work together to see what we selected” (line 919) and guided them to look at the ‘leaf shape’ (line 920) in thefourth segment. The video transcript shows that the children reached a consensus about the leaf shape, which theNaturalist reinforced (lines 921-923). The fifth segment shows a transition towards the branching structure(lines 929-932). The children chose ‘opposite’ on the US Trees app after a sensory engagement with the tree onsite and after they confirmed this observation with each other. For example, Lydia, moved closer to Emmy tolook at her iPad screen and asked “What did you do?” (line 928), Figure 1. They touched and unfolded theleaves to observe and feel the branching pattern as shown in Figure 2. Even before the Naturalist asked them topull down a “branch with leaves to take a closer look” (lines 923-924), Figure 3 shows the children attended tothe branching structure by moving closer to the tree, by holding their gaze on the leaf pattern.Figure 1Figure 2Figure 3Greg, Lydia, and Emmy used the US Trees app on the iPads together to support their observation andidentification practices. Once the children verbalized their identification, the Naturalist also pointed at the trees’nodes to draw attention to the 3-dimensional, actual tree specimen. Here, the learners coordinated theirinteractions between the sensory modes (i.e., touch, observation) and the mobile technology, as they movedback and forth between them. The learners’ sensory experience involved gaze, gesture, touch, and talk, whichhelped the children to identify and confirm the branching structure. The mobile app presented the children withspecific options of branching structure, which in turn focused their attention on the scientific aspects of themystery tree. The constraint of the app channeled their noticings (Kellah, 2010; Yew & Schmidt, 2012) to thescientific knowledge that is relevant in this learning moment—in keeping with mobile technology pedagogy thatenables domain-specific thinking strategies and knowledge. The three children interacted with the dynamicscreen that empowered them to navigate at their own pace and interest (Thomas & Brown, 2011) and also gavethem the relevant results at the end of their engagement. This app’s process of dynamic assessment differs fromICLS 2014 Proceedings381© ISLSpicking identity markers on the static paper (as in a book) and is an important learner-centered attribute of amobile computing environment for ILIs.The sixth segment (below) began with confusion about the leaf margin (i.e., the texture of the edge ofthe leaf). Unlike the fifth segment above where there was a consensus about the branching structure as‘opposite’, two of the three children, Emmy and Lydia, were confused about the ‘look’ of the leaf margin. Sincethe field tour is happening during autumn, the older autumn leaves have a different shape and texture thanyounger summer leaves, which the US Trees app featured. The children’s sensory experience told them that theleaves were “kind of bumpy” (line 936) and the children confirmed their observation by alternating betweenfeeling the leaves and rereading the options on the mobile app. The Naturalist encouraged their coordination ofthese sensory and technological modes, and she only confirmed Greg’s selection (line 939) when he approachedher to show that his US Trees identity “match” (line 938). The Naturalist knew that the 3-dimensional on-siteleaf had a time restriction that called for manipulation of a fourth dimension (i.e., time of year). She directed thetwo confused children to consider a different ‘look’ of the older autumn leaves when she said that “it’s gottencrinkly and they are not as green anymore” (line 944). She attended to this instance, connecting the ‘now look’of the autumn leaves with the ‘before look’ of the summer leaves. She said: “I think it's crinkled up and so itlooks like there's a- there's a tooth to it but I actually think that it's probably smooth when the leaves- actually Ican augment that too” (line 946). At this point the augmented image of the leaf is shown to the children so thatthey have a technologically accessed experience of the summer leaf.The transitions in the above segments illustrate how mobile technology afforded a rich layering ofrealities, by varying time. The support in coordinating sensory and technological modes and using augmentedreality to show variation over time, all contributed towards the collective engagement at the Arboretum.Particularly, in the seventh segment (lines 947-960), the use of AR, coupled with on-site observations andinformation from the app where the children themselves compare and self-assess their own identification aswhen Lydia exclaims “I’m riiight” (line 955) and Greg identifies the leaf shape as “oval” (line 960).ICLS 2014 Proceedings382© ISLSDiscussionThe discussion section is organized by the two defining characteristics of the collective (Thomas & Brown,2011) to examine the interaction between mobile technologies and sensory semiotic modes to enable collectiveengagement of learners within an informal education design. We focus on two key areas of theory: (1) activeengagement with the learning process and (2) accessing multiple human and technological resources.Active engagement with the learning processThe collective engagement of the three learners meant that they each took on an active role as the problem ofidentifying the mystery tree unfolded naturally (Kellah, 2010). The learners’ interactions in the mystery treeactivity reflect the individuals’ learning agendas, which were encouraged by the learner-centered design of theintegration of the Naturalist’s pedagogy with the content from the mobile computing environment. Each learneraccessed the sensory and technological semiotic resources. Sometimes the children worked individually whilenext confirmed with their group members (line 928) while other times, they attended to their group members bylooking at what they were doing but picked their own option without confirmation from the peers (line 938).Throughout the activity, each learner exhibited an active engagement not only in identifying the mystery tree,rather in making sense of the identification problem by “riddling one’s way through the mystery” (Thomas &Brown, 2010: p.9). This multimodal, collective sense making was seen when Emmy and Lydia were confusedabout the ‘look’ of the autumn leaf margin calling it “kind of bumpy” (line 936). They did not confirm the USTrees selection of the leaf margin until they were sure—by comparing the feel of the leaves to the options on theUS Trees mobile app. The three children also involved the Naturalist in facilitating their thinking about thisparticular tree’s feature. Incorporating supports from the adults on-site showed how learners engaged activelyby utilizing all available resources to identify the mystery tree according to their personal learning agenda,which Thomas and Brown (2010) refer to as tinkering. Within the design of the activity, the Naturalist acted as afacilitator guiding them with their thinking process by her talk or by introducing AR content as technologicalsemiotic resources (lines 942-946). This tinkering support becomes most visible when Greg expressed curiosityabout the flower (line 867) since the tree had no flowers as it was autumn; here, the Naturalist used the ARcontent to access a digital photograph of the springtime flower (lines 867-876) and fruit (lines 900-911).Moreover, the learners’ active engagement was afforded by the structure of the mystery tree activitywhich takes a manageable form as it presented (yet limited) the available identifying features: branchingpatterns, leaves/needles (shape, arrangement, margin), fruit elements (color), flowers (shape, color) by means ofthe mobile app. Also, the repeated use of the same six features across modes supported the learners’ sensemaking since the children had already encountered these ideas in the earlier part of the Arboretum. Here, thetechnology afforded by the US Trees app aids in structuring the problem such that learners could access it in itscomposite and manageable parts that were linked to the children’s prior knowledge. In keeping withrecommendations (Kahr- Højland, 2011; Sung et al., 2010) that utilized mobile technologies in engagingactivities, this channeling directed the learners’ attention to specific features of the tree’s materiality (e.g., leaftexture, color, shape.) so as to afford both engagement with and identification of the tree. Also, this repeated sixfeature structure functioned as a pedagogical tool whereby one iPad screen became the reference point for allparticipants (including the Naturalist) when converging together from where they depart into their own processof mystery-solving. Interestingly, this occurred at points of transition from one tree feature to the next- example:line 934 when Lydia asked: “over here?” and all attended to her iPad screen. This was in response to theNaturalist’s directive of: “So, what’s the next one?” (line 933) after they identified the branching pattern.Accessing multiple human and technological resourcesThe interaction between the available semiotic resources at the Arboretum allowed the three learners and theNaturalist to move back and forth between the sensory modes and technological modes. Throughout thelearners’ participation in solving the tree identification mystery, they do not appear to be conscious of theresources used in their collective engagement—especially their reliance on their own sensory modes whenobserving the trees. This overlooking of their (learners) sensory modes was also revealed in the post-tourinterviews where when the children reflected on their experiences mentioned only the device as the tool helpingthem identify the mystery tree. For example, one boy reported that “I could never figure that out withoutlooking all around that app on the iPad”. Across all the learners, the children only noticed the role oftechnological modes in this activity. Lemke (2002) asserts that we never make meaning with only the resourcesof one semiotic system and we glide through the various semiotic systems in “relatively automated ways” (p.2)and this study reaffirms his claim that learners use various systems but perhaps without notice. Figures 4-7above capture this pattern: the children first looked up the features on the app [see gaze onscreen, Figure 4],then they moved closer to the tree to look at a particular feature [see spatial move and gaze on on-site tree,Figure 4 & Figure 5], next they looked at the app options [see gaze onscreen, Figure 5] followed by touchingand feeling that feature on the tree specimen multiple times at the Arboretum. When the children were confusedabout the leaf margin, each child not only touched one leaf multiple times but the children also touched andICLS 2014 Proceedings383© ISLSobserved multiple leaves on the tree for confirmation [i.e., touching concreteness and confirmation throughsensory modes in Figure 6]. After this sensory confirmation from the leaves at the Arboretum, the childrenpicked one option on the app [i.e., technological mode/app]. This process of engagement followed furtherconfirming and getting to know what their peers have selected [see Figure 1] as illustrated when the childrenwho were not sharing an iPad were seen to go to at least confirm and check their selection such as in line 928when Lydia asked Emmy; “what did you do?” This confirming of specimens on-site and on others’ app choiceswas a more frequent move when a tree’s identifying features had a seasonal or time restriction (e.g., deciduousleaves, flowers, fruits).Kress’s (2005, 2001) and Lemke’s (2002) perspectives explain these children’s engagement patterns asthe inter-semiotic processes through which semiotic choices integrate to create meaning wherein the learner isempowered to make choices of which semiotic mode to use. The children also approached the Naturalist whoused augmented reality (AR) to bring certain tree features to the children to technologically enhance the learningexperience [i.e., technological mode/AR, see Figure 7]. The AR materials brought a digital ‘summer time’ to theArboretum to be superimposed on the ‘autumn time’. Bringing together multiple seasons allowed for a completeidentification of the mystery tree. In summary, throughout their experience at the Arboretum we have shownthat these three children moved smoothly back and forth from sensory to technological modes to access neededinformation to identify the tree. In the context of this study’s findings, we posit this as learner’s choice ofrepresentational modes within the framework of the collective engagement.Figure 4Figure 5Figure 6Figure 7ConclusionThis exploratory study analyzed the interactions between various semiotic resources in the context of aninformal educational project at the Arboretum at Penn State. It shows how learners move across resources andmodes to develop their own paths towards collectively identifying a mystery tree. The collective (Thomas&Brown, 2011; 2010) was much more than just three children working together; it included the children makingdecisions about what was included in that collective (i.e., which resources and how to use them) while tinkeringthrough the problem. Our findings, guided by the defining characteristics of the ‘collective’, include learners’active engagement in utilizing human and technological resources. Our interaction analysis of modal transitionsrevealed the visible paths and choices of semiotic resources that these three learners picked to solve the mysterytree problem. Technological resources used in the study came across as powerful semiotic modes that affordedproblem analysis (e.g., the interface of mobile app attending to focused features and the rich layering of realitiesafforded by the AR content). This study adds to our understanding of mobile technologies used as a learningtool within the context of informal science education when analyzed as a collective, learners take control of theirown learning paths as they coordinated interaction between sensory modes (e.g., verbal, gaze, touch, spatial)and mobile technologies (e.g., iPads, AR).ReferencesBaldry, A. & Thibault, P.J. (2006). Multimodal Transcription and Text Analysis. London: EquinoxBell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A. W., & Feder, M. A., (Eds.) (2009). Learning science in informalenvironments: People, places, and pursuits. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Derry, S. J., Pea, R., Barron, B., Engle, R., Erickson, F., Goldman, R., Hall, R., Koschmann, T., Lemke, J.,Sherin, M. G., & Sherin, B. L. (2010). Conducting video research in the learning sciences: Guidance onselection, analysis, technology, and ethics. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(1), 3-53.Heath, C., Knoblauch, H., & Luff, P. (2000). Technology and social interaction: the emergence of ‘workplacestudies’. The British Journal of Sociology, 51 (2), 299-320.Heath, C. & Hindmarsh, J. (2002). Analyzing Interaction: video, ethnography and situated conduct. In Tim May(Ed.), Qualitative Research in Action. London: Sage.Hsi, S. (2003). A study of user experiences mediated by nomadic web content in a museum. Journal ofComputer Assisted Learning, 19(3), 308-319.Hodge, R. & Kress, G. (1988). Social Semiotics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell UPICLS 2014 Proceedings384© ISLSJordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Kahr-Højland, A. (2011). Hands on, mobiles on: The use of a digital narrative as a scaffolding remedy in aclassical science centre. MedieKultur. Journal of media and communication research, 50, 66-83.Kearney, M., Schuck, S., Burden, K., & Aubusson, P. (2012). Viewing mobile learning from a pedagogicalperspective. Research in Learning Technology, 20(14406), 1-17 . DOI: 10.3402/rlt.v20i0.14406Kellah, E. (2000). Preparing Problem Solvers for the 21st Century through Problem-Based Learning. CollegeTeaching, 48(2), 55-60Kress, G., (2005). Gains and Losses: New Forms of Texts, Knowledge, and Learning. Computers andComposition, 22, 5–22.Kress, G., Charalampos, T., Jewitt, C., & Ogborn, J. (2001). Multimodal Teaching and Learning: the rhetoricsof the science classroom. Continuum: New YorkLemke, J. (2002). Multimedia Genres for Scientific Education and Science Literacy. In M. J. Schleppegrell & C.Colombi (Eds.), Developing Advanced Literacy in First and Second Languages: Meaning with Power(pp. 21-44). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Looi, C.-K., Seow, P., Zhang, B., So, H.-J., Chen, W., & Wong, L.-H. (2010). Leveraging mobile technologyfor sustainable seamless learning: a research agenda. British Journal of Educational Technology, 41(2),154–169. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2008.00912.xMacArthur Foundation. (2006). Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: Media Education of the21st Century. Retrieved from http://www.nwp.org/cs/public/download/nwp_file/10932/Mann, S. & Reimann,P. (2007). Mobile Technology as a Mediating Tool for Learning in the Convergences fromTechnology, Collaboration and Curriculum Perspectives. Making the connections. ConferenceProceedingsmLearnMelbourne2007.Retrievedfromhttp://www.mlearn.org/mlearn2007/files/mLearn_2007_Conference_Proceedings.pdfMiles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded source book (2nd ed.).Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.O'Halloran, K.L. (2009). Multimodal Analysis and Digital Technology. Interdisciplinary Perspectives onMultimodality: Theory and Practice. Proceedings of the Third International Conference onMultimodality, Palladino, Campobasso, 2009. Retrieved from http://multimodal-analysislab.org/_docs/pubs02-Multimodal_Analysis_and_Tech.pdfPea, R. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributedcognitions (pp. 47-87). New York: Cambridge University Press.Pea, R. (2006). Video as data and digital video manipulation techniques for transforming learning sciencesresearch, education and other cultural practices. In Weiss et al. (Eds). The International Handbook ofVirtual Learning Environments, 1321-1393. Springer: the NetherlandsStake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: SageSung, Y.-T., Hou, H.-T., Liu, C.-K., & Chang, K.-E. (2010). Mobile guide system using problem-solvingstrategy for museum learning: a sequential learning behavioral pattern analysis. Journal of ComputerAssisted Learning, 26(2), 106-115. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2729.2010.00345.xThomas, D & Brown, J. S. (2010). Learning in/for a World of Constant Flux: Homo Sapiens, Homo Faber &Homo Ludens revisited. In Luc E. Weber James J. Duderstadt (Eds.), University Research forInnovation (pp. 321-336). France: Economica.Thomas, D. & Brown, J. S. (2011). A New Culture of Learning: Cultivating the Imagination for a World ofConstant Change. USA: Create Space PublishingWhite, T. & Pea. R. (2011). Distributed by design: On the promises and pitfalls of collaborative learning withmultiple representations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20 (3), 489-547Yew, E.J. & Schmidt, H.G. (2012). What students learn in problem-based learning: a process analysis.Instructional Science, 40 (2), 371-395.Zimmerman, H. T., Land, S. M., McClain, L.R., Mohney, M. R., Choi, G-W., & Salman, F. H. (2013). TreeInvestigators: Supporting families and youth to coordinate observations with scientific knowledge.InternationalJournalofScienceEducation.Advanceonlinepublication.DOI:10.1080/21548455.2013.832437. pp. 1-24.AcknowledgmentsThe authors express their appreciation to our partners: the Arboretum at Penn State, the Penn State Center forOnline Innovation in Learning, and the Penn State Education Technology Services unit Teaching and Learningwith Technology. We acknowledge the contributions of our Augmented and Mobile Learning Research Group(http://sites.psu.edu/augmentedlearning/): colleagues Lucy R. McClain, Michael R. Mohney, GiWoong Choi,and Brian J. Seely.ICLS 2014 Proceedings385© ISLS