Fostering Awareness Content Creation bySelf-Determined RegulationTanja Engelmann, Katrin König, and Michail D. Kozlov, Knowledge Media Research Centert.engelmann@iwm-kmrc.de, k.koenig@iwm-kmrc.de, m.kozlov@iwm-kmrc.deAbstract: Prior studies have shown that without explicit instruction participants do not createcomplete awareness contents. Group awareness tools work implicitly. In this study it isinvestigated whether the construction of awareness contents can also be encouragedimplicitly. Based on the self-determination theory it is expected that implicit regulation ismore effective than explicit instruction. First results suggest that this is indeed the case.IntroductionExperts of different areas are needed to solve complex problems. Often, they can only communicate via internetdue to time constraints and large distances. In this setting, misunderstandings can occur due to reduced contextinformation. In order to prevent misunderstandings and communication problems, different tools weredeveloped to foster group awareness that is defined as “consciousness and information of various aspects of thegroup and its members” (Gross, Stary, & Totter, 2005, p.327). A subtype of group awareness is knowledge andinformation awareness (KIA) that is defined as being informed on the collaborators’ knowledge and informationunderlying this knowledge (Engelmann & Hesse, 2010). Several studies have shown that groups provided with aKIA tool that visualizes the collaborators’ knowledge and information by digital concept maps perform better ina problem solving task (e.g. Engelmann & Hesse, 2010). In contrast to such studies in which the participantsreceived individual concept maps pre-created by experts, Engelmann and Kolodziej (2012) examined whathappens if group members create their individual concept maps on their own. It was shown a.o. that groupmembers did not create complete maps resulting in a less effective KIA tool compared to that in studies withpre-created maps. The aim of the current study was to examine how team members can be motivated to createcomplete maps. Awareness approaches themselves work implicitly by providing task-relevant informationwithout using explicit instruction. It can be assumed that the construction of awareness contents can also beencouraged implicitly. Explicit approaches, which directly instruct group members what to do, for examplethrough collaborations scripts (e.g. Kollar, Fischer, & Hesse, 2006) already exist. In a study by Engelmann,Kolodziej, and Hesse (2014) explicit instruction was successful as all participants followed this instruction.However, implicit instructions should exceed explicit instructions: Providing prospective meta-knowledge to theparticipants is one example for an implicit instruction (Cress, 2005). According to Cress (2005), informing aperson that an activity is important for the other team members increases the probability that the personperforms this activity. Thus, arguably, emphasizing the importance of creating an individual map will lead toless disruptions of the task and to a higher map quality. Hence, in the current study, two different kinds ofinstruction are compared: an explicit instruction instructing the participants to first create an individual map oftheir own knowledge and information before they start with the collaboration as well as an implicit instruction inwhich the group members are not explicitly told what they should do but are informed about former studyresults which showed that groups with access to the concept maps of their team members performed better thangroups without access to them. It was expected that both instructions would encourage the group members tostart creating an individual map. However, according to the self-determination theory by Deci and Ryan (1993)it was assumed that the implicit instruction leads more often to finishing the maps, while the explicit instructionsleads more often to discontinuing the map creation. Deci and Ryan differentiated several levels of extrinsicmotivation by their degree of self-determination: For example, external regulation refers to people actingbecause they receive a reward or avoid punishment. Introjected regulation refers to behavior people showbecause otherwise they would feel anxiety or guilt or because they want to gain positive feelings like higherself-esteem. It was expected that the explicit instruction would evoke these less self-determined types ofmotivation. In identified regulation the goals of action are accepted as one’s own goals. It was expected that theimplicit instruction would lead to this self-determined regulation type: As the participants were provided withinformation guiding their actions without receiving an explicit instruction, they should feel like they decidedindependently how to proceed. Self-determined forms of motivation reduce the probability to discontinue a taskbefore completion (Vallerand & Bissonnette, 1992). Additionally, the performance in learning situations isimproved and cognitive processing is deeper (Krapp, 1993). Therefore, it was expected that both instructiontypes encourage starting to create an individual map, but that the implicit instruction will more often lead to thecompletion of the maps.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1545© ISLSMethodsParticipants93 participants (34 male) with an average age of 24 years (SD=3.49) took part in the study. They were randomlyassigned to the two conditions resulting in 15 explicit and 16 implicit groups (triads). There were no significantdifferences between the conditions w.r.t. gender composition (F<1) and acquaintance of the members (F<1).Material and ProcedureThe criminal case the triads had to solve is based on a task by Schreiber and Engelmann (2010). First, theparticipants filled out a questionnaire for measuring control measure items. Then they practiced to create digitalconcept maps. In the main phase they were informed that they will assume the roles of detectives who togetherhave to identify a murderer. The triad members each received a text document with unshared hints that had to becombined to solve the case. The members worked in separate workspaces. The members had to read a documentcontaining all “their own” hints. Afterwards, each member had to indicate whom they suspected to be themurderer to differentiate between the individual and the collective solution. Then the members were motivatedimplicitly or explicitly to create their own concept map representing their individual knowledge and informationas well as to start with the group discussion. In this collaborative phase, all participants could see their ownworking window, the working windows of their collaborators, and a group working window. The memberscould choose to either create their own individual maps in their own individual working window or to startworking on a group concept map in the group window. In this phase they could communicate via headsets.They had 50 minutes to choose the murderer and give reasons why they suspect him/her. Afterwards, they filledout another questionnaire including questions concerning their motivation to create an individual concept map.Results and DiscussionAll analyses were made on the group level as the individuals of a group were not independent of each other.First results showed that the members of the implicit groups needed significantly less time (M=34.7 min) thanmembers of the explicit groups (M=41.5 min) to agree on their later solution (F(1,29)=5.6; p<.05). Furthermorethe implicit groups needed significantly less time until they had written their final answer (F(1,29)=4.6; p<0.05).Furthermore, the members of the implicit groups perceived a stronger improvement of group collaboration overtime than the explicit groups (F(1,29)=10.7; p <.01). These preliminary results point to the expectations thatgroups with implicit regulation performed better in the task in terms of time needed. Further analyses forexample regarding the motivation of the participants and the quality of the individual maps are in progress.ReferencesCress, U. (2005). Effekt des Metawissens beim kollaborativen Aufbau eines Informationspools. Zeitschrift fürMedienpsychologie, 17, 147-156.Deci, E.L. & Ryan, R.M. (1993). Die Selbstbestimmungstheorie der Motivation und ihre Bedeutung für diePädagogik. Zeitschrift für Pädagogik, 39, 223-238.Engelmann, T. & Hesse, F.W. (2010). How digital concept maps about the collaborators’ knowledge andinformation influence computer-supported collaborative problem solving. International Journal ofComputer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5 (3), 299-320.Engelmann, T. & Kolodziej, R. (2012). Do virtual groups recognize situations in which it is advantageous tocreate digital concept maps? In A. Cañas, J.D. Novak. & J. Vanhear (Eds.), Concept Maps: theory,methodology, technology. Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Concept Mapping (Vol.1, pp. 172-179). Malta: University of Malta.Engelmann, T., Kolodziej, R., & Hesse, F. W. (2014). Preventing undesirable effects of mutual trust and thedevelopment of skepticism in virtual groups by applying the Knowledge and Information AwarenessApproach. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1–25.Gross, T., Stary, C., & Totter, A. (2005). User-centered awareness in computer-supported cooperative worksystems: Structured embedding of findings fromsocial sciences. International Journal of HumanComputer Interaction, 18, 323-360.Kollar, I., Fischer, F. & Hesse, F.W. (2006). Collaboration scripts: A conceptual approach. EducationalPsychology Review, 18 (2), 159- 185.Krapp, A. (1993). Die Psychologie der Lernmotivation. Zeitschrift für Pädagogik, 39, 187-206.Schreiber, M., & Engelmann, T. (2010). Knowledge and information awareness for initiating transactivememory system processe of computer-supported collaborating ad hoc groups. Computers in HumanBehavior, 26, 1701-1709Vallerand, R.J., & Bissonnette, R. (1992). Intrinsic, extrinsic, and amotivational styles as predictors of behavior:A prospective study. Journal of Personality, 60, 599-620.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1546© ISLS