Mathematical Tasks as Boundary Objects in Design-BasedImplementation ResearchRaymond Johnson, Samuel Severance, Heather Leary and Susan MillerUniversity of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado, USAraymond.johnson@colorado.edu, samuel.severance@colorado.edu, heather.leary@colorado.edu,susan.miller@colorado.eduAbstract: This paper describes a collaboration involving school district curriculumsupervisors, mathematics teachers, university researchers, and web engineers engaged indesign-based implementation research of the adaptation of an Algebra 1 curriculum to meetthe demands of the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. In this effort,mathematical tasks operated as a boundary object, acting to organize cooperative work despitea lack of consensus regarding their meaning or purpose. Exposing and understanding this lackof consensus during joint work at community boundaries provided opportunities for learningin the form of changed practice and activity. Evidence for learning through coordination ispresented, such as the communication of curricular vision and the routinization of a task ratingprocess. Where lack of consensus led to potential conflict, as in the case of task adaptation,evidence for learning in the form of new practices was less evident.Major IssueThe adoption of the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics (CCSSM) has created a need for manyteachers and school districts to consider changing their curricular materials. For the 44 U.S. States that haveadopted these standards, they generally represent a more focused and demanding target than prior standards(Porter, McMaken, Hwang, & Yang, 2011). While some schools will purchase new curriculum materials thatbetter align to the CCSSM, many others will attempt to modify and improve existing materials. This kind ofadaptation can require considerable effort and expertise, and implementation strategies for the CCSSM are notyet well-developed (Cobb & Jackson, 2011). Collaboration with researchers can be a productive option for notonly developing quality curriculum, but for better understanding the processes by which standards-basedcurriculum is designed and implemented.A useful unit of mathematics curriculum is the task, which is sometimes defined as “a classroomactivity, the purpose of which is to focus students’ attention on a particular mathematical idea” (Stein, Grover,& Henningsen, 1996, p. 460). As intended by the CCSSM, high-quality mathematical tasks are likely to beinquiry-based activities that engage learners in multiple Standards for Mathematical Practice (NGACenter/CCSSO, 2010). While adapting curricula to include such tasks may be a goal shared by teachers, districtcurriculum supervisors, researchers, and other reform agents, the meaning and significance of a mathematicaltask may vary depending on one's position and perspective. In this way, mathematical tasks are a potentialboundary object (Star & Griesemer, 1989; Star, 2010). In this paper, we ask: How do mathematical tasksoperate as boundary objects, and what do mechanisms for learning related to boundary objects and boundarycrossing imply for collaborative efforts to adapt and implement new curricula?Contextualization and SignificanceOur research is an example of design-based implementation research (DBIR; Penuel, Fishman, Cheng, &Sabelli, 2011), an approach that expands classroom-based design research to consider perspectives of otherstakeholders in an educational system. DBIR leverages iterative and collaborative development of processes andproducts to enhance a system's capacity to sustain and scale change related to persistent problems of practice.Participants in this DBIR project represented four communities: university researchers, curriculumsupervisors from an urban school district, high school algebra teachers from the district, and an engineeringteam coordinating with the researchers to develop a web-based catalog of curricular resources. The districtsupervisors selected teachers with the goal of representing varying levels of teaching experience and expertisewith curriculum development. Approximately ten teachers participated at any one time on a Teacher DesignTeam (TDT), with some leaving and others being added as the project changed phases or as individualcircumstances demanded. This project is significant not only in its purpose to support curricular change inresponse to the CCSSM standards, but in its DBIR approach and researcher access to both the district's teachersand their supervisors. The focus of this paper is the initial phase of the project, a period from July 2012 throughthe first TDT meeting in December of 2012, a full-day workshop involving all four communities. During thisphase there were weekly meetings of the research team as well as weekly phone conferences between theresearchers and the district supervisors. One member of the engineering team attended these weekly meetings ina significant liaison role.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1127© ISLSTheoretical and Methodological ApproachesBoundary objects are so called because they exist at and cross the boundaries of social worlds, such as theboundaries between communities of teachers, researchers, and curriculum supervisors. Star and Griesemer(1989) described boundary objects as “objects which are both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and theconstraints of the several parties employing them, yet robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites”(p. 393). In addition to an interpretive flexibility across social worlds, Star (2010) clarified that boundary objectsallow groups to cooperate without a consensus regarding their meaning or use, and they have a dynamicbetween ill-defined and well-structured uses. For this paper, we are particularly interested in how boundaryobjects represent the “stuff of action” (Star, 2010, p. 603) being the thing around which work is organized.Work organized around boundary objects can represent learning in the form of changes in identityand/or participation. In their review of boundary crossing and boundary objects, Akkerman and Bakker (2011)identified in the literature four mechanisms of learning at boundaries: identification, coordination, reflection,and transformation. Akkerman and Bakker grouped identification and reflection together as mechanisms thatreflected meaning-oriented learning processes with implications for people’s identities and perspectives, andgrouped coordination and transformation together as practice-oriented learning processes with implications foractivity. In this DBIR project, mechanisms related to practice and activity are most relevant for discussinglearning. Coordination involves communication, efforts of translation, boundary permeability, and routinization,all of which contribute to people or objects moving smoothly across boundaries. Alternatively, transformationtypically involves confrontation, recognition of shared problem spaces, hybridization resulting in new culturalforms, and crystallization of routines or procedures that embody new learning and require continuous joint workat boundaries. The in-between practices that can emerge in transformation are often held as goals but tend to bedifficult to achieve and sustain, while coordination maintains the nature of boundary objects in ways that avoidthe disruption of power structures or organizational hierarchies.The primary sources of data used in this analysis are field notes taken in meetings of the research team,the researcher-supervisor planning meetings, and the TDT meeting. Results from an end-of-year teacher surveywere also considered. The analysis here focuses on meetings where boundaries were exposed, such as inresearcher-supervisor meetings and the TDT meeting. Iterating over the meeting notes, we identified arcs ofwork (Strauss, 1985) related to mathematical tasks, then identified design tensions (Tatar, 2007) within each arc.Arcs of Work in Design-Based Implementation ResearchThe project’s initial arc of work established mathematical tasks as a potential boundary object. DBIR oftenbegins with a search for an appropriate boundary object (Penuel, Coburn, & Gallagher, 2013) around whichwork can be organized. The object is not a “given” because the goals of a project emerge through collaboration.Though many of the participants in this project had collaborated before, identifying a common aim—and a newpotential boundary object—was a key initial step in the work. The previous collaboration resulted in an onlinecatalog of digital objects for supplementing a new science curriculum. The district supervisors’ initial stancewas to develop a similar website and set of resources for Algebra 1, while researchers focused more on issues ofcurriculum implementation aligned with current research agendas, rather than the curriculum itself. Researchers’early conversations suggested “productive adaptation” of curriculum (meeting notes, July 23, 2012), curriculumadaptation and authoring tools for teachers (meeting notes, August 28, 2012), analyzing teachers’ use ofteacher-created materials (meeting notes, September 4, 2012), and a need for teachers to do task evaluation in away that was simple but rooted in learning sciences research (meeting notes, August 28, 2012).District supervisors pressed to pursue task evaluation and requested a selection of task rubrics,including rubrics for cognitive demand and language (meeting notes, September 17, 2012). The researcherssuggested in the following meeting that the work focus primarily on learning trajectories, which was respondedto by a supervisor with “Why not just use the curriculum guides we already have?” and “I don’t want to soundtoo pedestrian, but I want us to help teachers identify and use tasks that extend our current program” (meetingnotes, September 24, 2012). This request, combined with an underdeveloped research base for learningtrajectories in high school algebra (Sztajn, Confrey, Wilson, & Edgington, 2012), led to organizing project workaround mathematical tasks. The focus on tasks fulfilled the supervisors’ desire for new, high-quality curricularmaterials, and the prospect of a task rating process would allow researchers to focus on productive curriculumadaptation and other aspects of teacher practice based in mathematics education and learning sciences research.The second arc of work included the selection of task qualities teachers would use to rate tasks.Beginning with the supervisor-requested qualities of cognitive demand (Stein, Smith, Henningsen, & Silver,2009) and language (Moschkovich, 2012), researchers assembled task evaluation guides and rubrics, attemptingto consider what teachers actually do in implementing tasks (meeting notes, September 25, 2012). Additionalpotential rubrics and guides included alignment to standards and district learning goals, task “launch” (Jackson,Shahan, Gibbons, & Cobb, 2012), cultural relevance, and use of technology (meeting notes, October 9, 2012).The main tensions in this arc of work centered on task adaptation and implementation support. Thedraft of the language rubric suggested task modifications for English learners, which raised concerns from aICLS 2014 Proceedings1128© ISLSsupervisor: “One thing I worry about is, how will a teacher know if a task is appropriate for modification? Or ifit has no guide for modification?” (meeting notes, October 22, 2012). Rather than modify the task, thesupervisors requested supporting materials for ELLs that could support all tasks, including those in the districtadopted textbook. It was agreed that the development of these and other supporting materials would be pursuedin a future phase of the project and that task qualities would apply to tasks only as written. This decision wasapplied later in the meeting when discussing the evaluation of tasks for cultural relevance. This rubric was setaside, with one supervisor suggesting that cultural relevance was related to teacher planning, not task quality. Adifferent supervisor agreed, stating, “If teachers determine it’s a worthwhile task, there ought to be a place tomake some notes about how that task is supported,” which again suggested a future phase of work focused onsupporting the implementation of tasks. At meeting’s end, the list of task qualities to consider with the TDTwere limited to the alignment with CCSSM and district goals, cognitive demand, language, and technology.Following the October 22 meeting, a district supervisor sent researchers four tasks selected from theMathematics Assessment Project (http://map.mathshell.org). The tasks had been scheduled into the Algebra 1pacing guide for teachers to use at specific points in the curriculum. Each tasks represented a full lesson andincluded supports developed by the Mathematics Assessment Project such as student materials, slides, anddiscussion guidance. The district supervisors had added a cover sheet to each task that outlined a lesson plan andaligned the task to district content and language standards, but the task itself was unmodified from the original.A third arc of work involved the design of a process for rating tasks within a group professionaldevelopment activity. The researchers recognized there would be a “need [for] tasks for [teachers] to analyzeusing the draft rubric” (meeting notes, September 25, 2012) with sufficient practice with each rubric for teachersto have a “calibrated/shared understanding on that area of the rubric” (meeting notes, October 9, 2012).Negotiations over plans for the TDT meeting surfaced tensions related to aims for tasks and relevanttask qualities. In a November 5th meeting with supervisors, the researchers suggested structuring activities sothat teachers “directly address their own questions about aligning to the goals of the CCSSM,” which was metwith a supervisor concern that the conversation could devolve into irresolvable details of practice that mightdistract from the goals of the activity. Instead, the supervisor expressed a broader vision: “It would be nice tosee a task that truly represents the kind of task that students should be capable of after three years of high schoolmath.” A researcher altered the TDT agenda to reflect this vision of an “ultimate goal.” A supervisor alsowanted teachers to work with the rubrics enough to be comfortable with both CCSSM alignment and cognitivedemand, stating, “A task might have great cognitive demand, but if it doesn’t align to the standards, it doesn’tserve much of a purpose for us.” In a November 13th meeting, the liaison from the engineering team presentedplans to show the TDT the curriculum website, how rated tasks might eventually be presented, and how otherdigital library resources were being algorithmically brought in to align with the district scope and sequence.Teachers voiced their own perspectives at the TDT meeting, asking to consider their perceptions ofstudents’ capabilities to engage in the task. For example, when discussing cognitive demand, teachers indicatedtheir ratings depended on where in the curriculum they might use the task, or if the task was to be used with arelatively higher- or lower-ability group of Algebra 1 students. Seeking consistency in the rating process andconsensus amongst raters, the researchers encouraged teachers to evaluate the tasks only as written and their“qualities independent of the particular groups of students” (meeting notes, December 1, 2012). This tensionover task adaptation to classroom contexts persisted to the year-end teacher survey. When asked what factorsinfluenced their use of tasks not captured in the rubrics, answers included “individual student abilities,” “theneeds of my students,” “whether the task will be engaging/interesting to my students,” and “level of engagementfrom the students.” When asked how they would design PD around the CCSSM, responses included:Teacher 2: “I would want a focus on how these resources can be used in my unique situation”Teacher 7: “I really just wanted to focus on creating better tasks … I don’t really care toomuch about the rubric”Teacher 11: “[I would give] teachers resources that would enable them to create their owntasks”DiscussionFigure 1 summarizes how each community interpreted mathematical tasks. For supervisors, tasks were a vehicleto add cognitive demand into the intended curriculum. The data shows the supervisors’ resistance to encourageteacher modification of tasks, preferring instead to identify high-demand tasks and to support their use.Teachers, by showing a desire for selection and adaptation of tasks, were grounded in their daily need to use oradapt available resources in the written curriculum meet students’ particular needs. For the researchers, tasksrepresented opportunities to engage teachers in using the rubrics. The particular task was somewhatunimportant, as the higher goal was to instill teachers with a set of curriculum design principles to apply to alltasks in the transformation between the written and intended curriculum. Lastly, for the web engineers, taskswere interpreted as a digital resource in a collection of resources that comprised a written curriculum.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1129© ISLSFigure 1. Mathematical tasks as a boundary objectIt is also useful to consider how mathematical tasks organized work within each community in waysStar (2010) described as “invisible” or “back stage” work. The typically unseen work of the curriculumsupervisor is the coordination of content and professional development to sculpt their vision for curriculum andinstruction. Carefully chosen tasks are one way for supervisors to communicate that vision. For teachers, taskoriented back stage work includes how the unique demands of each classroom drives the search for taskswherever they might be found, or the creation of new tasks when necessary. These unique demands are a reasonwhy fidelity-based approaches to curriculum implementation tend to be problematic, despite supervisors’ andcurriculum designers’ attempts to anticipate the needs of teachers. For DBIR researchers, invisible workincludes collecting data of task analysis and enactment, as well as theorizing from patterns in that data. In thisstudy, this invisible work would sometimes manifest itself in the form of a researcher-designed process toaddress a problem (e.g., “here’s a recommended strategy for encouraging teachers to participate in a webinarabout task use”) when supervisors had more direct solutions available (e.g., “just tell us who needs to participateand we’ll call people we trust to see that it gets taken care of”). For the web engineers, the back stage work withtasks was the meticulous cataloging of the tasks and the creation of metadata records to describe their locationin the curriculum, their alignment to standards, and how they were rated.Akkerman and Bakker (2011) identified coordination and transformation as practice-orientedmechanisms for learning at boundaries. The evidence presented in this paper primarily describes mechanisms ofcoordination, as the arcs of work consisted largely of communication and translation between communitiesrather than confrontation and shared recognition of problem spaces. Continued research in this DBIR projectshould yield evidence of whether the supervisors’ vision for curriculum establishes a communicative connectionacross all spaces, if researchers’ efforts of translation of the scholarly literature impacts perceptions of tasks, orif task rating can become a routinized teacher practice in individual lesson planning and in teachers’professional communities. Nine of 11 teachers reported in the year-end survey that their experience had apositive impact on their practice, with several indicating an influence of the task rating process into their dailyselection and use of mathematical tasks. While this is a promising sign, more work at the boundary is requiredto understand how teachers’ participation is changing, and how change can be made scalable and sustainable.There are opportunities for learning to occur as transformation in this project, particularly whereconfrontation persists around mathematical tasks. Task adaptation is one such area, but the existence ofhybridization or crystallization is unclear as conflict was largely avoided or postponed. New forms ofparticipation are tempered by histories and structures that exist across and within communities, such as teachers’experiences with professional development and the roles of building administrators. Transformation may requirea greater “coevolution” of teacher participation across contexts (Kazemi & Hubbard, 2008) and newtheorizations within DBIR for addressing issues of power within educational systems. Transformation in thisproject could evolve as the crystallization of a task rating process that overcomes tensions between (a) teachers’need to situate tasks in their classrooms, (b) supervisors’ need to provide curricular vision, (c) researchers’ needfor scalability and sustainability of processes, and (d) web engineers’ need to classify and catalog tasks.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1130© ISLSConclusionCollaborations between school districts, teachers, researchers, and other reform agents in design-basedimplementation research is a promising approach for building scalable and sustainable change in educationalsystems. This paper described how one such collaborative partnership organized their mathematics curriculumreform work around mathematical tasks. As a boundary object, mathematical tasks facilitated coordinationdespite a lack of consensus regarding their meaning. The lack of consensus exposed during joint work at theboundary of communities revealed opportunities for and achievement of learning, evidenced by changedpractice and activity made possible mostly through the mechanism of coordination. In the case of taskadaptation, a lack of consensus became a point of conflict. Successful confrontation of this conflict in thecooperative design process could yield new hybridized or crystalized task adaptation practices that, whiledifficult to achieve, have sustainable impact.ReferencesAkkerman, S. F., & Bakker, A. (2011). Boundary crossing and boundary objects. Review of EducationalResearch, 81(2), 132–169. doi:10.3102/0034654311404435Cobb, P., & Jackson, K. J. (2011). Assessing the quality of the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics.Educational Researcher, 40(4), 183–185. doi:10.3102/0013189X11409928Jackson, K. J., Shahan, E. C., Gibbons, L. K., & Cobb, P. (2012). Launching complex tasks. MathematicsTeaching in the Middle School, 18(1), 24–29.Kazemi, E., & Hubbard, A. (2008). New directions for the design and study of professional development:Attending to the coevolution of teachers’ participation across contexts. Journal of Teacher Education,59(5), 428–441. doi:10.1177/0022487108324330Moschkovich, J. N. (2012). Mathematics, the Common Core, and language. Understanding Language:Language,Literacy,andLearningintheContentAreas.Retrievedfromhttp://ell.stanford.edu/publication/mathematics-common-core-and-languageNGACenter/CCSSO.(2010).Standardsformathematicalpractice.Retrievedfromhttp://www.corestandards.org/Math/PracticePenuel, W. R., Coburn, C. E., & Gallagher, D. J. (2013). Negotiating problems of practice in research–practicedesign partnerships. In B. J. Fishman, W. R. Penuel, A.-R. Allen, & B. H. Cheng (Eds.), Design-basedimplementation research: Theories, methods, and exemplars (Vol. 112, pp. 237–255). New York, NY:National Society for the Study of Education.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331–337.doi:10.3102/0013189X11421826Porter, A. C., McMaken, J., Hwang, J., & Yang, R. (2011). Common Core standards: The new U.S. intendedcurriculum. Educational Researcher, 40(3), 103–116. doi:10.3102/0013189X11424697Star, S. L. (2010). This is not a boundary object: Reflections on the origin of a concept. Science, Technology, &Human Values, 35(5), 601–617. doi:10.1177/0162243910377624Star, S. L., & Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology, “translations” and boundary objects: Amateurs andprofessionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39. Social Studies of Science, 19(3),387–420. doi:10.1177/030631289019003001Stein, M. K., Grover, B. W., & Henningsen, M. A. (1996). Building student capacity for mathematical thinkingand reasoning: An analysis of mathematical tasks used in reform classrooms. American EducationalResearch Journal, 33(2), 455–488. doi:10.3102/00028312033002455Stein, M. K., Smith, M. S., Henningsen, M. A., & Silver, E. A. (2009). Implementing standards-basedmathematics instruction: A casebook for professional development (2nd ed., p. 182). New York, NY:Teachers College Press.Strauss, A. (1985). Work and the division of labor. The Sociological Quarterly, 26(1), 1–19.doi:10.1111/j.1533-8525.1985.tb00212.xSztajn, P., Confrey, J., Wilson, P. H., & Edgington, C. (2012). Learning trajectory based instruction: Toward atheory of teaching. Educational Researcher, 41(5), 147–156. doi:10.3102/0013189X12442801Tatar, D. (2007). The design tensions framework. Human-Computer Interaction, 22(4), 413–451.doi:10.1080/07370020701638814AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (Award #1147590). The opinionsexpressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the NSF.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1131© ISLS