Motivating and Broadening Participation: Competitions,Contests, Challenges, and Circles for Supporting STEM LearningOrganizers and Chairs:Yasmin Kafai, University of Pennsylvania, kafai@upenn.eduNatalie Rusk, MIT, nrusk@media.mit.eduPresenters:Quinn Burke, College of Charleston, burkeqq@cofc.eduChad Mote, University of Pennsylvania, chadmote@gmail.comKylie Peppler, Indiana University, kpeppler@indiana.eduDeborah A. Fields, Utah State University, deborah.fields@usu.eduRicarose Roque, MIT Media Lab, ria@media.mit.eduOrkan Telhan, University of Pennsylvania, otelhan@design.upenn.eduKaren Elinich, The Franklin Institute, kelinich@fi.eduDiscussant:Alecia Magnifico, University of New Hampshire, aleciam@gmail.comAbstract. National and local competitions have become popular venues to inspirestudents in K-16 to excel in math, science, engineering and computing. In recent years,online versions—such as the National STEM Video Game Design Challenge, GlobaloriaAwards, and Make-to-Learn Contest—have joined the portfolio. While competitions,contests, challenges, and circles are theoretically open to all, it is unclear to what extentthey are not only motivating but are also broadening participation. The goal of thissymposium is to better understand the dimensions of four different type of public eventsby reviewing (i) the design of the public event model, (ii) implementation of activities, and(iii) evaluation of participation and learning that amplify levels of youth participation insharing design-based projects and increase opportunities for STEM learning for all.OverviewNational and local competitions, such as Coding Wars, Google Science Competition, FIRST Robotics, Hackfest,Microsoft Imagine Cup—to name just a few of the ever-growing list—have become popular venues to highlightSTEM accomplishments. While science fairs have a long tradition, starting with the first National Science Fairin Philadelphia in 1910, the number of these public competitive events has increased with recent efforts toinspire more students in K-16 to excel in math, science, engineering and computing. Online versions, such as theNational STEM Video Game Design Challenge, Globaloria Awards, and Make-to-Learn Contest, have recentlyjoined the portfolio. The goal of this symposium is to better understand the dimensions of these public eventsthat amplify levels of youth participation in sharing design-based projects and increase opportunities forlearning, online and offline.Public STEM events, where students prepare, display, and share their artifacts, are widely believed tobe a valuable learning experience (e.g., Abernathy & Vineyard, 2001; Grote, 1995; Yasar & Baker, 2003).Participation, often encouraged with support from teachers or parents, is highly correlated with later careerchoices in STEM majors (Forrester, 2010). At the same time, little is known about which aspects of these eventsmotivate and sustain youth participation. Although actively engaging many youth, to date large-scalecompetitions have often encountered difficulties attracting and sustaining participation for students in groupstraditionally under-represented in STEM careers (e.g., FIRST LEGO League, 2008-9; Greenfield, 1995).Research on achievement motivation suggests that an emphasis on performance and competition may be mostmotivating to students who already have high confidence in their ability (see review by Kaplan & Maehr, 2007).While competitions, challenges, and contests are theoretically open to all, it is unclear to what extentthey are not only motivating but are also broadening participation—an issue central to any STEM effort. Onesolution to address this concern has been to focus more on collaboration than on competition in the design ofpublic events. For example, Rusk and colleagues (2008) present examples of organizing robotics exhibitions asan alternative to robotics competitions. Other solutions have been also used to leverage more collaborativemodels of production. For instance, in the Connected Messages project, conducted in the Summer 2013,hundreds of youth in public library branches designed and assembled message boxes that resulted in large publicelectronic displays. In this type of collaborative design event, rather than focusing on individual projects, thecompilation of individual contributions completes the larger public design. Although differing in focus fromcompetitions, exhibition-focused events still retain the idea of addressing an authentic audience (Magnifico,ICLS 2014 Proceedings1219© ISLS2010), but they focus more on sharing of ideas than selecting a winner. While an array of approaches hasemerged, to date little is understood about how to design features of public events, with or without competitivedimensions, to successfully engage broader participation of K-12 students as well as community membersattending the events.In this symposium, we bring together a first set of recent designs and studies that have implementedand evaluated different types of public competitive and collaborative events. Our goal is to understand howthese events can be designed not only to support and motivate STEM learning but also increase diversity inparticipation. Online competitions such as the 2012 National STEM Video Game Design Challenge(http://stemchallenge.org) invite students to program games with STEM content and upload them, whereas the2013 Make-to-Learn Youth Contest invites youth to share and explain physical rather than virtual designs forthe possibility of garnering one of the prizes in different grade levels (http://m2l.indiana.edu/make-to-learnchallenge/). The 2011 Scratch Collab Challenge initiated collaborations between online members to program aScratch project by using three different elements (http://info.scratch.mit.edu/collabchallenge). By contrast, the2013 eCrafting Circles (http://ecrafting.org) include a hybrid of online calls that bring local community groupstogether in making physical artifacts for Halloween and end in local celebration of designs. Taken together,these four projects occupy different places on the continuum of collaboration versus competition, physicalversus virtual designs, and individual versus collaborative productions, all of which can be key dimensions inthe design of productive and meaningful STEM learning activities.The chairs will introduce the theme and issues raised in symposium followed by 20 minutepresentations that review the (i) the designs of each public event model, (ii) implementation of activities, and(iii) evaluation of participation and learning. Our discussant Alicia Magnifico, will review findings addressingissues of motivation and audience and discuss implications for future initiatives designed to increase andbroaden youth participation in design-based STEM learning initiatives.Feeding Competitive Streaks and Fostering Collaborative Determination:Grounding STEM Coursework in a National Video Game ChallengeQuinn Burke, College of Charleston & Chad Mote, University of PennsylvaniaRecent reviews of making games for learning (Burke & Kafai, 2014; Hayes & Games, 2008) outline a numberof reasons why making video games exemplifies important learning, including the potential to reinforcetraditional academic subject learning (Dickey, 2005), to introduce children to computer programming (Kelleher& Pausch, 2005), and to expose children to more authentic audiences as producers and not merely consumers ofdigital media (Peppler & Kafai, 2010). Yet despite the merit of each of these goals individually, what is lackingis a particular “forum” within schools in which all these learning principles can collectively take root.In this presentation, we argue the game design competition can represent such a forum. In an arenaonce solely occupied by robotics competitions, game design competitions have recently emerged on both localand national fronts as a way to attract a wider variety of children to STEM learning. Among the growingnumber of annual competitions are Globaloria’s “Globey Awards”, Advanced Micro Devices (AMD)“Changing the Game” contest, the Games for Change Awards, and Microsoft’s longstanding “Imagine Cup”. Amore recent addition to this group is a competition issued by the White House itself, the National STEM VideoGame Design Challenge. Developed in order to inspire K-16 students to learn STEM-based skills through directapplication, this contest is now in its third year. It awards each of its winners in the middle school category witha personal laptop computer plus $2000 for their respective schools. Over the initial year of the challenge, a totalof ten middle school students were selected as winners from a total pool of 600 entries.With no shortage of excitement, our classroom entered the competitive-fray. Using Scratch(scratch.mit.edu), we team-led an elective course around making one’s own STEM-based video game at anurban public middle school in which more than half of the student population qualifies for a free or reducedlunch. It was to be the school’s first elective around gaming, and we were offered the 2-3 PM time slot over theschool’s Winter trimester (late October until mid-February) which met twice a week. Our elective attracted themost participants that term—a total of 17 students, 6th through 8th grade. The group was representative of theracial and ethnic diversity of the school with approximately 40% of the group describing themselves as “white”,35% as “African-American”, and 25% as “Asian” or of “Mixed” race/ ethnicity. We designed the three-monthelective around three goals: First, to support middle-schoolers’ math and science content knowledge with handson activity; second, to introduce children to the potential of computer programming as a vehicle for personal andcreative expression; third, to expose children to more authentic audiences by becoming the actual producers ofdigital media and fostering a wider ethos of collaboration through sharing such media. Based on the these threegoals, we structured the elective course around both discussing and sampling games rather than simply teachingthe class the basics of Scratch and then leaving them to their own devices. To this end, every class would openwith a “roundtable” discussion in which students would discuss games and gaming, brainstorm potential ideasfor their own ongoing designs, and sample and share examples of other STEM-based games from the ScratchICLS 2014 Proceedings1220© ISLSwebsite. These round table discussions were paired with a series of “gallery walks” over the second half of thecourse in which students would play each others’ games and offer written feedback on game play and STEMintegration; last, the course culminated with an in-class arcade in which the rest of the middle school was invitedto come play the completed games before their final submission.Figure 1. Screen shots of the completed games from the STEM Video Game Challenge. Fromthe left: “Food Invaders”, “Lysosome Attack”, “Ender Build”, & “Genome Face”.Out of the 17 students who participated in our Challenge elective course, 16 submitted fully workingSTEM video games by the mid-March deadline. Returning to our initial three goals for the course, it was clearthat there had been considerable success. In terms of (1) STEM integration, over a third of the 16 participants(38%) developed their individual STEM video games “endogenously” focusing on a particular scientificphenomenon and/or mathematical relationship and developing a game around these learning principles forgame-play. The other ten participants developed their games “exogenously”, starting with a particular type ofgaming genre (e.g., a “platform game” or “first-person shooter”) and then subsequently “tacking on” the STEMtheme into game play, extrinsically. In terms of (2) utilizing programming for creative an personal expression,all projects effectively integrated a wide range of essential programming concepts: 69% of projects usedcoordination and synchronization as well as loops; 63% used event handling and conditional statements, andvariables, and 19% used Boolean logic. In terms of (3) peer-collaboration and finding authentic audiences, thisis perhaps where the course had the greatest measure of success. In the post-workshop survey on who or whatserved as their strongest influence, 57% of participants reported their fellow classmates, 36% reported us asinstructors, and 7% listed the National STEM Video Game Challenge. Altogether, the class seemed to genuinelyappreciate feedback from their peers, particularly when their classmates played drafts of their games.Discussion will center upon potential future iterations of this model for reinforcing STEM learning anddelve further into some of the unique challenges of using video games as a way to attract more children toSTEM learning, including attracting a greater number of females to such elective coursework, pushing for moreendogenic (rather than exogenic) integration of content, and ensuring that fostering a spirit of competitionamong students also leads to utilizing each other as resources for more authentic audiences and peer-to-peercollaboration.The Make-to-Learn Youth Challenge: Gaining Youths’ Perspective on LearningThrough MakingKylie Peppler, Indiana UniversityThe maker movement consists of a growing culture of hands-on making, creating, designing, and innovating. Ahallmark of the maker movement is its do-it-yourself (or do-it-with-others) mindset that brings togetherindividuals around a range of activities, including textile craft, robotics, cooking, woodcrafts, electronics, digitalfabrication, mechanical repair or creation—in short, making nearly anything (Peppler & Bender, 2013). Despiteits diversity, the movement is unified by a shared commitment to open exploration, intrinsic interest, andcreative ideas. And it’s spreading: online maker communities, physical makerspaces, and Maker Faires arepopping up all over the world and are continually increasing in size and participation (Dougherty, 2013).Moreover, there is a growing national recognition of the maker movement’s potential to transform how andwhat people learn in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics).While we know from theory and prior research that making can be particularly beneficial in thelearning process (e.g., Catterall, 2009; Peppler, 2013), most of what we know about in this area comes fromstudies within schools and after-school programs (e.g., Kafai, Peppler, & Chapman, 2009), and less from makersand maker culture at large. In the interest of developing a grounded understanding of youths’ own conceptionsof learning from the process of making, we launched an online competition for young makers (between the agesof 13 and 18) to share and discuss their “makes” for the chance to win prizes ranging from gift cards to miniiPads. To increase visibility for the competition, we hosted the challenge on the preeminent DIY portal,Instructables.com, an online community for makers of all ages to document their original work, connect withICLS 2014 Proceedings1221© ISLSothers, and gain inspiration. Challenge entrants were tasked to post one or more images and brief description oftheir make, which could be anything from a pinewood derby car, to a short movie, to science fair project. In aneffort to uncover (a) the range of locations where youths’ making was taking place (e.g., at home, in school, inafterschool clubs, etc.), (b) the range of practices involved in youth’s making (e.g., working independently orcollaboratively, etc.), and—perhaps most importantly—(c) what learning took place in the process of making,entrants had to answer the following questions in their submissions: (1) What did you make? (2) How did youmake it? (3) Where did you make it? (4) What did you learn?The Make-to-Learn Youth Challenge went live on Instructables.com in February 2013, with theentrance period closing 9 weeks later. At that point, a judging panel of 13 luminaries in the field of learning andmaking selected 20 projects (from over 300 submissions) to award with prizes. Submissions ranged from a“‘French’ style” kitchen knife made using a homemade grinder, propane forge, and milling machine; tohomemade bracelets; to an Arduino-powered Analog VU meter that doubles as a clock (see Figure 2 below).Submissions fell into the following categories of project types: Arts and Crafts (48%), Electronics andProgramming (14%), Shop projects (e.g., metal, wood, plastics, PVC, etc.) (12%), Fashion (7%),Mechanics/Engineering (7%), Digital Media (5%), Cooking (2%), and Other (5%). Over half of these projectswere made at home (56%), with the remainder of projects being made within youth-serving organizations (28%),schools (9%), and hackerspaces (3%).Figures 2: An array of projects submitted and reflected upon for the Make-to-Learn youthcontest (http://www.instructables.com/contest/maketolearn/).In terms of what youth felt they learned in the process of making, careful thematic analyses of youths’written reflections revealed that youth were less likely to state that they learned anything about subject-specificSTEM content (17%) than they were likely to note general insights into the techniques for using tools andmaterials (e.g., how to use an exacto knife, raise fire temperature for forging metal, types of stitching) (33%),general habits of mind cultivated while making (e.g., perseverance, need for iteration, patience, settingreasonable goals, etc.) (28%), and observations of personal growth and social connections (e.g., “I learned that Iliked…”, “I learned that I could…”) (19%). A small minority of youth (3%) reflected on learning about generalentrepreneurship skills as they marketed and sold their makes. While implicit STEM content could still betaking place, it’s clear that a sole focus on making as a STEM endeavor eclipses an important part of thelearning that is happening in these spaces—and may neglect major genres of making which are important forpreserving the broader maker ecology valued by young makers. In other words, by forcing an explicit STEMfocus (particularly with electronics, programming, and, at times, shop projects placed central in thisconversation), we may be overlooking the majority of young maker interests in the arts and crafts, fashion, andcooking, and digital media.These findings suggest that the Maker movement can be inclusive of a diverse range of makers andleveraged to broaden STEM pathways. However, as we begin to think about leveraging maker culture in thelearning landscape, how do we do so in a way that preserves the broader maker ecology and yet makes thepotential connections to learning more explicit? How might the types of projects we promote in our educationalworkshops mutate the maker culture and constrain and enable the authentic learning goals? Lastly, there aresome things that this data set cannot reveal to us, such as the extent to which this range of making isrepresentative of non-dominant youth. Despite its promise, since most of this making occurs in homes andoutside of any formalized context, how can we be sure that we are inviting youth from non-dominantcommunities to participate? Moreover, most of these projects require access to specialized tools, materials, andsocial networks to support such making that may have been prohibitive for youth to participate.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1222© ISLSLeveraging Online Design Challenges for Local Collaborations: CollabChallenge and Collab CampDeborah A. Fields, Utah State University; Ricarose Roque, MIT Media LabStudies of massive online communities tend to focus primarily on those online participants that are at the core ofthe community. But in truth, only a small percentage of youth demonstrate the fluency to participate online inways that are the most educationally beneficial (Hargittai, 2010; Grimes & Fields, 2012). Given known barriersto participating online (e.g., Kafai, Fields, & Burke, 2010), we argue that online community events can provideunique opportunities for local groups to come together and work toward an authentic goal at the same time thatthey engage online participants with opportunities to deepen their participation. In this presentation, we discussone such type of event, an online design challenge issued in the Scratch online community that we leveragedboth locally and online to provide opportunities for deeper learning and broader participation in Scratch. As thelargest online programming community for youth, deepening participation in the Scratch web community hasstrong potential for strengthening youth participation in programming.In 2011 we sought to create a series of online events in Scratch that would bring kids together toprogram, learn, and collaborate beginning with Collab Challenge. With nearly 4 million projects shared since itspublic launch in 2007, the Scratch website is a vibrant online programming community for youth, with over1,000 new projects being uploaded every day. Yet only a small percentage of online Scratch participantsregularly engage in practices like commenting, downloading, and networking around projects (Fields, Giang, &Kafai, 2013). The Collab Challenge thus provided an opportunity to engage both online participants andstudents from locally organized workshops in productive practices they otherwise would not likely access in thelarger, interest-driven online community. The online challenge had four key features intended to engage youthin deeper processes of computing and participating: external feedback, creativity within constraints, open spaces,and authentic audience (see Figure 3). Below we consider these design features in light of online and localparticipation in the challenge.Figure 3. Scratch Collab Challenge: Call on main screen (left) and call details (right).While most competitions (including those featured in this symposium) focus on a single endpoint ofdesign, Collab Challenge and Collab Camp required two submissions: a draft and a final project. Allsubmissions received external feedback from the Scratch Design Team in addition to goodwill comments left byother participants to help users improve their designs. Half of the 52 teams with 139 participants submittingprojects online took the opportunity to resubmit their projects, most of them going deeper in programming in thesecond version. In addition, many participants left comments on others’ projects, though not as many as we hadhoped. Participants also submitted a range of projects, demonstrating that even within a shared task (design aproject using three pre-chosen images: a pinwheel, a swirl, and a beachball), users were able to use creativitywithin design constraints. Participants submitted a wide range of stories, games, and interactive animations.Further, based on the number of comments and views tallied on Collab Challenge projects at both the draft andthe final stages, the Challenge provided an open space with a wide horizon of observation (Hutchins, 1995) forparticipants to see others’ projects, download them, and get ideas from them. Finally, the Challenge providedhighly desired visibility on the Scratch website. This was instantiated in two ways. First, 14 of the best projectswere “featured” on the front page for a week at the end of the Challenge. Participants strongly sought out thisverification of their quality participation as it gained them a wide audience for their work. Second, simply byposting projects in the Challenge gallery, projects culled far more views than normal for projects submitted onthe Scratch website. Thus the Challenge provided a means for online participants to have a wider audience fortheir Scratch work.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1223© ISLSLocally we organized a workshop for students from a local high school to engage in the Challenge.Twenty-one high school freshman aged 14-15 participated in the 8 week (2 hours/week) workshop, forming sixsmall groups. All students had prior experience with Scratch but none participated in the website regularly. Inthis way the Collab Challenge drew in students who otherwise did not feel very engaged in the Scratch website.According to even the most involved Scratch students (who played Scratch in their free time and helped tomentor others), they rarely logged on to the Scratch website unless requested by a teacher. Yet the externalfeedback left on their projects online had a strong influence on students’ projects, particularly because it camefrom people seen as outside experts. As Jacob described about his group, “They took all of the criticism to heartand all the praise, and they worked hard to make their project more interesting.” Individual students and groupsas a whole read the feedback and make specific changes in their projects in response. We suggest that theexternal feedback from members of the online community held more status for local students because of theperceived expertise and authenticity the members. All local groups improved their projects substantiallybetween the first and second submissions. In local workshops open spaces took two forms. Online, studentscould view many other groups’ projects, download them, and open them to see how they worked. This gavethem a wider perspective on how their work fit in with others’ creative ideas and sophisticated programming. Inaddition we created hourly sharing times in the local workshops where students showed their in-progress projectto the larger workshop and received praise and constructive feedback. This not only encouraged the individualswho shared their projects, it also created an open space where students could learn from each others’ work, getideas, and see different programming strategies.The Collab Challenge provided a structure for students to work creatively and an audience that changedstudents’ visions for who saw their work and how their work was perceived. Although audience is most oftendiscussed in literacy studies (Magnifico, 2010), we found that it played a key role in students’ programming.While all students in local workshops had their peers as a local audience, knowing that their project would beviewed online by other participants in the Collab Challenge “was helpful because it gave them perspective ontheir works,” according to one student Sam. “It kind of made them realize that other people were going to seethis too and it motivated them to put more work into it.” Thus locally, the online audience gave students a widerperspective on their programming and they made more efforts to put in instructions and improve their projects.Online participants responded positively to the feedback that others left and Our experiences of leveraging andbuilding on key features of online design challenges suggest further ways to build on opportunities normallytaken up by only a small percentage of online participants.In future iterations of the Collab Challenge we anticipate making several design changes to betterfacilitate Scratch users’ deepening participation in key programming and online media practices. For instance,we hope to better understand the ways in which a broad audience and constructive feedback affect students’actual learning of specific programming concepts. In particular, user interaction and initialization are two keyareas that we suspect could be improved through such design challenges since they depend on projects runningconsistently without a person present to guide and direct users through a project. In addition we plan to promoteconstructive criticism amongst all participants in the Challenge, not just the Design Team. This shouldencourage users to create a more open space to view others’ projects as well as critique and encourage others.Overall, the Collab Challenge showed good potential for engaging both online and local youth in going deeperinto programming while also encouraging stronger engagement with a key interest-based community that couldsupport their programming practices.eCrafting Circles: Rethinking Celebrations in Online and Offline CommunalMakerspacesYasmin Kafai, Orkan Telhan, University of Pennsylvania, and Karen Elinich, The Franklin InstituteMuch attention has focused on designing makerspaces either as physical spaces such as fablabs and museumspaces that provide access to 3D printing and other devices for manufacturing computational artifacts, or asonline spaces such as Instructables, diy.org, or make2learn that allow for sharing of designs and instructions, oras public events such as Maker Fairs or online competitions that bring together groups and celebrate localproductions (Honey & Kanter, 2013). Far less attention has focused on creating hybrid models that allow forlocal fabrications but also provide global connections. In our presentation, we describe the design andimplementation of such a hybrid model called eCrafting Circles (see Figure 1) that bring together these differentefforts by providing local communities and workshops with an online home, or circle, in which they can sharedesigns of their artifacts and by providing access to a larger community that can offer support and feedback.Rather than focusing on competitions as a model for incentivizing making, displaying, and sharing handmadeartifacts, eCrafting Circles leverage traditions of sewing circles which are themselves built upon thecollaborative model of quilting bees that produce shared artifacts and celebrate diversity in accomplishments.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1224© ISLSFigure 4. eCrafting.org: Main screen upper part (left) and lower part with different activities (right).The design of the eCrafting Circles platform provides basic features for individuals and groups to signup and create their local activity groups. A location map, an activity timeline, and project archive let activities,calls, and projects be browsed freely by everyone. Online visitors can comment on the projects, ask to be invitedto join circles where they can either work remotely with circle members on existing projects—during or afterworkshops—or join upcoming events and workshops to be part of new activities. Unlike most onlinecommunities that are geared towards the creation, display, and archival of individual projects, eCrafting Circlesintend to motivate a social learning experience through organizing activities tied to public events. As the websiteallows individuals, groups, maker spaces, and institutions initiate their own circle and form their own calls, suchgroups can structure their own curriculum and pursue different types of learning objectives such as makingsocially integrative projects—such as designs that foster parent and child interactions—or commemorativeartifacts, and memorabilia. Circles are supported by providing teaching aids, templates, instructions, andmaterials for a set of predefined themes—such as Monsters and Masks for Halloween, T-shirts for Astronomynight—and allow the circles customize the material for their own events.In our first local implementation we issued two calls, Monsters & Masks in Fall 2012 coinciding withcelebration of Halloween night and Astronomy Night in Philadelphia in Spring 2013 connecting to an annualcity-wide event during the Philadelphia Science Festival to bring eCrafters and their families together. Severalworkshops at The Franklin Institute, in different branches at the Free Library and other communityorganizations and schools had students and adults stitch circuits with LEDs and switches on masks, monsters(abstractly-shaped stuffed creatures), t-shirts and interactive hoodies. In addition, we organized a meeting in acentrally located public park that also provided portable telescopes as part of Astronomy Night. Dozen ofparents participated in making simple circuits with their children while a small group of eCrafters had broughttheir interactive hoodies and linked their hands while touching conductive patches to form a human circuit thatlit up their LED designs. Our analyses of pre-post surveys found success in that the over 100 participantsranging from 10 to 50 years of age broadened their views of computing and increased their interest in searchingout more activities in computing while also significantly improving their understanding of simple circuits andelectricity concepts. We also learned that attendance at local events is not guaranteed, even when connected toinitiatives such as Astronomy Night that receive widespread advance publicity.These experiences and evaluations prompted us to rethink the role of public events in reaching out andconnecting to local and online community members. Rather than using public events to celebrate finalaccomplishments, we will use them as a launch pad to generate interest and showcase designs. An intense 48hour local event, called PennApps, will serve as anchor to engage 100 undergraduates in generating newapplications with the LilyPad Arduino while across the city children and their parents at The Franklin Instituteas well as youth in participating branches of the Free Library will engage in simpler designs but joining thelarger community online all the same. Our aim is to support the activities both during and after the workshops,so that the learning and sharing experience can be sustained after the initial contact among the circle members.Here, circles can continue to grow with non-local participants and continuously be in dialogue with other circles.The website provides also a visual interface through which circle members can upload pictures and videos oftheir individual projects and share code, craft and design techniques with each other. They can also embedannotations, comments and explanations to their own designs and mix their content with different elements theyappropriate from other designs. By participating in eCrafting Circles, all participants can bring local funds ofknowledge and experiences to bear in the design of their artifacts and find access to local and collaborativecommunities of practice, further suggesting that the eCrafting Circles model may have broad potential impactfor the informal science learning community.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1225© ISLSReferencesAbernathy, T.V. & Vineyard, R.N. (2001). Academic competitions in science: What are the rewards forchildren? The Clearing House, 74(5), 269-276.Buechley, L., Peppler, K., Eisenberg, M., & Kafai, Y. B. (Eds.) (2013). Textile Messages: Dispatches from theWorld of Electronic Textiles and Education. New York, NY: Peter Lang Publishers.Burke, Q. and Kafai, Y.B. (2014). A decade of programming games for learning: From tools to communities.In Harry Agius and Marius C. Angelides (Eds.), The Handbook of Digital Games. New York: JohnWiley and Sons.Catterall, J. S. (2009). Doing well and doing good by doing art: The effects of education in the visual andperforming arts on the achievements and values of young adults. Los Angeles, CA: ImaginationGroup/I-Group Books.Dickey, M. (2005). Engaging by design: How engagement strategies in popular computer and video games caninform instructional design. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53 (2): 67-83.Dougherty, D. (2013). The maker mindset. In M. Honey & D.E. Kanter (Eds.), Design, make, play: Growing thenext generation of STEM innovators (pp. 7-11). New York, NY: Routledge.Fields, D. A., Giang, M. & Kafai, Y. B. (2013). Understanding collaborative practices in the Scratch onlinecommunity: Patterns of participation among youth designers. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan, &S. Puntambekar (Eds), To see the world and a grain of sand: Learning across levels of space, time, andscale: CSCL 2013 Conference Proceedings, Volume 1, Full Papers & Symposia. International Societyof the Learning Sciences: Madison, WI, 200-207.FIRST LEGO League (2008-9). More than robots: An evaluation of the FIRST Robotics competitionsparticipant and institutional impacts. Center for Youth and Communities Heller School for SocialPolicy and Management. Boston, MA: Brandeis University. Retrieved on December 7, 2011 fromhttp://www.usfirst.org/uploadedFiles/Who/ Impact/Brandeis_Studies/FRC_eval_finalrpt.pdfForrester, J. H. (2010). Competitive Science Events: Gender, Interest, Science Self-Efficacy, and AcademicMajor Choice. Unpublished Dissertation. NC: North Carolina University.Greenfield, T. A. (1995). An exploration of gender participation patterns in science competitions. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 32(7), 735-748.Grimes, S. M. & Fields, D. A. (2012). Kids online: A new research agenda for understanding social networkingforums. New York. The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop. Available online athttp://www.joanganzcooneycenter.org/reports-38.html.Grote, M.G. (1995). Science teacher educators’ opinions about science projects and science fairs. Journal ofScience Teacher Education, 6(1), 48-52.Hargittai, E. (2010). Digital Na(t)ives? Variation in Internet Skills and Uses among Members of the ‘‘NetGeneration.’’ Sociological Inquiry, 80(1), 92-113.Hayes, E.R. & Games, I.A. 2008. Making computer games and design thinking: A review of current softwarestrategies. Games and Culture, 3 (3-4): 309-332.Honey, M. & Kanter, D. (Eds.) (2013). Design, Make, Play: Growing the Next Generation of STEMInnovators. New York: Routledge.Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Kafai, Y. B., Fields, D. A., & Burke, W. Q. (2010). Entering the clubhouse: Case studies of young programmersjoining the online Scratch communities. Journal of Organizational and End-User Computing, 22(2),21-35.Kafai, Y.B., Peppler, K., & Chapman, R. (Eds.) (2009). The Computer Clubhouse: Creativity andConstructionism in Youth Communities. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.Kaplan, A., & Maehr, M. (2007). The contributions and prospects of goal orientation theory. EducationalPsychology Review, 19, 141–184.Kelleher, C., & Pausch, R. (2005). Lowering the barriers to programming: A taxonomy of programmingenvironments and languages for novice programmers. ACM Computing Surveys, 37 (2): 83–137Magnifico, A. M. (2010). Writing for whom? Cognition, motivation, and a writer’s audience. EducationalPsychologist, 45(3), 167-184.Peppler, K. (2013). New Opportunities for Interest-Driven Arts Learning in a Digital Age. (Deliverable to theWallace Foundation). Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University.Peppler, K. & Bender, S. (2013). Spreading Innovation: Leveraging Lessons from the Maker Movement. PhiDelta Kappan.Peppler, K. and Kafai, Y.B. (2010). Gaming fluencies: Pathways into a participatory culture in a communitydesign studio. International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(4), 1-14.Roque, R. (2012). Making Together: Creative Collaborations for Everyone. Unpublished masters thesis.Cambridge, MA: MIT.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1226© ISLSRusk, M., Resnick, R., Berg, R., & Pezalla-Granlund, M. (2008). New pathways into robotics: Strategies forBroadening Participation. Journal Science Education Technology, 17, 59-69.Yasar, S. & Baker, D. (2003). The impact of involvement in a science fair on seventh grade students. Paperpresented at the Annual Meeting of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching(Philadelphia, PA, March 23-26, 2003).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1227© ISLS