Learning with Multiple Visualizations in the Science MuseumJoyce Wang, University of Pennsylvania, joyce.s.wang@gmail.comSusan Yoon, University of Pennsylvania, yoonsa@gse.upenn.eduAbstract: Science museums are intentionally designed spaces that foster visitors’understanding of scientific knowledge. Increasingly, museums are adopting digital media andtechnologies in the exhibits both to modernize the experience and to increase visitors’ interest,engagement, and learning. This study examines how three dynamic visualizations (digitalaugmentation, computer simulation, and animation) support visitors’ knowledge of acommonly misunderstood scientific concept, Bernoulli’s Principle. Data from interviews,surveys, and tests reveal that visitors’ knowledge significantly increased after engagementwith multiple visualizations. Both children and adults attributed their understanding to theaffordance of multiple visualizations to accommodate a range of learning styles and to offer adiverse range of types and depth of knowledge. Based on these findings, we suggest thatdesigning for multiple visualizations in museum exhibits is a positive approach to increasingvisitors’ understanding of scientific knowledge.IntroductionInformal environments such as museums play a prominent role in our nation’s science education landscape.Intentionally designed to support learning about the physical and natural world around us, research has foundthat science museums foster engagement and interest in science, cultivate the understanding of scientificknowledge, support the growth of scientific reasoning skills, encourage reflection on science, promoteengagement in scientific practices, and advance the development of science learner identities in visitors (NRC,2009). In particular, understanding science knowledge, such as concepts, facts, models, and explanations, is animportant motivation for many museum visitors including teachers bringing school groups (Kisiel, 2005) andparents bringing their families (Falk & Storksdieck, 2010). Similarly for museums as educational institutions,being able to accurately represent and successfully communicate important scientific concepts to enhance thegeneral public’s science understanding is an important institutional goal. While several studies document thatmuseum visits enhance visitors’ science knowledge understanding, assessments that measure this knowledgeoften demonstrate little or no positive change in science knowledge outcomes for learners (NRC, 2009).The question of how best to support learning in science museums is often related to exhibit design.Because museums lack the direct facilitation, accountability, and rigid structure that characterize formal learningenvironments, supporting free-choice learning that is based on visitors’ interests and motivations requiresintentional design of museum objects, labels, and spaces. Increasingly, museums are adopting new digitaltechnologies to support science learning. A growing body of literature argues that these technologies cancontribute positively to visitor experiences. For example, Sandifer (2003) found that visitors tend to usetechnology-based exhibits more frequently and for longer periods of time than traditional exhibits, Laursen(2013) presented illustrations of children engaged in various levels of co-participation around a computer-baseddevice, and Eberbach and Crowley (2005) found that virtual representations of objects support different kinds oflearning. However, concerns have also arisen about the negative effects of technology on visitors, such as thetendency for them to interact less with other exhibits or objects (Ucko & Ellenbogen, 2008). “Ultimately, thegoal of introducing new media technologies…is not only to modernize the experience and space, but tosignificantly improve the quality of the visitor experience, including enhancing learning outcomes” (NRC,2009). Fundamentally, more research needs to analyze the effects of digital technologies on museum learning.It is within this field of research that we now position our study. In this paper, we investigate howvarious digital technologies impact visitors’ knowledge of Bernoulli’s Principle, a concept often illustrated inscience museums. Specifically, we examine how dynamic visualizations can support science learning. Drawingupon Ainsworth’s (1999, 2006) work on multiple representations, we study how the combination of threevisualizations (digital augmentation, simulation, and animation) together can afford learning of scientificconcepts, facts, and principles. The research question investigated in this article is “How do multiplevisualizations enhance learning in a science museum?”Theoretical ConsiderationsExhibit design is a critical feature of visitor engagement and learning. From the makeup of the individualinterpretive labels to the arrangement of the exhibit elements on the museum floor, careful attention is directedtowards how exhibit features might attract visitor attention and facilitate learning. In our earlier work, weinvestigated how scaffolding the physical design of the exhibit device might impact school children’s learning.We examined how the addition of knowledge-building scaffolds and digital augmentation might enhanceICLS 2014 Proceedings94© ISLSlearning, and we discovered that knowledge-building scaffolds support cognitive learning and digitalaugmentation supports conceptual understanding (Wang & Yoon, 2013; Yoon & Wang, 2014; Yoon et al.,2012a, b, 2013b). Furthermore, we found that digital augmentation supports conceptual learning because itencompasses many of the same learning affordances as dynamic visualizations (Yoon & Wang, 2014). Buildingupon these earlier findings, this study considers how adding more dynamic visualizations might support evendeeper learning during museum visits. Briefly, the device under investigation, Bernoulli Ball, depicts alightweight plastic ball that is able to float in the air due to the interactions between the speed and pressure oftwo types of air – the normal air in the room and the air that is being blown out of a blower attached to thedevice. In this section, we’ll first briefly discuss some of the general learning affordances of dynamicvisualizations to set the framework for understanding why they can be beneficial to learners. We’ll then addressthe three specific visualizations that were employed in this study and conclude by presenting Ainsworth’s workon multiple representations to help ground our rationale for using multiple visualizations in museum learning.Dynamic VisualizationsDynamic visualizations, or external representations that are able to depict changes in space over timeand a continuous flow of motion, have become a popular means of providing instruction in all types of learningenvironments (e.g., Lowe & Schnotz, 2008). There are four main affordances of dynamic visualizations thatmake it so attractive for learning. These include attracting learners’ attention and motivation (Scheiter et al.,2009), enabling the visualization of invisible entities or processes (Hegarty, 2004), allowing objects to beviewed from different angles or viewpoints (Hegarty, 2004), and increasing interactivity and control which canfacilitate comprehension (James et al., 2002 as cited in Plass et al., 2009). Collectively, these affordancessignificantly aid thinking.Figure 1. Three visualizations: digitally augmented device, simulation, animation.Three dynamic visualizations were investigated in this study. The first was digital augmentation, whichwe previously defined as computer-generated images superimposed upon the physical environment (Yoon et al.,2012b). Although its use is relatively new within museum spaces, some studies have revealed that they canelevate visitors’ interest and engagement (Hall & Bannon, 2006), support collaborative interactions (Asai et al.,2010), and garner conceptual understanding (Yoon et al., 2013b). For this study, the digital augmentation (Fig.1) depicts the movements and pressures of the two types of airs using different colored arrows. These arrowswould readjust their position depending on where the ball was. The second visualization employed was acomputer simulation. Computer simulations are programs that model a simplified system or process of a realworld phenomenon and their ability to allow users to manipulate variables and observe the resulting changesmakes them effective visualizations (de Jong, 2011). In science museums, they have been presented as fungames that invite visitors to explore certain aspects of a particular scientific issue (e.g., Cheng et al., 2011). Thesimulation in this study, depicted in Fig. 1, shows a pipe with molecules flowing through and a line graph belowillustrating the speed and pressure changes of these molecules. Individuals were able to manipulate the width ofthe pipe and examine its effects on the pressure and speed of the flowing molecules. The last visualizationemployed was an animation. Animations are “pictorial display that changes its structure or other properties overtime and which triggers the perception of a continuous change” (Schnotz & Lowe, 2008, p. 34). The ability tovisually depict changing information, some of which are not observable is one of the greatest benefits of usinganimation (Rogers, 2008). In museums, animations have been used as virtual staff members that guide visitorsin particular ways (Lane et al., 2011). They’ve also been used to convey important scientific information;consequently data has revealed that visitors respect these animations as trusted sources of information (Matuk &Uttal, 2008). The animation (Fig. 1) in this particular study demonstrates how the phenomena can be replicatedat home with a blow dryer and a Ping-Pong ball. A child narrates the set-up and briefly describes the sciencebehind how the ball floats.ICLS 2014 Proceedings95© ISLSMultiple RepresentationsAs discussed above, whether through increasing learners’ interests to continue their exploration or by makinginformation more visible and accessible, dynamic visualizations bear much potential to support learners’comprehension of complex scientific phenomena. In this study, we hypothesize that by bringing together theseindividual visualizations, we’ll be able to capitalize on their collective affordances to garner even deeperlearning than if using them separately. We draw upon Ainsworth’s work on multiple external representations(MERs) to provide some grounding on which to base this hypothesis.MERs have been widely used in science teaching to help learners understand complex scientificconcepts (Ainsworth, 1999). They typically refer to modern, multi-representational, computer-based learningenvironments that package together several dynamic representations such as audio, video, animations,dynamically changing graphs, diagrams, and tables and other interactive dynamic visuals (van der Meij & deJong, 2006). Although a common justification for employing multiple representations is that they are morelikely to capture a learner’s interest and motivation (Ainsworth, 1999), they also provide cognitive benefits thataid in learning. Broadly, there are three main functions of multiple external representations: to complement eachother, to constrain the interpretation between the visualizations, and to construct deeper understanding(Ainsworth, 1999). First, MERs can complement each other in the content of the representation or in thecognitive processes needed to interpret the representation. Concerning content, regardless of whether theyexpress completely different information or they provide some similar redundant information, by distributingthe information across several representations instead of containing all of it in a single representation, thecomplexity of the representation decreases. This in turn decreases the amount of cognitive load learners need tointerpret the representation (Ainsworth, 1999). MERs can also support complementary processes; even ifrepresentations contain equivalent information, they can still support different inferences because of differencesin their computational properties (Ainsworth, 1999). This requires that different cognitive processes are neededto interpret the information. Second, MERs can also be used to constrain the interpretation between therepresentations (Ainsworth, 1999). A familiar representation can be used to support the interpretation of a lessfamiliar or more abstract representation. In this role, the familiar representation is meant to support learners’reasoning about the less familiar one. The last function of MERs is to support the construction of deeperunderstanding by promoting abstraction, encouraging generalizations, and in teaching the relations betweenrepresentations (Ainsworth, 1999).In this section, we’ve outlined how previous studies on dynamic visualizations and MERs inform ourhypothesis of bringing together several dynamic visualizations to enhance learning. Because our researchanalyzes the use of three distinctive visualizations that operate through three different platforms, from here onout, we will use the term “multiple visualizations” (as opposed to MERs) to refer to the collective of the threedistinct visualizations.MethodsContext and ParticipantsThis study evolved from a formerly funded large-scale National Science Foundation informal science educationproject in which the goal was to design, integrate, and increase the use of educational technologies, particularlydigital augmentation, and to study their impact within the science museum learning experience (Yoon et al.,2012a, b, 2013a). This mixed methods quasi-experimental study extends that focus by considering how twoadditional technologies, a computer simulation and an animation, can supplement the previously augmentedexhibit device. The participants were family groups that consisted of at least one child, between the ages of 11and 14, and one adult. In total, 30 families with 37 children and 38 adults participated. Over 75% of the familieswere recruited directly off the museum floor on the day of the study. The remainder was recruited through themuseum’s monthly community outreach event and through emails to professional and personal contacts.This study follows a within-subjects, or repeated measures, design in which all of the participantsengaged in both experimental conditions with the device. The study took approximately 45 minutes to completeand was held in a separate room off of the museum floor. Before families engaged with the exhibit device,parents were asked to fill out a pre-survey and children were asked to complete a pre-knowledge test and answersome pre-intervention interview questions. After this pre-intervention data was collected, families were exposedto the first condition that featured the device with just the digital augmentation visualization. Families wereasked to play with the device as if they had found it on the museum floor. Once families signaled that they werefinished playing and after the mid-intervention interview data was captured from children, they moved onto thesecond condition. The second condition featured a computer simulation and an animation in addition to theaugmented device. Both the simulation and animation were presented on two netbooks at a table adjacent to thedevice. Again, families were asked to play with all of the tools as if they had seen it on the museum floor and tosignal me when they were done. Their participation ended once parents completed their post-survey, childrenICLS 2014 Proceedings96© ISLSfinished their post-knowledge test and post-intervention interview, and both children and parents answered somepost-study interview questions.Data Sources and Analysis1.2.3.4.Pre- and post-surveys were administered to adults at the very beginning and end of the study. Therewere two parts to the surveys but for the purposes of this study, only the second part, which assessesparents’ knowledge of the phenomenon, was analyzed. The question asks, “How do you think the ball isable to stay floating in the air without being blown away?” In the post-survey, we asked parents toreview and revise their answer. A categorization manual was constructed to evaluate this question andinterrater reliability was obtained on 20% of the responses by two independent researchers (α = 0.91).The written responses were coded from “Little to No Understanding” (Level 1) to “CompleteUnderstanding” (Level 6). Whereas in a level 1 response, the individual attributes the floatingphenomenon to just the air from the blower, a level 6 response recognizes that the ball floats becausethe high pressure from the slow-moving room air keeps the ball in the low-pressure, fast-moving airstream. Both types of air are explicitly addressed in the highest level of understanding. Paired samplest-tests were conducted to determine whether parents’ understanding of the phenomenon had changedafter the study.Children’s knowledge of the phenomenon was also measured, but was administered via interview asopposed to a written survey. Pre-, mid-, and post-intervention interviews were conducted with childrento more finely explore how their knowledge changed with each exposure to the visualization tools. Inall three interviews, children were asked the same question as on parents’ surveys, “How do you thinkthe ball is able to float without being blown away?” The mid-intervention interview was administeredto more finely identify differences in the learning impact between just the digital augmentation andthen the multiple visualizations. The same categorization manual was used to code these verbalresponses. Interrater reliability was obtained on 20% of the responses by the same independentresearchers (α = 0.96) and a one-way repeated measure ANOVA was conducted to examine how theirknowledge changed between each condition.Pre- and post-knowledge tests were administered to children at the very beginning and end of the studyto assess children’s conceptual understanding. Whereas the interviews measured their understanding ofthe exhibited phenomenon, these tests were meant to assess understanding and application of theprinciple to different contexts. The test consisted of 4 multiple-choice questions (2 low level recallquestions and 2 application questions) that were informed by textbooks and vetted by content experts.The responses were coded as correct or incorrect and a paired samples t-test was administered toexamine differences between overall pre- and post-knowledge scores.To understand how the multiple visualizations impacted visitors personally, in the post-study interview,children and parents were asked to reflect on their interaction with all three visualizations. They wereasked, “Do you think you learned more by playing with all three, or a combination of these, tools? Ifso, why or how did playing with these tools enhance your learning?” These responses werequalitatively mined for common themes.ResultsAdults’ Knowledge of Phenomenon: Pre- and Post-SurveysA paired samples t-test was performed on adults’ written responses to the question “How do you think the ballwas able to float in the air without being blown away?” Results indicated significant increases in theirknowledge between the pre-intervention (M = 1.87, SD = 0.99) and post-intervention (M = 3.21, SD = 1.61);t(37) = -4.97, p = .00. This suggests that their engagement with the multiple visualizations in the exhibitenhanced their understanding of how the phenomenon occurred.Children’s Knowledge of Phenomenon: Children’s Pre-, Mid-, and Post-InterventionInterviewsA one-way repeated measures ANOVA was conducted to compare the effects of the various visualization toolson children’s understanding before any exposure to the exhibit, after the augmentation-only condition, and afterthe multiple visualizations condition. The results suggest that there was a significant difference in children’sknowledge (F(2,72)) = 25.399, p < .01, partial η2 = 0.414) between pre-intervention (M = 2.16, SD = 1.04),mid-intervention (M = 2.76, SD = 1.52), and post-intervention (M = 4.27, SD = 1.87). This implies thatchildren’s knowledge of the phenomenon deepened with each successive engagement with the visualizations.Furthermore, the difference between mean scores suggests that children learned most when they played with allof the visualizations.ICLS 2014 Proceedings97© ISLSChildren’s Conceptual Knowledge: Pre- and Post-Knowledge TestsThe pre- and post-knowledge tests contained two types of questions – questions about subject matter contentthat required simple recall of information (“What is the relationship between the speed and pressure of movingair?”) and transfer questions that required application of the concept to a new situation (“What do you think willhappen to the 2 hanging ping-pong balls when the boy blows air through the straw between the balls?”). Apaired samples t-test was performed on children’s test scores before and after their engagement in the miniexhibit. Results indicated significant increases in knowledge between the pre-intervention (M = 0.84; SD =0.83) and post-intervention (M = 1.84; SD = 1.14), t(36) = -4.71, p = .00. This similarly indicates that playingwith multiple visualizations positively impacted children’s conceptual knowledge of the science principles thatunderlie the floating ball.Children and Adult Post-Intervention Interview about Effects of Multiple VisualizationToolsInterview responses to “Do you think you learned more by playing with all 3, or a combination, of these tools?”indicated that 100% of the families had at least one member who thought a combination was helpful while 93%of the families had every member agree that it was helpful. For example, one child remarked, “Can’t just haveone of it. It’s not going to be enough.” Parents made comments such as, “All 3 together makes it more betterand easier to understand” and “I didn’t understand it fully until I did all 3.”When asked to explain why or how they thought multiple visualizations supported deeper learning, twomajor themes emerged. First, adults and children identified that having more visualizations accommodated agreater range of learning styles. For example, one child commented “I think they're all teaching the same thingbut they're all slightly different so it's kind of just what you prefer. If you prefer just listening to something, thenyou can do the video or if you prefer hands on, then you could do that one or kind of both [sic], you could dothat.” Similarly parents explained, “I like when there’s multiple ways…different people have different learningstyles…I think maybe [sic] would provide a learning experience for different learning styles” and “I thinkbecause we all learn differently, the hands-on, the visual, the video....that just helps reinforce the knowledge...the person who learns most by doing or the person who learns by reading...so I think it's great, all 3, andtechnology today, especially for young people. I think it hit everybody”. Another theme that emerged as to whyengaging with multiple visualizations enhanced learning was because they offered visitors a range of types anddepth of information that could be learned. Even though the visualizations all focused on the same concept, theyaddressed the concept from different perspectives. As one parent explains, “It's 3 different things but the sametopic, same main idea on all of them...so you get to learn more about that piece of information.” This affordanceenabled all visitors, with varying degrees of knowledge on the topic, to gain understanding. Another parentexplained, “You can go to the simulator and kind of get a more in depth look at air pressures um, maybe for kidsthat are ready to take it to another level of understanding...And then again, the video gave an opportunity to givekids an idea to try it on their own at home which would add another level of understanding of the experiment.”This recognition that multiple visualizations could support varying depths of learning was understood to be afunction of the nuanced information contained in each visualization. For example, one child explained, “I thinkit [enhanced learning] because it added stuff that maybe the other tools didn't have.” He explains further bydescribing the different knowledge revealed by each tool: “Like the 3rd one. The video showed you that youcould make it yourself. The simulation showed that you could change the shape and change the pressure, thespeed of air by doing so. And then the augmentation showed you where the air was going. I like the 3 puttogether.” Her brother added, “Yeah because some of the things like added little details that some of the otherstuff didn't have.” Here, the children have recognized that each tool presents slightly different information. Theinterpretation is that that when these disparate pieces of information are added together, they extend learning.Discussion and ImplicationsOne of the many goals of science museums is to increase visitors’ understanding and knowledge of scientificconcepts. Through careful design of exhibit spaces, tools, and objects, exhibit developers create experiences thatnot only provide entertainment but that also facilitate science learning in visitors. Consequently, this projectsought to investigate how incorporating visualization tools into exhibits can support children’s understanding ofa commonly misunderstood scientific concept, Bernoulli’s Principle. Building upon the positive learning gainsfrom our earlier research with just one visualization tool (digital augmentation) (Yoon et al., 2012b), wehypothesized in this study that the addition of more visualizations might elicit even greater learning gains.Overall, we found that engagement with multiple visualizations in a science museum supports scienceknowledge understanding. Differences between pre-, mid-, and post-evaluations of how adults and childrenunderstood how the ball was able to stay floating revealed that both groups of visitors grew in theirunderstanding of the role of invisible features involved in the phenomenon. Initially, parents’ and children’sconceptions reflected an “Emergent Understanding” (Level 2) of how the system worked. Only obvious features(e.g., characteristics of the ball and the air being blown from the tube) were identified as contributing factors toICLS 2014 Proceedings98© ISLSthe system. These pre-intervention understandings are consistent with extant literature that documents robustdifficulties in reasoning about air pressure. For example, Engel Clough & Driver (1985) demonstrated thatchildren (between the ages of 12 and 16 years old) incorrectly associate pressure or force with movement.Similarly, Basca and Grotzer (2001) found that children often do not think that pressure exists when they can’teasily see an effect or movement and Sere (1982) found that children (between 11 and 13 years old) could notimagine pressure without movement associated with it. Because air pressure is a non-obvious variable thatcannot be sensed directly, we expected that children would have difficulties perceiving its role. That adults alsoheld onto these naïve understandings was unexpected, though not completely unsurprising given the robustresearch on the persistence of preconceptions among older children and adults even after encounteringexperiences and models that contradict naïve understandings (NRC, 2000). Regarding children’s understanding,we were encouraged to find positive results on the mid-intervention interviews after they had engaged with onevisualization (digital augmentation), which confirms our previous research that certainly, the presence of theaugmentation significantly enhances children’s understanding (Yoon et al., 2012b). As digital augmentationembodies many of the advantageous qualities of dynamic visualizations in general (Yoon & Wang, 2014), itsadded benefits to learning is unsurprising. More importantly, we found pronounced knowledge gains in bothgroups of visitors after their engagement with the multiple visualizations. Whereas parents (in their postsurveys) attained a “Partial Understanding” (Level 3) of the phenomenon, children (in their post-interventioninterviews) progressed to a “Basic Understanding” (Level 4). Conceptually, this indicates that both are shiftingtheir understanding from purely obvious features (e.g., characteristics of the ball and the air being blown fromthe tube) to more imperceptible elements such as the interactions of other forces unrelated to the tube air (e.g.,gravity or the normal air in the room pushing up/down) (Level 3) and to the recognition that these forces exertdifferent amounts of pressure which affords the ball to float (Level 4). This conceptual growth was also evident,albeit to a lesser extent, in children’s post-knowledge test. Other studies lend support to our positive findings.For example, van der Meij and de Jong (2006) found that students who were exposed to separate, non-linkedvisualizations (in a Physics unit titled “Moment”) demonstrated significantly increased post-scores on questionsabout content knowledge and Ainsworth (2006) suggests that because multiple representations have thepotential to support deeper understanding when learners integrate all of the information together, the insightachieved increases the likelihood of being transferred to new situations.Based on a) our post-intervention interviews with adults and children and b) the differences betweenchildren’s mid- and post-interview about the phenomenon, we argue that the growth in understanding is mostlikely due to their engagement with multiple visualizations in the second condition as opposed to the singlevisualization in the first condition. Our claim is well grounded in studies that have highlighted variousadvantages of learning with multiple representations. Consistent with Ainsworth’s (1999) work, we found thatour multiple visualizations support complementary cognitive processes. This advantage allows for learners whoexhibit different preferences to exploit different visualizations according to their experiences, expertise, orfamiliarity (Ainsworth, 1999). Our excerpts revealed that both children and parents perceived the value ofaligning learning preferences with tools that support these preferences. Several visitors highlighted theaffordance of these visualizations to teach individuals who preferred learning through interactive experiencesversus those who preferred learning through more direct means. Not only did they recognize that their familymembers learn differently, but that in spite of these differences, because of the various properties particular toeach of the visualizations, every member was still enabled to learn. This affordance of multiple visualizations toaccommodate particular learning styles is particularly beneficial, though there are some researchers that arguethat successful learning with multiple visualizations is less about alignment to learning style preferences andmore about expertise with particular subjects or representations (Ainsworth, 2006). While we would notdisagree that learning with multiple visualizations corresponds to both the learner’s command of the subjectmatter and how well s/he can interpret a particular type of visualization, we also want to articulate that thesestudies occurred in formal learning environments, vast contrasts to informal, museum spaces. Without directfacilitation from a teacher or prescribed assignments and activities to complete, museum learning is heavilycontingent upon visitors’ own personal choices, motivations, and preferences in deciding which exhibits tointeract with (NRC, 2009). Several studies, including Borun and Dristas’ (1997) piece on exhibit characteristicsthat facilitate multimodal learning, have explicitly addressed this relationship between exhibit design and visitorchoice. Thus designing exhibits to optimize visitor learning must consider visitors’ learning style preferences.We also found evidence of multiple visualizations supporting complementary information. Whenvisualizations contain partially redundant information, it enables users to exploit differences in the information,which therein supports the construction of new interpretations of the original concept (Ainsworth, 1999). Incomparing the information that each visualization presented, most visitors identified that the animation taughtthem how to construct a similar device at home, the simulation illustrated the idea that speed and pressure is notstatic but rather can be manipulated, and the augmentation revealed the precise movements of the various airsinvolved. These pieces of information, though seemingly disparate, support the development of cognitiveconnections about Bernoulli’s Principle when packaged together in the context of the exhibit. VisitorsICLS 2014 Proceedings99© ISLSrecognized that despite the fact that all three visualizations addressed the same concept albeit from a differentangle, the variation in details afforded by each visualization complemented each other in such a way that itdeepened their learning. Packaging “elements” within an exhibit to enhance conceptual coherence is not a newpractice. In fact, museums frequently cluster groups of conceptually related exhibits to communicate a mainconcept (Falk, 1997). However, whether visitors actually discern the underlying messages and themes acrossconnecting exhibits has received mixed reviews (Allen, 2004; Falk, 1997). Particularly with regards toillustrating abstract concepts, visitors often have more difficulty perceiving connections and themes betweenrelated exhibits (Allen, 2004). To ameliorate this complexity, researchers and exhibit designers have called formore critical consideration to be paid to all levels of exhibit design, from small-scale user design functions tolarger-scale decisions about the layout and orientation of the physical environment (Allen, 2004). In addition toincorporating explicit labels that describe the main message of an exhibit (Falk, 1997), we suggest thatemploying multiple visualizations that contain partially redundant information in various formats may also be aneffective way to support conceptual understanding.Much research has been devoted to understanding how museums can design for a range of learningexperiences from general exhibit designs that attend to a variety of learning styles and levels of knowledge(Broun & Dristas, 1997) to addressing specific design features that influence science knowledge understandingsuch as labeling (Falk, 1997) and interactivity (Allen, 2004). With the advent of digital technologies in museumspaces, studies of how they impact science learning are still emerging. While some have raised the concern thattechnology can reduce visitors’ interactions with exhibit objects or other visitors (Ucko & Ellenbogen, 2008),our study not only supports the few that have found benefits of technology on visitor learning (e.g., Asai et al.,2010; Cheng et al., 2011; Sandifer, 2003) but also suggests that designing for multiple visualizations within amini-exhibit setup may garner deeper knowledge understanding.LimitationsWhile these results strongly demonstrate evidence of increased learning with multiple visualizations, werecognize that this study is not without its limitations and challenges, some of which admittedly will haveimpacted the positive findings. The first limitation concerns the design of the research study. While there areseveral benefits to conducting a within-subjects study, one disadvantage is the potential for order effects tonegatively impact the data. In this study, children were asked, “How do you think the ball is able to float withoutbeing blown away?” 3 times. The successive repetition of this question may have cued participants to pay moreattention to the information in visualizations than if they had encountered them on the museum floor. Second,the study occurred in a location separate from the main museum floor – half in one of the design studio and theother half in an office-like space. These environments greatly contrast a typical museum environment where thescene is often chaotic, loud, and distracting with multiple activities going on at the same time. However, weview this as a “first study” and best-case scenario of what could occur. Families had the entire exhibit tothemselves, the environment was void of typical museum distractions, and they could spend as long as theywanted. To understand how this mini exhibit would fare on the actual museum floor would require furtherresearch. Finally, some may argue that increased learning resulted more from the repetition of seeing 3visualizations rather than from the actual information presented by the visualizations themselves. We actuallyconsider this to be an integral advantage of having multiple visualizations. Several children commented in theirinterviews that it was helpful to have this reiteration as it lent “more proof and understanding rather than justone” and that “since you have all 3 that are kind of similar, you can review over and over again which inputted[sic] in your head.” Simply having multiple visualizations served to reinforce a particularly difficult conceptthat children and adults alike, struggle with. Thus, the presence of redundant information should not beconsidered a casual accessory to be minimized but instead, as an asset that can improve learning.ReferencesAinsworth, S. (1999). The functions of multiple representations. Computers & Education, 33, 131-152.Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for considering learning with multiple representations.Learning and Instruction, 16, 183-198.Allen, S. (2004). Designs for learning: Studying science museum exhibits that do more than entertain. ScienceEducation, 88(Suppl. 1), S17-S33.Asai, K., Sugimoto, Y., & Billinghurst, M. (2010). Exhibition of lunar surface navigation system facilitatingcollaboration between children and parents in science museum. Proceedings of the 9th ACMSIGGRAPH Conference on Virtual Reality Continuum and Its Application in Industry, 119-124.Basca, B., & Grotzer, T. (April, 2001). Focusing on the nature of causality in a unit on pressure: How does itaffect student understanding? Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American EducationalResearch Association, Seattle, Washington.Borun, M., & Dristas, J. (1997). Developing family-friendly exhibits. Curator, 40(3), 178-196.ICLS 2014 Proceedings100© ISLSCheng, M., Annetta, L., Folta, E., & Holmes, S. (2011). Drugs and the brain: Learning the impact ofmethamphetamine abuse on the brain through a virtual brain exhibit in the museum. InternationalJournal of Science Education, 33(2), 299-319.de Jong, T. (2011). Instruction based on computer simulations. In R. Mayer & P. Alexander (Eds.), Handbook ofResearch on Learning and Instruction (pp. 446-466). NY: Taylor & Francis.Eberbach, C., & Crowley, K. (2005). From living to virtual: Learning from museum objects. Curator, 48(3),317-338.Engel Clough, E., & Driver, R. (1985). What do children understand about pressure in fluids? Research inScience and Technological Education, 3(2), 133-144.Falk, J. (1997). Testing a museum exhibition design assumption: Effect of explicit labeling of exhibit clusters onvisitor concept development. Science Education, 81, 679-687.Falk, J., & Storksdieck, M. (2005). Using the contextual model of learning to understand visitor learning from ascience center exhibition. Science Education, 89, 744-778.Hall, T. & Bannon, L. (2006). Designing ubiquitous computing to enhance children’s learning in museums.Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 22(4), 231-243.Hegarty, M. (2004). Dynamic visualizations and learning: Getting to the difficult questions. Learning andInstruction, 14, 343-351.Laursen, D. (2013). Co-participation among school children around a computer-based exhibit. Social Studies ofScience, 43(1), 97-117.Lowe, R. K., & Schnotz, W. (Eds.). (2008). Learning with animation: Research implications for design. NewYork: Cambridge University Press.Matuk, C., & Uttal, D. (2008). Entertaining evolution: Understanding science from animations. Proceedings ofthe 8th International Conference on the International Conference for Learning Sciences 3, 93-94.National Research Council (NRC). (2009). Learning science in informal environments: People, places, andpursuits. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Plass, J., Homer, B., & Hayward, E. (2009). Design factors for educationally effective animations andsimulations. Journal of Computing in Higher Education, 21, 31-61.Rogers, Y. (2008). A comparison of how animation has been used to support formal, informal, and playfullearning. In R. Lowe & W. Schnotz (Eds.), Learning with animation: Research implications for design(pp. 286-303). NY: Cambridge University Press.Sandifer, C. (2003). Technological novelty and open-endedness: Two characteristics of interactive exhibits thatcontribute to the holding of visitor attention in a science museum. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 40(2), 121-137.Scheiter, K., Wiebe, E., & Holsanova, J. (2009). Theoretical and instructional aspects of learning withvisualizations. In R. Zheng (Ed.), Cognitive effects of multimedia learning (pp. 67-88). Hershey, PA:IGI Global.Schnotz, W., & Lowe, R. (2008). A unified view of learning from animated and static graphics. In R. Lowe &W. Schnotz (Eds.), Learning with animation: Research and design implications (pp. 304-356). NewYork: Cambridge University Press.Sere, M. (1982). A study of some frameworks used by pupils aged 11-13 years in the interpretation of airpressure. European Journal of Science Education, 4(3), 299-309.Ucko, D., & Ellenbogen, K. (2008). Impact of technology on informal science learning. In D. W. Sunal, E.Wright, and C. Sundberg (Eds.), The impact of the laboratory and technology on learning and teachingscience K-16 (pp. 239-266). Charlotte, NC: Information Age.Van der Meij, J., & de Jong, T. (2006). Supporting students’ learning with multiple representations in a dynamicsimulation-based learning environment. Learning & Instruction,16, 199-212.Wang, J., & Yoon, S. (2013). Scaffolding visitors’ learning through labels. Journal of Museum Education,38(3), 320-332.Yoon, S., Elinich, K., Wang, J., Van Schooneveld, J., & Anderson, E. (2013b). Scaffolding informal learning inscience museums: How much is too much? Science Education, 97(6), 848-877.Yoon, S., & Wang, J. (2014). Making the invisible visible in science museums through augmented realitydevices. Tech Trends, 58(1), 49-55.Yoon, S., Elinich, K., Wang, J., Steinmeier, C., & Tucker, S. (2012a). Using augmented reality and knowledgebuilding scaffolds to improve learning in a science museum. International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 7(4), 519-541. doi:10.1007/s11412-012-9156-xYoon, S., Elinich, K., Wang, J., Steinmeier, C., & Van Schooneveld, J. (2012b). Learning impacts of a digitalaugmentationinasciencemuseum.VisitorStudies,15(2),157-170.doi:10.1080/10645578.2012.715007.ICLS 2014 Proceedings101© ISLS