Examining How Students Make Sense of Slow-Motion VideoMin Yuan, Nam Ju Kim, Joel Drake, Scott Smith and Victor R. LeeUtah State University, Logan, Utahmin.yuan@aggiemail.usu.edu, {namju1001, jrichdrake}@gmail.com, {scott.smith1, victor.lee}@usu.eduAbstract: Slow-motion video is starting to appear in science classrooms as a source of datafor students to examine. However, seeing important features in such video requires aparticular kind of student engagement and supported acts of noticing. This poster reports on anexploratory study of what students noticed and talked about when viewing slow-motion videoduring a classroom design experiment focused on bodily activity as it relates to motion andanimation.IntroductionSlow-motion video (SMV) is an important way for scientists to analyze physical phenomena (e.g., Mazur,Krehbiel, & Shao, 1995). SMV is created when cameras capture motion at high framerates (>120 frames persecond); when this video is played back at a standard rate (~30 fps), the motion is slowed. As prices drop forcamera equipment necessary to generate high quality SMV, such video is being integrated into school sciencecurricula (e.g., Heck & Uylings, 2010). With SMV capture capabilities being built into smartphones and othermobile devices (e.g., point-of-view cameras), we expect more classrooms will turn to SMV as a source of datafor students to use during classroom inquiry experiences. These SMV capture devices can facilitate students’noticing and observing of complex phenomena that are otherwise invisible, such as the frequency of oscillationin the intensity of a light bulb and the detailed body movements when throwing a baseball.While SMV is widely appreciated because it maintains high fidelity and detail relative to the originalactions being recorded, specialized ways of seeing need to be developed in order for SMV to actually be useful.Professional disciplinary communities are sometimes noted for their ability to coordinate visual artifacts in veryparticular ways as part of their work (Stevens & Hall, 1998), and researchers have developed variousterminology, such as “professional vision” (Goodwin, 1994) and “noticing” (Sherin & van Es, 2005), to describehow professionals develop selective perceptions of specific situations. Such research suggests that for studentsto be able to productively work with SMV, they must also learn to see and notice aspects of the video inparticular ways. This study reports on a classroom design experiment around the topics of movement andanimation and asks how students discuss and make sense of SMV.Designed Unit and Data SourcesThe design experiment took place at a public charter elementary school in the United States Intermountain Westas an extension to other work we have done with elementary students examining data related to the human body(Lee & Thomas, 2011). Fifteen fifth grade students from two classrooms participated in the unit. Over 13 days,the students met one to two times per week to examine and discuss SMV footage of a bouncing ball, a verticaljump, and other idiosyncratic bodily movements that they performed. Following the SMV discussions, studentsmodeled the movements as they noticed them using stop motion animation software (SAM Animation, Searle,Gravel, & Rodgers, 2009).All lessons in the unit were video-recorded. Whole-class discussions of SMV comprise the focus ofthis poster. In this poster, we report on the conversations and actions related to SMV of a vertical jump, whichcovered approximately two hours across three days.As an assessment for the unit, students created flipbooks showing a realistic jumping motion at thebeginning and end of the unit. These flipbooks also served as an initial object for class discussion and to helporient the students to the theme of animation. Researchers scored the flipbooks using a rubric that includedepistemic fidelity, consistency, and conventionality of students’ drawn representations.Findings and DiscussionThe students engaged with the SMV in several ways. Two of the most prominent ways were physically reenacting the depicted motions and comparing jumps across types and students. Students used physical reenactments to supplement their explanations in front of the class. During one discussion after watching video ofa student’s jump, students noted that one of the jumper’s arms moved upward. However, there was disagreementabout which arm it was; one student stood up, oriented himself in the same way as the jumper in the video, andthen moved his arm to demonstrate which arm he thought moved. In response, another student came to the frontof the room to model the jumping motion while also adopting the same position and orientation as the jumper inthe video (Figure 1). Soon, other students began to explore the movement themselves.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1617© ISLSFigure 1. Students immediately re-enacting the slow-motion jump to determine how a jumper’s arms weremoving.Students also engaged with the video by comparing across different students’ jumps for both commonand different movements. They chuckled at odd movements, and they also noted that those odd movementswere idiosyncratic. By looking across multiple examples, the students were able to find commonalities acrossjumps, which they discussed further and used later in their stop motion animations.These stop motion animation videos were of variable quality with some inconsistencies across groupswith respect to what jump features were depicted. However, when the students’ post-unit flipbooks fordepictions of a horizontal jump were assessed, there was a significant improvement (t=-3.68, df=12, p<.001).Figure 2 illustrates changes in a student’s pre-unit and post-unit flipbooks.Figure 2. Excerpts from one student’s flipbook before (top) and after the unit (bottom).In light of these results, this initial effort seems to suggest that the use of slow motion video does havepromise. The full range of strategies for making sense of such video still needs to be explored, but it appears thatre-enacting motions viewed in slow motion and comparing multiple examples of the same phenomenon may beimportant ways for students to relate to and interpret information in this medium.ReferencesGoodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.Heck, A., & Uylings, P. (2010). In a hurry to work with high speed video at school?. The Physics Teacher,48(3), 176-181.Lee, V. R., & Thomas, J. M. (2011). Integrating physical activity data technologies into elementary schoolclassrooms. Educational Technology Research and Development, 59(6), 865-884. doi:10.1007/s11423-011-9210-9Mazur, V., Krehbiel, P. R., & Shao, X. M. (1995). Correlated high-­‐speed video and radio interferometricobservations of a cloud-­‐to-­‐ground lightning flash. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres(1984–2012), 100 (D12), 25731-25753.Searl, E., Gravel, B. E., & Rogers, C. (2009). SAM Animation (Version 1.1). Tufts University, Medford, MA.Sherin, M., & van Es, E. (2005). Using video to support teachers’ ability to notice classroom interactions.Journal of technology and teacher education, 13(3), 475-491.Stevens, R., & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience. In M. Lampert & M.L. Blunk (Eds.), Talking Mathematics in School: Studies of Teaching and Learning (pp. 107-149).Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.AcknowledgmentsThis work was funded by NSF grant DRL-1054280 and the Marriner S. Eccles Foundation. The opinions in thispaper are those of the authors and not necessarily of any funding agency.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1618© ISLS