Learning to Survive “Home-Free”: Compulsory Learning and thePolitics of Freight-Hopping MobilityF. Alvin Pearman, II, Vanderbilt University, 230 Appleton Place, Nashville, TN, 37203,a.pearman@vanderbilt.eduAbstract: This project utilizes methods of grounded theory to explore and make sense ofthe learning and identity processes associated with two unaccompanied youths’ freighthopping practices. The purpose of this poster is to advance the notion of compulsorylearning to describe the process through which freight-hoppers recover or expand a sense ofagency through deliberate shifts in identity, meaning making, participation, tool use, andproblem solving that are themselves birthed in forced survival. I contextualize this argumentby discussing the aims and dimensions of compulsory learning that frame the pragmatics ofconstructing agency.Potential SignificanceCompulsory learning is a way to understand learning on the margins. This poster argues for the utility ofcompulsory learning as a way to understand (1) how one’s marginal positionality within social, economic, andinstitutional structures may contribute to a range of objectives toward which learning occurs in an obligatorymanner, and (2) how one’s response to such contextually-defined objectives must necessarily involve adaption,creativity, coordination, and resolve. Said differently, compulsory learning disrupts and re-specifies normative,self-directed understandings of “interest-driven learning,” and argues for a critical investigation into the wayscontexts, structures, and environments may compel the interests which drive forms of learning.Theoretical FrameworkAs many scholars have noted, locally-constituted cultural practices, characterized by an array of goal-directedactivities, circumscribe learning and identity processes (Cole, 1996; Saxe, 1999; Wenger, 1998). In this vein, Iwill consider learning and identity processes as occurring within and in relation to the sociocultural mobilitypractice of freight-hopping (Nasir and Cooks, 2009; Greeno, 2006; Wenger, 1998). Additionally, I refer to asense of agency as the extent to which one perceives the social environment as responsive to his or herdeliberate actions toward some objective (Johnston, 2004; Connell, 1998).Methodological ApproachOver the span of two months, I conducted ethnographic fieldwork in which I immersed myself in the space-timerounds of two, African American teenagers—known affectionately to each other as Smiles and Bones—whoengage themselves in the sociocultural practice of freight-hopping and its less organized but mutuallyconstitutive aspects of street-life. Fieldwork took place within and in several instances across one mid-westerncity at various locations relevant to participants’ daily activities. In addition, I conducted a series of semistructured interviews to elicit thoughts, comments, and reflections on participants’ forms of learning related tofreight-hopping. Field notes and photographs were collected and subsequently analyzed for emergent themes.Audio recordings were selectively transcribed, and then axial coded and analyzed through constant comparativemethod (Strauss & Corbin, 1990).Preliminary FindingsSituated on the margins of social, economic, and institutional life, and faced with direct threats to their physicaland psycho-emotional well-being, Smiles and Bones feel themselves compelled to engage in complex,interrelated processes whereby they learn to recover, expand or otherwise maintain their own sense of agency ashighly mobile subjects. I define this form learning as compulsory learning, which describes a learningexperience in which one expects that (a) failure to learn will inevitably constrict or remove one‘s sense ofagency, or (b) fits of learning will recover, expand, or maintain one’s sense of agency. In this brief section, I willfirst introduce the aims of compulsory learning within the lives of Smiles and Bones, followed by a shortdiscussion of the dimensions through which these aims are realized.One way to consider the aims of compulsory learning are that they represent the tenuous thoughessential aspects of daily life that Smiles and Bones negotiate in order to recover or expand a sense of agency. Iwill discuss briefly, omitting illustrative quotes for the sake of space, the following aims: (a) physical safety, (b)heightened self-worth, (c) access to and appropriation of basic resources, and (d) the ability to realize idealsrelated to each of their overlapping identities. Physical Safety: Since Smiles and Bones feel compelled to engagein mobile practices that are themselves characterized by the imminent threat of real and perceived danger,participants pursue the necessary resources, skills, and dispositions to realize a measure of safety across mobileICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1493© ISLSpractices. Their pursuit of such safety extends beyond high-risk freight-hopping practices to include traversalsacross and temporary dwellings in blighted and potentially dangerous urban spaces. Heightened Sense of Worth:Against mainstream perceptions and stereotypes that position Smiles and Bones, for instance, as homeless,amoral “scum of the earth,” and of their mobile practices as irresponsible, deviant, and oppositional, Smiles andBones feel compelled to adopt activities, discourses, and mindsets to counteract these dominant narratives andrecover and expand their own sense of worth. Appropriation of Basic Resources: Of precarious economic meansand circumscribed by limited knowledge of the opportunities embedded within local communities, Smile andBones must engage themselves in daily quests to meet basic physiological demands. The	  Realization	  of	  Ideals:	  Premised	  on	  an	  overarching	  ideal	  of	  freedom,	  Smiles	  and	  Bones	  construct	  personal	  and	  social	  identities	  as	   fright-­‐hoppers,	   musicians,	   urban	   campers,	   and	   street	   kids,	   and	   consequently	   feel	   pressed	   to	   gain	   the	  resources	  and	  skills	  necessary	  to	  meet	  ideals	  associated	  with	  each	  identity	  type.Smiles and Bones pursue the ends of compulsory learning (i.e., physical safety, heightened sense ofworth, access to and appropriation of basic resources, and the ability to realize ideals) through three interrelateddimensions: (a) discursive space, (b) event space, (c) bodily space. Discursive Space: Situated on the fringes ofmainstream society, and aware not only of the negative stereotypes about themselves and of their socialpractices but also the dangers and limitations that characterize highly mobile street life, Smiles and Bones createfor themselves discursive spaces from which they attempt to realize the various ends specific to theircompulsory learning. Event Space: Each of the activities, or event spaces, in which participants engage haveeither an explicit or approximate structure, duration, and objective, while the events themselves also havevarious social implications. Consequently, Smiles and Bones realize the various ends of their compulsorylearning through controlling, modifying, reframing, subverting, or participating more in line with the variousevents that constitute their daily rounds. Bodily Space: Bodily space refers to the lived experience of theirmobile practices, which Smiles and Bones describe in varying degrees as strenuous, grueling, and oftentimeshazardous. As a result, Smiles and Bones realize various ends of their compulsory learning through modifyingthe lived experience associated with their bodily space.Relevance to Conference Theme: Learning and Becoming in PracticeAs pertains to this year’s conference theme, this project argues for the consideration of a subjective dispositionas a mediating link between learning and becoming. As discussed, the crux of compulsory learning pertains tothe recovery, expansion, or maintenance of one’s sense of agency. Put differently, compulsory learning occurswhen one recognizes he or she has a prodigious amount of “skin in the game,” so to speak. There is much toloose, in other words, in the event one fails to learn. If we assume this sense of agency facilitates sustained,interest-driven learning related to social practice, and if we think of becoming as necessarily related to notionsof personhood and self-identity, one can begin to see perhaps a less direct link between learning and becoming.This poster argues that a sense of agency may serve as a conduit to learning and a premise to becoming inpractice. One can learn a skill, for instance, yet until one perceives an acquired skill to matter in relation to somedesired identity construction, such learning may not necessitate a sense of becoming. For instance, both Smileand Bones, who maintained relatively high GPAs throughout high school—based largely on what theyconsidered to be their own “natural smarts”—never identified themselves as “scholars” or “school boys.” Infact, they chose to discontinue their school-based education since they perceived the accumulation of academicknowledge itself to be at odds with the life of a traveler, which was who they desired to become. Rather,“becoming in practice” may result from the recovery, expansion, or maintenance of agency, in other words,from compulsory learning. In short, agency in practice may presuppose learning as becoming.ReferencesCole, M. (1996). A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Greeno, J. (2006). Learning in activity. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Nasir, N. S. Cooks, J. (2009). Becoming a hurdler: How learning settings afford identities. Anthropology andEducation Quarterly, 40(1), 41-61.Saxe, G. B. (1999). Cognition, development, and cultural practices. In E. Turiel (Ed.), Culture and development:New directions in child psychology (Vol. 83, pp. 19-35). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.AcknowledgementsThis project would not have been possible without the critical feedback and continuous support of the Space,Learning, and Mobility Lab, including Rogers Hall, Kevin Leander, Katie Taylor, Ty Hollett, Jennifer Khan,and Ben Shapiro. I am also grateful for Pratim Sengupta and Rich Lehrer’s invaluable insights and comments.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  1494© ISLS