Assessment Analytics in CSCL: Activity Theory Based MethodWanli Xing, Robert R. Wadholm and Sean Goggins, University of Missouri, Columbia, MOwxdg5@mail.missouri.edu, rwadholm@indiana.edu, gogginss@missouri.eduAbstract: In this exploratory study, we present and apply an automated student participationanalysis method derived from activity theory. We show how it can be used in a specificcomputer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) environment (Virtual Math Teams withGeogrebra—VMTwG), and provide holistic analysis of individual student participationaccording to aggregate behavior, in order to inform teaching and assessment practices.IntroductionAutomated assessment of student performance is a long hoped for, often strived for and probably distantobjective for learning sciences research. A more pressing and achievable objective for learning analytics is toprovide teachers with insights into student interactions. This work provides an activity theory-informed methodfor producing a holistic view of individual student participation in CSCL activities.Theoretical Framework: Activity theoryActivity theory is a social psychological and multidisciplinary theory that seeks to be naturalistic and offers aholistic framework for describing activities in practice while linking together individual and social behavior(Leont’ev & Aleksei, 1974). Engeström’s (1999) model of the structure of an activity system includes theinteracting components of subject, object, tools, division of labor, community, rules, and outcome (see Fig. 2).The activity of learning is “the joint activity of a student, physical/symbolic tool(s), and anotherperson(s) performing together as a working social system to achieve some outcome under constraints such asrules” (Basharina, 2007). Learning is reframed as social practice (rather than as merely the product of practice)(Engeström, 1999). In our CSCL learning assessment context, the outcome and process of this transformationmay both be seen as learning. It is the sum of the system components and the tensions among them that make upthe learning and influence the learning outcomes.Current participation analysis methods only address part of the activity of the learning system. Activitytheory helps us to address complex interactions in the environment, and to see into individual studentinteractions in a socio-technical environment. The activity system can be thought of as being built for eachstudent, which allows us to highlight the learning of an individual student in collaborative group work.Case DescriptionFigure 1. VMTwG of an Analytical Tool for collaborative Math Discourse.In this study, we operationalize activity theory as a lens for making sense of electronic trace data from thesynchronous math discourse software Virtual Math Teams (VMT). There are four main ways to participate incollaborative activities in VMT (see Figure 1). The time dimension (A in Figure 1) is provided by the VMTreplayer bar (each action within VMT is logged with a timestamp). In the chat window (B), text is entered fordirect textual communication among students. C and D are related to Geogebra actions. C is the “Take Control”button, while D is the GeoGebra window itself. In this figure, students are working to create an equilateraltriangle within an equilateral triangle, and many approaches are being tried. This is an ordinary part of howVMT facilitates interactive problem solving discourse among teams. We collected log data in .txt format fromfive modules in a single course. The data centers on specific event types from the CSCL environment (VMT):ICLS 2014 Proceedings1535© ISLSAwareness, Geogebra, System, Chat, and WhiteBoard (Wb). We process each event into four dimensions:individual, group, action constraints, and module set to facilitate measure construction.Measure ConstructionSubject: When mapped to our log data, it represents all actions one student makes during the whole trainingunder the individual modules, and is the sum of all actions under individual tasks (Figure 2).Figure 2. VMT data analysis using activity theoryRules: Students have to perform actions that the VMT environment offers. Therefore, the Rules arereflected by the sum of actions the student uses across all the modules.Tools: The tools are the System and Wb event types where the student’s action for tool usage isregistered. Thus, Tools are presented as the sum of participation frequency in System and Wb events.Community: All the communications that help maintain the community structure. Community ispresented as the sum of chat messages and awareness.Division of labor: Contributions of the student made to the collaborative learning modules. The onlyconcrete contribution to the geometry object construction is from the Geogebra dimension. Therefore, we usethe student’s participation in Geogebra events to represent the student’s Division of Labor aspect.Object: The CSCL activity is to achieve the object of a student’s active involvement in the whole class.We incorporate the total of module types involved, frequency of participation and the number of event types.Results and ConclusionIndividual student participation in the course is represented as six dimension sets (after standardization) (seeTable 1 as a sample). By investigation into those numbers, the teacher can provide specific advice to individualstudents. For example, if the value of a student in the Community dimension is very low, the teacher couldsuggest for the student to communicate more in the group. This methodology can be totally automated to betime efficient for teachers to use, and represents a unique, holistic, and theoretically informed approach toanalyzing participation in group work.Table 1: Sample Individual student participation model based on Activity TheoryDiv.ofNameSubjectRulesToolsCommunityLaborA0.670.452.171.630.56Q1.140.060.421.620.12Object1.712.35ReferencesBasharina, O. K. (2007). An activity theory perspective on student-reported contradictions in internationaltelecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 11(2), 82-103.Engeström, Y. (1999). Activity theory and individual and social transformation. Perspectives on activity theory,19-38.Leont'ev, A. N. (1974). The problem of activity in psychology. Journal of Russian and East EuropeanPsychology, 13(2), 4-33.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1536© ISLS