Enacted Misconceptions: Using Embodied Interactive Simulationsto Examine Emerging Understandings of Science ConceptsRobb Lindgren and Michael Tscholl, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,1310 S. 6th St., Champaign, IL, 61820Email: robblind@illinois.edu, m.tscholl@cs.ucl.ac.ukAbstract:	   In this paper we describe an approach to examining and potentially diagnosingmiddle school students’ misconceptions and emerging understanding about science conceptsusing immersive and interactive simulations. There are varying views in the literature on thenature of science misconceptions and the role they ought to play in learning interventions, butwe focus here on their manifestation in physical activity as opposed to their detection viastandardized inventories. We describe a novel framing of incorrect and emerging notions ofscience, and we illustrate this framing with descriptions of students’ embodied interactions inan immersive digital simulation of planetary astronomy. Through live observation and videoanalysis we identified 9 misconceptions that were made visible through the student’s bodilyactivity rather than through verbal accounts. We conclude with a discussion of how thesesame diagnostic environments may be used for instruction and remediation.IntroductionRecent developments in interactive and immersive digital environments have opened new opportunities not onlyfor instruction, but also for understanding and diagnosing students’ misconceptions and developing ideas.Commonly thought to arise out of everyday experience in the physical world, misconceptions are qualitativeintuitions or pre-conceptions that are resistant to change, even when confronted with traditional forms ofinstruction. While there are many viewpoints in the literature on the precise nature and origins of sciencemisconceptions (e.g., naïve theories, knowledge fragments, etc.) the methods employed to identify studentmisconceptions and primitive understandings of physical phenomena has consistently relied on clinicalinterviews and subsequently developed paper-based inventories with schematic representations and multiplechoice questions. While we acknowledge that these instruments have provided valuable insights into facets ofstudents’ scientific reasoning, we believe they may be limited in their ability to detect the kinds of flawedconceptions and primitive ideas that are revealed not through students writing and spoken words, but throughtheir actions in the physical world. A reliance on concept inventories for probing student misconceptionscontinues despite the emergence of interactive technologies that make it possible for learners to “act out” theirknowledge—which includes misconceptions and emerging ideas—and make qualitative real-time predictions ofthe behavior of a physical system (e.g., Dede, Salzman & Loftin, 1996).In this paper we put forth the notion of “enacted misconceptions” and we discuss the potential to useinteractive technologies to make explicit the intuitive and developing ideas about science as revealed through alearner’s bodily actions. This approach is based on recent advances in understanding the role of embodiment inconceptual development and learning. We explicate this framing by describing a set of specific enactedmisconceptions that were revealed by middle school students using a full-body immersive simulation of howobjects move in space. Finally, we discuss the potential for using the same kinds of interactive environmentsutilized for diagnostic purposes as a means of instruction and building up correct intuitions.The Embodied Origins (and Expressions) of Science MisconceptionsResearch on conceptual development in science over the last several decades has vigorously investigated thecauses underlying students’ consistent and robust errors with common science problems. They are variouslydescribed as common sense beliefs (Halloun & Hestenes, 1985), preconceptions (Clement, 1982), or as an‘intuitive sense of mechanism’ (diSessa, 1993). As for the source of these intuitions or preconceptions,researcher frequently point to the influence of everyday experience in the physical world. For example, at thesource of students’ idea that “motion implies force” are everyday observations that objects stop moving unless aforce is applied to them. The absence of an observable agent causing the counterforce (e.g., friction) likelyaccounts for students’ difficulty in appreciating Newton’s First Law.Experiences giving rise to faulty intuitions are normally thought to be detached observations ofeveryday situations (e.g., watching a ball roll across the floor). Less attention has been given to the possibilitythat personal bodily sensations and experiences may be the basis for faulty conceptions about the physicalworld. For example, people traveling in a car that steers sharply will feel “pushed” against the door, potentiallyleading to the (incorrect) notion that centripetal force is directed outward from the center of curvature. Not onlyis it likely that these ideas about force originate from body-based actions in the world, it is also possible thatthese ideas are primarily expressed through embodied interactions. Thus, individuals in a sharply turning carICLS 2014 Proceedings341© ISLSmay very well report consistently that the force is outward, but people looking at a diagram of circular motionare likely to vary widely in their interpretation of the system’s forces (though perhaps with still very few peoplestating correctly that the force is directed inward). The point is that while most significant learning theories,including the Piagetian model, place prominence upon people’s physical actions in the environment, knowledgeis still typically inferred from whatever abstract and symbolic representation can be articulated verbally.Contemporary research and theoretical developments in psychology and philosophy have challengedthe symbolic view. Goldin-Meadow, Alibali, & Church (1993), for example, argue that children’s bodymovements (and specifically gestures) play an important role in cognitive development and facilitating theprocess of learning (c.f., Abrahamson, Trninic, Gutierrez, Huth, & Lee, 2011; Antle, 2013). Theories ofembodied cognition maintain that even complex concepts are derived via the perception of our bodies (Johnson,1987). On the more radical side of embodied cognition theory, some researchers have argued that all cognitionis essentially a process of activating simulations of bodily action (Barsalou, 1999).If it is the case that cognition is inseparable from the actions and sensations of the body, then it makessense that one would look to bodily behavior as a means of examining a person’s understanding (ormisunderstanding) of scientific phenomena such as principles of physics. In particular, it makes sense to creatediagnostic environments grounded in the perspective of one’s body (Gallagher, 2005; Lindgren, 2012).Advances in computer technology and specifically in the area of augmented and mixed reality make these kindsof immersive diagnostic environments possible.Traditional Approaches to Examining MisconceptionsThe diagnosis of students’ misconceptions in physics primarily utilizes paper-based schematic representations(or web-based equivalents) often accompanied by explanatory or descriptive text. The examples describe orrepresent a situation requiring the application of the rules and principles of physics. For example, students maybe asked to describe the forces acting on an object thrown upwards or, more often, select among 4-5 drawingsrepresenting the correct forces as arrows. Through examples of this kind, researchers and teachers gain insightinto whether students hold naïve concepts of physics; in this particular case, students may select an answercontaining 2 forces (one upwards and one downwards, this latter the force of gravity) while the only force actingon the object is the force of gravity. The foundational studies on physics misconceptions (McCloskey,Caramazza, & Green, 1980; Clement, 1982; Halloun & Hestenes, 1985) combined these representations withclinical interviews to elicit reasoning and explanations. From these studies, multiple-choice tests were developedbased on common answers given to these questions (e.g., Force Concept Inventory (FCI); Hestenes, Wells,Swackhamer, 1992). Note, however, that even in their pre-multiple-choice origins, the misconceptions questionswere rooted in students’ verbal accounts of their reasoning while passively observing diagrammaticrepresentations. We certainly do not deny that these traditional instruments have value in revealing errors instudents’ verbal processing of physics problems, but if one accepts the idea of misconceptions as a deeplyintuitive misunderstanding expressed through behavior, then it is quite possible that these paper-basedinstruments are insufficient for fully characterizing student conceptions.The impact of representational formats in students’ performance on assessments is, as in a variety ofother subjects, well known in physics learning. For example, Meltzer (2002) conducted research on thediscrepancy between student performance with physics problems presented with sketches and text versus graphsand text. He found that answers designed to reveal student misunderstanding differed in relation to the formatsused. The study suggested that students had acquired sophisticated strategies to interpret graphicalrepresentations in relation to specific questions, answering them often correctly; but interviews showed thatstudents still did not have an intuitive understanding of physics governing the behavior of real-world objects.Hestenes (1996) emphasizes that the success of teaching of physics depends crucially on the representationsbeing used, with multi-layered integrative models capturing the dynamic of the physical world being among themore successful ones. Likewise, success in assessments depends on the way in which knowledge is enacted,whether it is text, graphical representations or, indeed, computer-based dynamic simulations. Theoreticalsupport of this position is provided by diSessa’s (1993) notion of “knowledge in pieces.” He proposes thatstudents do not hold a systematic and consistent naïve theory of physics but rather a loose collection of notionsabout specific situations. This may mean that placing students in contexts in which they have not yet been testedmay show a wider range and diversity of conceptions than normally uncovered by paper-based tests. Further,embedding students in action-based environments that more closely resemble the contexts in which thisknowledge would be applied would presumably allow the diagnostic process to focus on the ideas andsituational understandings that are most in need of further development and remediation. Indeed, part of thesuccess of novel digital learning environments, and especially interactive desktop-based simulations (e.g.,Adams et al., 2008), may derive from the ability of these systems to tap into learners’ misconceptions notrevealed by “static” multiple-choice questions, though clearly systematic studies are needed to investigate thispossibility.ICLS 2014 Proceedings342© ISLSThe Potential toMisconceptionsUseInteractiveLearningTechnologiestoExaminePrevious attempts to use novel and technology-enhanced learning environments to uncover incorrect ideas andintuitions about the physical world are sparse. Bates and Galloway (2010) surveyed recent uses of diagnosticmethods in a mechanics courses and found that sketches depicting real-world objects combined with text andmultiple choice questions remained the standard. This includes examples where simulations and other digitaltools were used for learning and instruction, but when it came to assessing the presence and persistence ofmisconceptions, these studies still relied on traditional inventories and diagrammatic representations. This is to alarge degree justified by the availability of a very large amount of data collected over decades relying onstandard examples and therefore available for comparison. Though these data continue to confirm the internalvalidity of standardized tests (i.e., coherence of answers across test examples in relation to assumed deep-seatedmisconception), little has been done to examine how misconceptions might be changing or vary in theirappearance given the availability of contemporary learning technologies. Unfortunately, the impact of learningtechnology is often seen as increasing student engagement and interest, not as an expanded context forapplication and assessment of critical concepts.Unlike more passive and didactic instructional approaches, interactive learning technologies (e.g.,computer simulations) focus on actions in realistic contexts, and they are designed to give learners opportunitiesto experience the effect of their actions (Dede, 1995; de Jong & van Joolingen, 1998; Lindgren & Schwartz,2009). In addition to creating powerful learning interventions, these environments also permit researchers andinstructors to observe students’ real-time actions and choices that may reveal problematic intuitions andmisconceptions about science. By placing the learner in a realistic environment, she may mobilize deep-seatedintuitions, exposing them to experimentation and reflection, and making them amenable for change. It isimportant to note that an interactive technology environment for exposing primitive concepts does not need tobe completely unstructured. Guidance through the use of the simulation or visualization technologies can still beprovided, as long as there are built-in opportunities for learners to make choices and articulate predictions. Assuggested earlier, we are particularly enthusiastic about the potential for revealing misconceptions withembodied interactive simulations, where learners not only take action within a digital environment, but theyphysically enact their understanding through gross gestures or full-body movement. In the next section wedescribe the design of one such embodied interactive environment.The MEteor Simulation of Planetary AstronomyThe remainder of the paper examines a particular simulation environment and how we used it to identify severalspecific body-based misconceptions—what we have termed enacted misconceptions—pertaining to anunderstanding of how objects move in space. The MEteor simulation that we developed at our lab study is alarge full-body simulation of planetary astronomy. Learners launch a virtual asteroid into a simulation of outerspace (planets with gravitational forces, etc.), and run with the asteroid, predicting its trajectory in real time. Thesimulation consists of 4 different levels that require the learner to accomplish certain tasks, such as hitting atarget with the asteroid that is located behind a planet, or putting their asteroid completely in orbit around aplanet. The simulation was built in collaboration with physicists and physics educators to ensure accuracy of thescience principles being represented.The system is made interactive with laser-scanning technology that monitors the learner’s movementsacross the floor display, and gives feedback on her success in following the asteroid. While the learner can movefreely across the simulation, cuing mechanisms and feedback have been implemented to help guide the learner.For example, if the learner ever gets more than about 4 feet away from the asteroid it will disappear and theleaner will have to re-launch. Nonetheless, there is still ample room for learners to make inaccurate predictionsand move in ways that are counter to core physics principles.Enacted Misconceptions of How Objects Move in SpaceFifty-seven students from local middle schools used the MEteor full-body simulation for about 15 minutes each,working independently through the objectives of the 4 different levels. Students were given basic instructions onhow to interact with the simulation but were largely free to explore and move in ways that they felt would bestaccomplish the objectives (i.e., hitting a target). We rely on the analysis of students’ behavior as visible in videorecordings as well as our live observations and field notes when the study was being conducted. In our review,we observed fairly consistent behavior indicating incorrect and emerging ideas about how objects move inspace. These misconceptions and primitive ideas are much more specific than the kinds of misconceptionstypically diagnosed by traditional instruments, reinforcing Liu & McIsaac’s (2005) argument that the manner inwhich naïve physics intuitions gets applied depends on the kinds of questions, prompts, situations, and objectsthey are exposed to. There is good reason to believe that participants possess these incorrect ideas because theyare actively trying to make accurate predictions to succeed in a game-like environment (as opposed to inferringICLS 2014 Proceedings343© ISLSTable 1. Enacted misconceptions that were observed from video analysis of middle school students using theMEteor simulation.MEteor Level andObjectiveLevel 1: Launchingthe asteroid at adistant target (noother objectspresent in thesimulation)Level 2: Launchingthe asteroid at atarget with a largeplanet nearbyLevel 3: Launchingthe asteroid at atarget with a smallplanet directly infront of itObserved BehaviorSpecific MisconceptionsParticipants frequently slow down andoccasionally speed up when traveling to thetarget.1.1. Moving objects in space behavelike objects moving on Earth, whichtypically slow down over timeParticipants almost always begin by launchingthe asteroid the same way they did in Level 1.Participants also typically fall behind theasteroid, i.e. fail to predict gravitationalacceleration2.1. Gravity doesn’t have asignificant effect on objects that arerelatively far awayParticipants typically start by launching theasteroid from the far sides of the simulationplatform in hopes of hitting it at an angle3.1. Gravitational forces exerted byplanets will move objects in motiondirectly towards the planetParticipants are often lagging behind theasteroid and sometimes not anticipating stronggravitational acceleration and bending3.2. The mass of a planet (differentsized planets of equal density) doesnot affect the magnitude ofgravitational force2.2. Objects being pulled by planetswill move with a constant speedtoward the planetParticipants frequently move as though theyexpect the gravity to be much stronger,responding similarly to how they moved withthe larger planet in Level 2Level 4: Putting theasteroid into orbitThe most consistent problem was thatparticipants did not launch the asteroidtangentially, or slowly enoughWhen participants successfully got the planetinto orbit, they often moved around the planetwith constant speedMost participants also moved as though theyexpected the orbits to be circular4.1. Objects traveling directly at aplanet will get into orbit by beingswept up by “orbital forces”surrounding a planet4.2. Objects in orbit move at aconstant speed around the planet4.3. Orbits are circular4.4. Orbits require inherent force tobe maintainedthese misconceptions from their verbalizations). This configuration leads the participants to mobilize their ideasand intuitions and make them visible.Table 1 lists the misconceptions that we observed in MEteor. These are organized according to thesimulation level in which the enacted misconception was typically exhibited, and they are accompanied by thebehavioral observations that suggest the primitive understanding. Figure 1 shows participants exhibiting acouple of the misconceptions described in the table. To be sure, observations of some of the students’ behaviorare consistent with ideas tested in traditional inventory assessments. This includes the observation that studentsfrequently launch the asteroid with a force that is not required to get the asteroid to the target, suggesting thecommon misconception that objects stop moving quickly because their internal force dies out. That said,applying the notion that students have an “impetus” theory of motion to this particular simulation context is notsufficient to explain the list of enacted misconceptions in Table 1—it does not explain for example why a childICLS 2014 Proceedings344© ISLSFigure 1. Left: Student exhibiting enacted misconception 2.2. The student’s body is moving at constant speed,but the asteroid depicted in the simulation is accurately responding to the force of gravity by accelerating and isabout to crash into the planet. Right: Student is exhibiting enacted misconception 4.2. The asteroid depicted inthe simulation has just sped up as it moves closer to the planet, but the student had assumed the orbiting asteroidwould move at constant speed and almost falls over in an attempt to catch up to it.does not slow down when they are enacting an asteroid’s orbit around a planet and the asteroid is at a point inthe orbit that is a further distance from the planet.Of particular value with this simulation experience were the insights it gave to how children thinkabout phenomena that cannot easily be observed or depicted in a diagram, such as the less-local effects ofgravity. Observed behavior from level 3 of the simulation demonstrated that students often underestimate theimpact of gravity not only on the asteroid’s speed but also on the direction of its trajectory. The way thatstudents typically angle their launches suggests that they are not initially taking into account that gravity’sinfluence is persistent even at far distances. Equally interesting was how students seemed to reason about orbits.Many students would use the word “ellipse” to describe an orbit, but their bodies suggested that they believedorbits to be perfectly circular. Likewise, a participant would typically move as though they anticipated theasteroid to travel at a constant speed in its orbit, expressing surprise and sometimes nearly falling over as theyscramble to catch up with the asteroid accelerating when it gets closer to the planet.Especially problematic were participant’s attempts to put the asteroid into orbit in the first place. Thisoften entailed direct launches at the planet, perhaps suggesting that they believed there was some sort ofinvisible orbital field that would suck up the asteroid and put it into circular motion, like an object dropped intoa draining sink. The enactments we observed in several of the levels suggested difficulty understanding therelationship between an object’s initial velocity and gravitational forces exerted on the object; gravitationalacceleration is a phenomenon that is difficult to observe on Earth since we typically can only see objects fallingfor short periods of time. While it may not be surprising that middle school students were challenged by theseideas, it is important to recognize that it would not be easy to pose a question on paper or even verbally to elicitthese intuitions and misconceptions.While the focus here has been on diagnostics and identifying the kinds of misconceptions that are onlyrevealed through embodied interactions, there is clearly the potential to utilize these same interactiveenvironments as a means to instruct and evolve primitive conceptions. Once an enacted misconception isidentified, such as the tendency to represent an orbiting object with constant speed, targeted feedbackadministered in real time and exposure to varying contexts that highlight critical relationships can be designedinto the simulation. Importantly, the context of diagnosis is not separated from the context of remediation, asoften occurs in traditional instructional contexts. The enactment of misconceptions is not a symptom of faultyknowledge, it is itself an expression of knowledge, that when exposed and made visible provides opportunitiesfor direct intervention and development.There is great promise in using embodied and interactive simulations to examine primitive conceptions,but there are certainly limitations to this approach that must be considered as well. There are limitations, forexample, on what actions the human body can perform such that it may be difficult to express accurate andcomplex ideas. It would be near impossible, for instance, for MEteor participants to have moved fast enough torepresent the velocity with which an asteroid is capable of traveling around a planet (relative to its approachingvelocity). The inability to recreate this pattern of motion with one’s body certainly should not be taken as anindication that they do not understand the underlying physics. It is also important not to assume that correctlyICLS 2014 Proceedings345© ISLSenacting a science phenomenon means that a person necessarily understands the causes of the phenomenon.Accurate performance can sometimes occur accidentally or is based on observations without appreciatingunderlying mechanisms. It is important, therefore, for interactive learning environments to elicit embodiedperformances that reflect deep understanding as opposed to surface-level descriptions of events.Concluding RemarksRecent models of cognition and learning have emphasized its embodied nature understood as the bodilyenactment of thinking (Gallagher, 2005; Wilson, 2002). These views contend that there is a deep connectionbetween thinking and bodily activity, and prescribed forms of physical movement may aid cognitive processesand increase the propensity for learning (Goldin-Meadow, 2005). In recent years increasing attention has beengiven to instructional environments and methods that incorporate body movements with the aim to help peoplebuild connections between their physical experiences and important principles and ideas in STEM domains(Abrahamson & Lindgren, in press; Goldin-Meadow, Cook, & Mitchell, 2009). Embodied learning is madeespecially relevant in relation to the development of immersive interactive environments that allow seeding ofbodily activities (Lindgren & Johnson-Glenberg, 2013). However, while these systems show considerablepromise to develop new forms of learning, less attention has been given to the possibility of using these systemsto identify primitive and emerging conceptions. While the important role of interactivity in learning has beingrecognized and the use of interactive systems is being utilized in a range of STEM learning environments, oftenthe impact of interactivity is conceptualized in relation to increased engagement, enjoyment, motivation andother indirect measures of learning. Now that immersive and interactive digital environments can confrontlearners with novel and highly contextualized scientific events, the possibility for access to different forms ofknowledge than what is available in traditional diagnostics needs to be given serious consideration.ReferencesAbrahamson, D., & Lindgren, R. (in press). Embodiment and embodied design. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), TheCambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd edition). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge UniversityPress.Abrahamson, D., Trninic, D., Gutiérrez, J. F., Huth, J., & Lee, R. G. (2011). Hooks and shifts: a dialecticalstudy of mediated discovery. Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 16(1), 55-85.Adams, W. K., Reid, S., LeMaster, R., McKagan, S. B., Perkins, K. K., Dubson, M., & Wieman, C. E. (2008).A study of educational simulations part I: Engagement and learning. Journal of Interactive LearningResearch, 19(3), 397-419.Antle, A. N. (2013). Exploring how children use their hands to think: An embodied interactional analysis.Behaviour & Information Technology, 32(9), 1-17.Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(4), 577-660.Bates, S.P., & Galloway, R., (2010). Diagnostic tests for the physical sciences: A brief review. New Directionsin the Teaching of Physical Sciences, 6, 10-20.Clement, J. (1982). Students’ preconceptions in introductory mechanics. American Journal of Physics, 50(1),66-71.Dede, C. (1995). The evolution of constructivist learning environments: Immersion in distributed, virtualworlds. Educational technology, 35(5), 46-52.Dede, C. J., Salzman, M., & Loftin, R. B. (1996). The development of a virtual world for learning Newtonianmechanics. In Multimedia, Hypermedia, and Virtual Reality Models, Systems, and Applications (pp.87-106). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.de Jong, T., & van Joolingen, W. R. (1998). Scientific discovery learning with computer simulations ofconceptual domains. Review of educational research, 68(2), 179-201.diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition & Instruction, 10(2-3), 105-225.Gallagher, S. (2005). How the body shapes the mind. Oxford: Clarendon Press.Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Hearing gesture: How our hands help us think. Harvard University Press.Goldin-Meadow, S., Alibali, M.W., & Church, R.B. (1993). Transitions in concept acquisition: Using the handto read the mind. Psychological Review, 100(2), 279-297.Halloun, I. A., & Hestenes, D. (1985). Common sense concepts about motion. American Journal of Physics,53(11), 1056-1065.Hestenes, D. (1997). Modeling methodology for physics teachers. In AIP Conference Proceedings (Vol. 399, p.935-955).Hestenes, D., Wells, M., Swackhamer, G. (1992). Force concept inventory. The Physics Teacher, 30(3), 141158. Johnson, M. (1987). The body in the mind: The bodily basis of meaning, imagination, and reason.University of Chicago Press.Lindgren, R. (2012). Generating a learning stance through perspective-taking in a virtual environment,Computers in Human Behavior, 28(4), 1130-1139.ICLS 2014 Proceedings346© ISLSLindgren, R., & Johnson-Glenberg, M. C. (2013). Emboldened by embodiment: Six precepts for research onembodied learning and mixed reality. Educational Researcher, 42(8), 45-52.Lindgren, R., & Schwartz, D. L. (2009). Spatial learning and computer simulations in science. InternationalJournal of Science Education, 31(3), 419-438.Liu, X., & MacIsaac, D. (2005). An investigation of factors affecting the degree of naïve impetus theoryapplication. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 14(1), 101-116.McCloskey, M., Caramazza, A., & Green, B. (1980). Curvilinear motion in the absence of external forces:Naive beliefs about the motion of objects. Science, 210(4474), 1139-1141.Meltzer, D. E. (2002). The relationship between mathematics preparation and conceptual learning gains inphysics: A possible “hidden variable” in diagnostic pretest scores. American Journal of Physics, 70,1259.Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(4), 625-636.ICLS 2014 Proceedings347© ISLS