Using Classroom-Based Authentic Research Experiences to FosterScientific Thinking and Representational CompetenceKristy L. Halverson, University of Southern Mississippi, kristy.halverson@usm.eduKari L. Clase, Purdue University, klclase@purdue.eduAbstract: In this preliminary mixed-method investigation, we explore how course-basedresearch experiences using virtual supplements facilitate students’ thinking andcommunicating like scientists. Our initial findings, from one institution (n=54 students),indicate that this experience has improved students' communication, representationalcompetence, understanding about scientific processes, and professional identifies. Weanticipate that these findings will be consistent across all five institutions we are targeting.Issue AddressedOne of the best ways for students to understand how scientific knowledge is generated is through participatingin the authentic practice of science through research. However, opportunities for research experiences are oftenlimited and competitive. There is a need to provide more undergraduates with authentic interdisciplinaryresearch experiences (AIRE) and assess their impact (AAAS, 2010). One way to provide research opportunitiesto more students is to integrate AIRE into the classroom. Ideally, classroom-based AIRE help students learn theprocess of science as they are guided to act and think like scientists while contributing to scientific discovery.Communication is an important aspect of science and advancements in technology have changed the wayscientists communicated. Biological databases have grown significantly with the advent of genome sequencingtechnologies and the explosion of the internet has provided multiple options for sharing data and meetingvirtually. Technology is integrated at multiple points during the process of scientific discovery as collection,analysis, and dissemination of data often relies on multiple virtual environments (VE) on the computer. Thus,AIRE for students should include the integration of technology. Technology (e.g., blogs, virtual worlds, andwiki spaces) can help create professional research communities and link students across institutions that are allparticipating in AIRE. Students can use this technology to communicate about problems, conceptualunderstandings, trouble shooting, and interesting findings (Clase and Halverson, 2013; Johnson et al., 2002;Kangassalo, 1994). The purpose of this investigation is to explore how course-based AIRE integrated with VEfacilitate students’ thinking and communicating like scientists.Theoretical FrameworkWe used the Representational Competence framework (Halverson and Friedrichsen, 2013) to guide this studyand we are testing its application for exploring changes in student thinking about annotated genomes and itsrelation to a biological system. Representational competence is the varying ability of an individual to understandand use representations when explaining complex phenomenon (e.g., a biological system). The seven levelsidentified range from no use to expert use of representations. Level 1: No use of representation; students areunable to create a representation. Level 2: Superficial use of representation; students create literal images toillustrate a scientific concept (e.g., drawing a scientists extracting DNA). Level 3: Simplified use ofrepresentation; students create representations with components of the concept, but these are not complete (e.g.,drawing chromosomes only without annotation). Level 4: Symbolic use of representation; students’representations are based on a conceptual understanding of the phenomena; however their understanding isflawed. Level 5: Conceptual use of representation; students’ are unable apply the information in theirrepresentations to their accurate conceptual understanding. Level 6: Scientific use of representation; studentscreate accurate representations and descriptions, but demonstrate limitations justifying which representation ismost appropriate within a given context. Level 7: Expert use of representations; students are able to generatemultiple representations and use them to accurately explain a complex phenomenon.MethodologyOur study explored the following research questions: 1) How can an AIRE influence students' levels ofrepresentational competence? 2) In what ways do students use representations to communicate their ideas likeexpert scientists? 2a) How does student thinking change after participating in an AIRE? 2b) How do studentsuse representations to think about components within a biological system and across scales? 3) How do studentsreact to using VE as part of AIRE classroom instruction? We are currently in the process of collecting andanalyzing data for this mixed method investigation. Participants include students enrolled in AIRE introductorybiology courses across five research universities in the US, about 15-40 students (all 18 years old or older) percourse (or course series). Data comes from student responses on pre/post assessments measuring biologicalcontent knowledge, attitude about science, and representational competence for genomes, individual semiICLS 2014 Proceedings1567© ISLSstructured interviews with students after participating in course-based AIRE, and reflection prompts collectedthroughout the semester. Data for our preliminary findings come from one of the universities (n=54). Weanalyzed data using qualitative and quantitative methods. For the qualitative portion, we first used a deductivecoding method to analyze student responses on the pre/posttest and individual interviews by grouping students’drawings and explanations into the levels of representational competence (Author, 2013). Then, we used aninductive approach to code students’ responses from individual interviews to identify themes of students’reactions to using VE. These themes included scale perception, logistical aspects, communication, contentvisualization, and perceived purposes for integrating VE into AIRE. For the quantitative portion, we analyzedresponses on pre/posttest using a Repeated Measures ANOVA to identify changes is attitudes toward science.Preliminary FindingsAccording to our findings from the first university that offered a two semester course-based AIRE, students’showed gains in communicating like scientists and representational competence. Before instruction studentsdemonstrated limited use of representations to communicate understandings, and much of this content wasinaccurate. After instruction more students were able to conceptually understand and use representations in theirexplanation of an annotated genome. Overall, only 5% of participants achieved the highest level ofrepresentational competence. Even though not all students were skilled at using representations to communicatetheir scientific understandings, all students involved in the course were able to verbally describe what they weredoing for their research project. They discussed how the act of doing science helped them better understand thatscientists have to make choices about what they are finding. Furthermore, the students used the evidence theycollected to make decisions, such as what constituted a gene, and also acknowledged that although their definedgene may not be right, it’s their best guess based on the data they had examined thus far. The student drawingsof an annotated genome resembled the genome visualizations from the VE used in the course. Although moststudents discussed a single computer image that influenced their representation, students who demonstrated thehighest level of representational competence made comparisons among the multiple computer images. Inaddition, only students that completed the entire AIRE (both semesters) demonstrated an awareness of thegenome from a biological systems perspective, making connections to proteins and biological function acrossorganisms. We also found that VE helped facilitate a professional identity among the students. They reportedthe VE as helpful for recognizing the scale of their AIRE at a national level, beyond the work completed in thecourse. They reported value in being able to use a VE to “see” the concepts they had been investigating in thelab, such as a genome and they found VE useful for communicating their project to students at other institutionsworking toward similar goals. Students also engaged in using VE to help with problem solving when theyexperienced experimental difficulties.Conclusions and ImplicationsWhile our current findings are only preliminary, they provide evidence that it is possible to offer AIRE in aclassroom-based setting and allow more students the opportunity to have these experiences meeting the needidentified by AAAS (2010). In these AIRE cases, students are afforded opportunities to develop insights intohow scientific knowledge is really developed and provided with authentic ways to communicate understandingswith others, particularly if paired up with VE supplements. This idea of communicating and collaborating withothers was a key aspect to helping students feel like contributing scientists. We anticipate that the findings fromthis one university will be consistent with the other four institutions we have partnered with for this project.ReferencesAAAS. (2010). Vision and Change: A Call to Action. Washington DC: AAAS.Halverson, K.L., & Friedrichsen, P.M. (2013). Learning tree thinking: Developing a new framework ofrepresentational competence. In D. Treagust and C.-Y. Tsui (Eds.) Multiple representations in biologyeducation (Chapter 10). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer. (pp. 185-202).Clase, K., & Halverson, K.L. (2013, September). Using Technology to Facilitate Science Learning andCommunity Development. Paper presented at ESERA, Nicosia, CyprusBransford, J.D., Brown, A.L., & Cocking, R.R. (Eds). (2000). How People Learn. Washington D.C.: NAP.Johnson, A., Moher, T., Choo, T., Lin, Y.J., & Kim, J. (2002). Augmenting elementary school education withVR. IEEE Computing Graphics and Applications, March/April, 6-9.Kangassalo, M. (1994). Children's independent exploration of a natural phenomenon by using a pictorialcomputer-based simulation. Journal of Computing in Childhood Education, 5, 285-297.AcknowledgmentsThis collaborative research was supported by funds from a GRC Visionary Grant, the NIH, and HHMI.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1568© ISLS