Synergistic Scaffolding of Technologically-Enhanced STEMLearning in Informal InstitutionsLeilah Lyons (chair), New York Hall of Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, llyons@uic.eduEmma Anderson, University of PennsylvaniaMichael Carney, University of Central Florida, mcarney@ist.ucf.eduKaren Elinich, The Franklin Institute Science MuseumRobb Lindgren, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, robblind@illinois.eduMichael Tscholl, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, mtscholl@cs.ucl.ac.ukChris Quintana, University of Michigan, quintana@umich.eduJessica Roberts, University of Illinois at Chicago, jrober31@uic.eduJoyce Wang, University of Pennsylvania, joycew@gse.upenn.eduSusan Yoon, University of Pennsylvania, yoonsa@gse.upenn.eduIris Tabak (discussant), Ben Gurion University of the Negev, itabak@bgumail.bgu.ac.ilAbstract: Scaffolding is often strongly associated with the structure of classroom educationalsoftware (Quintana et al., 2004), despite originally not involving classrooms or technology(Wood et al., 2007). Tabak argued that scaffolding can be productively distributed across alearning environment’s varied educational resources, proposing a “synergistic scaffolding”design pattern: “different supports that augment each other; they interact and work in concertto guide a single performance of a task or goal” (Tabak, 2004). This symposium argues thatsynergistic scaffolding is particularly apt for informal learning environments like museums,where visitors draw on a diverse array of technological, social, and physical resources whilelearning. Examples spanning collaborative data exploration, multi-context inquiry learning,mixed-reality simulations, and augmented reality exhibits are presented. Each details theeducational resources either intentionally designed into the environments or appropriated byvisitors as they learn. These examples highlight how designers can enhance informal learningby looking for potential synergies.IntroductionInformal science education shares many of the same aims as inquiry-based science education in classrooms, butis subject to a number of unique challenges not present in classrooms, like: the need to support learners withdiverse experiences and knowledge, the demand that the activity be designed to fit within a short single-visittimeframe, and the requirement that the activity be able to attract the participation of learners embedded in afree-choice environment. At the same time, informal science institutions are home to a number of social andmaterial resources not often present in classrooms, which, if properly employed, could support learning. In herconceptualization of synergistic scaffolding, Tabak (2004) proposes the framing as “an important conceptualtool in understanding how different constituents [in distributed scaffolding] interact to produce support that isgreater than the sum of the constituents.”This session will delve into how the multiple learning resources available to visitors in informal scienceinstitutions can be intentionally coordinated (and sometimes unintentionally appropriated) to form synergisticsupports for learning, and the implicit and explicit roles technology can play in that coordination. Papers in thissession will discuss the nature of the learning performance that is being supported, and how the activity can bedesigned to intentionally incorporate scaffolding resources like peers, more-expert companions, interpreters,physical artifacts, digital artifacts, ancillary repositories of knowledge, and cultural tools (both the practices ofthe visitors as well as the practices of the target learning domain). The papers will also describe how theseresources can be marshaled to perform the traditional scaffolding functions like inspiring interest in the task,reinforcing adherence to task requirements, reducing the degrees of freedom within the task, and providingfeedback and repair functions.Each presentation will cover a very different type of informal learning experience, each in differentstages of development: Lyons & Roberts describe how visitors drew on each other and the exhibit space itself tosupport joint explorations in a whole-body interaction exhibit on data visualization; Quintana reflects on thechallenges faced deploying a mobile tool for bridging formal and informal inquiry learning experiences; Tscholl& Lindgren describe how the addition of a monitoring station for adults to a mixed-reality simulation exhibitactivated parents as resources for guiding their children’s learning within the exhibit; and Yoon, Wang, &Anderson describe how the conceptual and social learning at traditional hands-on exhibits can be transformed bythe addition of augmented reality scaffolds that visualize invisible aspects of physics phenomena. Discussant IrisTabak will lead a reflection on the array of potential informal learning resources revealed by these projects, andwhere appropriate, draw contrasts with the goals and designs of formal scaffolding.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1456© ISLSScaffolding the Collaborative Interpretation of Data in a Museum ExhibitLeilah Lyons, New York Hall of Science and the University of Illinois at ChicagoJessica Roberts, University of Illinois at ChicagoMuseums are cultural ambassadors – introducing learners to both new disciplines of knowledge and the waysof-knowing that are privileged within those disciplines. Historically, science museums have allowed visitors tocome face-to-face with the artifacts and practices of science (Conn, 1998). With our project, we address thechallenge of what museums can exhibit when so much of the “stuff” of modern science is collections oforganized information. How can museums present data to visitors in an accessible and engaging fashion, andhow can they also inculcate a disciplinarily appropriate perspective towards data in visitors?Figure 1. Left, diagram of pilot exhibit installation at the New York Hall of Science. Where visitors standcontrols the appearance and the selection of the data set(s) being visualized. Right, visitors using the pilotCoCensus exhibit. The visitor is standing in the marked “1990” spot on the floor.CoCensus is an exhibit that presents geographically-plotted U.S. Census data on a large shared display.Georeferenced census data is useful to work with because it speaks to phenomena (where people live, whatpeople earn, etc.) that are familiar to visitors without them needing any specialized scientific knowledge. Toengage visitors interactively with the data, the exhibit allows visitors to control the visualization throughembodied, whole-body interaction (Cafaro et al, 2013). Where visitors stand in the exhibit gallery affects whatdata are shown and how they are visualized, essentially making use of the visitors and the space within theexhibit as parts of the user interface (see Figure 1). This serves two purposes: (1) it allows visitors to establishpersonalized connections to the data, and (2) it makes the current “state” of control immediately visible to bothparticipating and spectating visitors. In this presentation, we use two cases to describe how users exploited twotypes of resources, the presence of other visitors and the space of the exhibit itself, to support the interpretationsthey were making of the data visualization. The cases are from observational studies in two museums: Chicago’sJane Addams Hull House Museum (a small urban history museum), and the New York Hall of Science (NySci,a large interactive science center).Figure 2. Left, a scaled centroid map showing the distribution of British-born (blue, embodied by Belle) andPolish-born (red, embodied by Peg) residents of Chicago. Users cause their data set to become more opaque(closer to the display) or transparent (farther away) by moving perpendicular to the display (see blue arrow onFigure 1, left). Right, a chloropleth map of median household income data represented as five quantiles in NewYork. Moving across the marked timeline on the floor changed the decade (see red arrow on Figure 1, left).Tabak highlights “coconstitution” as an important part of synergistic scaffolds, wherein: “differentconstituents interact to produce support that is greater than the sum of the constituents” (Tabak, 2004). WithCoCensus, each visitor uses a kiosk to fill out an abbreviated US Census form, and their responses are thenassociated with a Radio Frequency ID (RFID) badge they wear in the exhibit. This allows the exhibit to displaythe data subsets relevant to each user in the exhibit, and thus the exhibit’s appearance depends on the numberand chosen identities of the visitors present (Roberts, Lyons, & Radinsky, 2012). Some visitors took advantageof the co-presence of data to engage in reasoning that would never have occurred with a single data set. ForICLS 2014 Proceedings1457© ISLSexample, in one trial two adult women (“Belle” and “Peg”) assumed control of the British-born and Polish-bornresidents of Chicago, respectively (Figure 2, left). After moving backward and forward to reveal each others’data sets, they very quickly noted the difference in the sets’ distribution:Belle:Peg:Belle:It looks like I'm along the lake.And I'm not. ((laughter)). Polish are inland. We're farming folk!We're sailors!The juxtaposition of the two sets caused the women to notice a difference in the distributions, and to begingenerating playful hypotheses about why. They proposed other possible differences:Peg:Belle:Peg:You're right, you're sailors!... So right, we have no idea... that's... if you're in the, ifyou're in the upscale? ((laughs))I would think so…I think so too. You're by the water. It's more expensive.The women incorporated prior assumptions about how geography intersects with property values and madefurther playful inferences about what this might mean about the lifestyles of the residents depicted on the map:Peg:Belle:So you're partying and I'm there in the fields.Right, I'm having (all the fun).While these women lacked the expertise to have made the same hypotheses that, say, sociologists would, theirprocess of making these hypotheses isn’t so far from what an expert might do: (1) first notice a pattern in thedata, (2) draw upon their prior knowledge to hypothesize about possible reasons for the patterns, and (3) makeinferences about what impact the observed patterns might have on the lives of the represented people. Thecoconstitution of the women’s respective data sets was what made this fanciful exploration of the data patternspossible. What was missing from the exhibit was support for the visitors to test their hypotheses. Ongoingdesign iterations of CoCensus have incorporated additional data sets such as vocational information, incomedata, and household size. .“The principled design of distributed scaffolding should include an attempt to create cohesion anddirect interaction between the elements of the scaffolding system” (Tabak, 2004). With formal scaffolding, thisrecommendation often bears literal design implications, like using the same semiotics across different learningresources. With CoCensus, we see interacting visitors bring in spectating visitors to support their dataexplorations, and the spectators in turn use their observations of the position of the interacting visitors to shapetheir contributions. The space of the exhibit itself is thus playing an active, cohering role, as illustrated in thefollowing case. A college-aged daughter, Kim, was interacting with the timeline of the chloropleth income map(see Figure 2) when she noticed a phenomenon of interest and engaged her parents (Julie and Ken):Kim: …Ken:Kim: TKen:Dad, do you know what area that is?Which?hat area that's turning from white to middle green? Right there?Um, let's see. The bottom note. No, no wait. I'm sure that's Queens, but I'm not sure((Really)) if that's near us or not. I don't think it is.Julie: And it went back to white!Kim: I nteresting.Julie: In twenty yearsKim:Ten. Well, within the space of twenty years, it has uh, from white to green to whiteagain. That's what I mean. Um. Uh, from white to green to white again.Here, the mother, Julie, is not just observing the change in the data visualization highlighted by Kim (“And itwent back to white!”); she has also clearly been attending to how far along the timeline on the floor her daughterhad been moving (“In twenty years”). This contribution added to Kim’s interpretation of what duration of timewas needed to truly characterize the interesting change in the data. Kim had been thinking of it as a 10-yearchange, but the point her mother made forced her to realize that 20 years was needed for the odd pattern (lowthen high-then low) to emerge. Julie’s attention to Kim’s movements on the timeline illustrates that the exhibitspace helped the “scaffolding elements” (the visitors) cohere into unified support for data exploration.These cases show how informal learning environments can make creative use of two oft-overlookedfeatures (the presence of other visitors, and the space of the exhibit) to support the engagement with and jointexploration of data visualizations. We are currently exploring how to give visitors a more disciplinaryICLS 2014 Proceedings1458© ISLSperspective by engaging them in critically challenging what data can tell them, and conversely, letting theirassumptions be challenged by the data, paralleling work in classrooms (Radinsky, Melendez, & Roberts, 2012).The Issue of “Fit” between Formal and Informal Contexts to FacilitateSynergistic ScaffoldingChris Quintana, University of MichiganThe Zydeco project is exploring how mobile and cloud technologies can support middle/high school scientificpractices and inquiry activity spanning across formal classroom and informal out-of-class contexts (Quintana,2012). The Zydeco system includes an app for iOS devices, along with a corresponding web application toprovide scaffolded workspaces that support different scientific practices, including: (1) A planning workspace toset up a project with investigation questions and sub-questions, possible hypotheses, and labels or tags todescribe and organize data, (2) a data collection workspace to collect different kinds of data, information andobservations in the form of photos, videos, audio notes or text notes, (3) a review workspace to access andreview the different items that have been collected, and (4) an explanation workspace to develop an explanationby using a “claim-evidence-reasoning” model (McNeill & Krajcik, 2011). The goal is to explore the notion of“cross-context inquiry” that broadens the settings, supports, and resources available to students so they canintegrate different experiences and information into their inquiry activity. The notion of cross-context inquiryprovides a setting to consider the potential synergies between the formal and informal contexts where studentsare undertaking their scientific inquiry. Closer integration of the formal and informal contexts is facilitated bythe mobile and cloud technologies in Zydeco, which increase the contextual permeability, allowing students toengage in different scientific practices in and draw from resources in the different contexts, and contextualtransference, allowing students to transfer different aspects of their inquiry activity between contexts (Quintana,2012).While such tools can open up larger, richer settings for inquiry projects in multiple contexts, studentsstill face different challenges and issues. Many of the challenges that have been previously identified forstudents engaging in inquiry activity still apply, such as the challenges for managing the inquiry process,making sense of different ideas and information, and reflecting on and articulating different information aboutthe inquiry activity (Quintana et al., 2004). In some respects, expanding student inquiry to span formal andinformal contexts may exacerbate these challenges because students are now working in contexts that each havedifferent goals, levels of support, and cultures. As we continue to explore cross-context inquiry, we seeadditional challenges in terms of the “fit” between formal and informal contexts (Quintana, 2013). For example,there are issues of (1) “cultural fit”, or the challenges arising from the potential mismatch between the goals andcultures of different formal and informal sites, (2) “resource fit”, or the challenges faced in making sure that theresources available in a given informal site fit the curricula, goals, and projects being developed in the formalclassroom context, and (3) “supportive fit”, or the challenges of identifying the scaffolding needed to supportnot only the different aspects of the scientific practices students are engaging in, but also the resources thatstudents may encounter in the different contexts.Figure 3: The Zydeco Review workspace allows students to review the data they havecollected in their investigation to see what they may use as evidence in their investigation.Students can filter their data, and also view their peers' data in certain cases.A potential benefit of cross-context inquiry is that there are conceivably more resources available tostudents to support their work, especially in different informal settings that can include museums, nature parks,etc. There are also supportive resources available to students, which can range from teacher and peer support inICLS 2014 Proceedings1459© ISLSformal settings, to signage and docent support in informal settings, to technology-based support in tools likeZydeco that aim to include supportive features that can be used in both the formal and informal settings. Thiscollection of resources provides a potential for more synergistic scaffolding for students (Tabak, 2004)—if thesedifferent resources can be marshaled to work together, then students could potentially benefit from morecohesive supports targeted to work together to support the inquiry aims of the student and teacher in all thesettings where the inquiry activity is taking place.However, the potential synergies between these various supportive resources can be hampered becauseof these issues of “fit” that emerge from mismatches between formal and informal settings. For example, in arecent Zydeco trial that spanned an academic year in a Detroit middle school, our teacher was devising aninquiry project around energy. The goal was to use engines as artifacts to study different ideas about energytransformation. The potential synergies here would include classroom discussions about energy and engines, amuseum visit for information gathering in exhibits on engines and automobiles, and a set of tags or labels inZydeco describing energy concepts so students could focus on and annotate their observations and collected dataabout the energy projects. However, this potential synergistic trio lacked cohesiveness: exhibit signage wasaimed at a general audience and there were concerns from the teacher that it would not be helpful to students,the classroom discussion did not always mesh with the material in the museum, and the student use of Zydecolabels that may not always be consistent. This episode led the team to consider ways of adjusting these activitiesand supports to operate in a more synergistic way. For example, we have begun to employ “mini museums” inthe classroom to augment the classroom discussion with engine models that prepare students for the morecomplex museum exhibits they will visit. We are also considering how to better incorporate data labels withinZydeco so they go beyond an organizational tagging aid, but also reflect important aspects of the classroomdiscussion to serve as a reflective support that can guide data collection. And our teacher even asked whether anaugmented reality approach would be feasible at the museum so that students could their mobile devices as“viewers” to gain additional, dynamic information about how engines work when they visit the static enginemodels, again to augment the classroom discussion in ways that concretely illustrate the energy concepts beingdiscussed.These ideas point to the issues about the fit between the formal and informal context, and how trying toimprove that fit could facilitate more synergistic supports between contexts. How can we improve the fitbetween the inquiry questions and plans in the classroom and the resources in a given museum so that theresources complement and augment the ideas and discussions in the classroom? How can we augment thesignage and information in a museum with additional scaffolding to help students with sensemaking activity atthe exhibits in ways that connect with their inquiry goals? Ultimately, the promise of effective cross-contextinquiry is contingent on effective scaffolding across those contexts, and given the differences between formaland informal contexts, and the challenges that arise because of these differences, addressing these issues of fitmay be necessary to develop a more cohesive, synergistic approach to supporting students and educators.Scaffolding Productive Learning ConversationsSimulation Technologies in Informal SpacesaroundMixedRealityMichael Tscholl and Robb Lindgren, University of Illinois, Urbana-ChampiagnMichael Carney, University of Central FloridaThere is a recognized potential for furthering learning through social interaction in informal environments,particularly parent-child guided participation (Ash, 2003; Zimmerman, Reeve & Bell, 2009). Augmented reality(AR) and mixed reality (MR) technologies, which are increasingly being used in informal spaces such as sciencecenters, have the ability to enhance social interactions that can lead to powerful learning experiences (Dunleavy,Dede, & Mitchell, 2009; Yoon, Elinich, Wang, Steinmeier, & Tucker, 2012a). How to most effectively facilitateproductive learning conversations that both leverage the visual affordances of AR and MR technology, as wellas the epistemic supports offered by accompanying parents and other adult visitors is a question that requiresfurther examination. To investigate this area of learning design and attempt to create instances of ‘synergisticscaffolding’ (Tabak, 2004), we placed an interactive and immersive simulation into a science center andconfigured the spatial setup and access to information so as to create knowledge dependencies between achild—directly interacting with the simulation—and parents positioned as active observes. The objective was tounderstand how our configuration and similar socio-technical designs support everyday interaction, as well aselicit forms of conversational interaction recognized as being particularly effective for generating learning.The MR simulation environment utilized in our research is called MEteor, a full-body immersivesimulation of planetary astronomy designed to help children learn about gravity and how objects move in space.Due to its significant footprint in the museum exhibit hall (a 30 by 10 foot interactive floor space) and vividsound and visual effects, the simulation attracted considerable attention, and middle-school aged children whovisited the science center with their families were invited to participate for approximately 15 minutes. Theparticipating child was asked to carry out a set of 4 interrelated tasks that required an understanding of the effectICLS 2014 Proceedings1460© ISLSof gravity on the trajectory of a launched asteroid (see Figure 4a). For example, in one of MEteor’s levels thechild was asked to hit a target located behind a planet. This required understanding and leveraging the planet’sgravity to bend the asteroid’s trajectory around the planet. The simulation was set up to resemble a spaceexploration control station with the child playing as the asteroid inside the simulation and parents and visitorssituated at the sidelines invited to help. The objective was to create knowledge dependencies that would elicitconversations pertaining to the child’s strategies inside the simulation and the important science concepts thatdictate the behavior of the simulation. To this end we made 3 display screens visible only to the onlookingparents (see Figure 4b) that provided 1) explanations about physics principles related to gravity and orbits, 2) areplay of the just-completed launch showing the trajectory of the asteroid and the child, and 3) text givingsuggestions for how to prompt the child in particular ways. The child interacting in the simulation is given afirst-person perspective on the action as they launch the asteroid, but there is the potential for their performanceto benefit from the knowledge and supports that can be provided by the parents.abFigure 4. (a) A child using her body to launch an asteroid into a target given the presence of a stronggravitation force (i.e. a planet). (b) A series of display screens visible only to observing parents and othervisitors giving replay and other supplemental information about the child’s performance.The setup creates multiple overlapping—and ideally synergistic—spaces within which activitiesconducive for learning can occur. The child’s natural body movements are placed within a simulationscaffolding the development of new intuitions about how objects move in space through visual and auditoryfeedback. Parents observe the child’s activities and can infer her strategies and her thinking, which enables themto give timely and contingent feedback on her performance. Parents themselves are scaffolded by the visualdisplays providing more formal information about laws of physics and gravity. They are further encouraged toprompt the child to maintain a higher-level perspective on the game activities, specifically to think about therelationship between how the asteroid was launched (position, velocity, etc) and its subsequent trajectory. Withthis configuration parents have the unique opportunity to make the child’s thinking and activity meaningful inrelation to scientific terminology and underlying principles.We developed a coding scheme aligned with current informal learning research (Tare, French, Frazier,Diamond, & Evans, 2010; Crowley, Callanan, Jipson, Galco, Topping, & Shrager, 2001) that was used by ourresearchers to annotate the talk and action while on site. We found that the parent-child interactions can bedistinguished into 2 broad categories:1.2.didactic interaction (coaching) of the child with the child carrying out the instructionsdialogic interaction between child and parents that included valuable conversational movessuch as explanation, and invitations for reflectionPrimarily didactic interaction occurred in 46 sessions out of 85 where parents participated in some form (54%),while in 33 (39%) sessions some conversational moves typical for dialogic interaction were identified (in 6sessions parents participated only through encouragement or affective comments). Interactions placed in thislatter category included requests for explanations (“what do you think happened here?”), offering causalexplanations in scientific terms (“your asteroid got pulled by gravity”), or descriptions of what happened in thesimulation in scientific terms (“did you see? There is gravity”). Often parents would engage in lengthyexchanges aimed to elicit children’s knowledge, reasoning and planning, as exemplified in the followingexcerpt:Dad:Tom:Dad:Tom, do you see the planet?Yes”What do planets do?ICLS 2014 Proceedings1461© ISLSTom:Dad:Tom:They attract thingsCorrect. So, do you see what is going on here?I have to shoot it this way ((curving gesture))In contrast, the ‘coaching’ type of engagement typically focused on how the child had to set the spring (“pullback more”) or the child herself (“run faster”). Prediction and reasoning were, in the didactic situations, done bythe parents, with only the action of the manipulation delegated to the child. Through this first analysis, it becameevident that dialogic exchanges consisted primarily of parents ‘eliciting explanations’ from children and‘providing explanations’ themselves. Providing explanations was more prominent and occurred in all 33‘dialogic’ sessions; in 26 of these sessions parents in addition asked the child to provide explanations andreflect.Our analysis suggest that when digital technologies are used in informal learning environments—evenMR or AR technology that embeds a learner within an immersive simulation—parents actively work to createlearning opportunities for children, guiding their attention and engaging them in critical concepts relevant forunderstanding the simulation. The various strategies that parents employ include elicitation of explanations orrequests for knowledge. Parents model problem solving strategies, a form of scaffolding that has been linked tochildren’s development of metacognitive competencies (Klahr, 2000; Zimmermann, 2000). We have shown,however, that parents’ contributions to digital interactions do not only convey explanatory or descriptiveknowledge, the kinds of conversational acts typically identified by studies of “static” exhibits (e.g., Tare et al.,2010; Crowley et al., 2001). The parental interventions in our study frequently aimed instead to create a spacefor the children to think and reflect – a space that they are left to fill on their own.Using Augmented Reality to Scaffold Learning about Conceptually ChallengingScience Content in a Science MuseumSusan Yoon, Joyce Wang, and Emma Anderson, University of PennsylvaniaKaren Elinich, The Franklin Institute Science MuseumIncreasingly, informal science environments have been characterized as important venues for learning scienceand influencing participation in science activities and careers (NRC, 2009). Questions that have arisen from thisfocus include the extent to which visitors can learn the science, what supports are needed, and how technologycan aid in the learning (NRC, 2009). At the same time, augmented reality (AR) technologies have beenhighlighted for their enormous potential to enable people to construct new understanding (New MediaConsortium, 2012). By layering digital images over real world environments, the hybrid display of phenomenaprovide scaffolds for users to experience and perceive virtual elements as part of their present world, makingnormally invisible things visible. In informal museum spaces, a number of studies have shown that AR canenhance visitor exploration of objects (Szymanski et al., 2008), increase visitor collaborative interactions (Asaiet al., 2010), and improve interest in the content of museum exhibits (Hall & Bannon, 2006).Figure 5: Bernoulli BlowerBuilding from these bodies of research, over the last several years, our project entitled AugmentedReality for Interpretive and Experiential Learning (ARIEL) has investigated how augmented reality and variousforms of learning scaffolds can improve visitor scientific knowledge in an informal science museum setting. Todate, three pre-existing exhibit devices have been modified to include digital augmentations. We selected thesedevices because the same or similar ones are present in virtually all science museums and centers across theworld. The first device, “Be The Path”, was augmented to show the flow of electricity when visitors complete anopen circuit; the second device, “Magnetic Maps”, was augmented to visualize the magnetic field surroundingtwo bar magnets; and the third device, “Bernoulli Blower” (depicted in Figure 5), was augmented to feature theICLS 2014 Proceedings1462© ISLSinteractions between two types of air to keep an object afloat. Results from quasi-experimental studies on thefirst two augmented devices demonstrate that AR can increase conceptual (content) understanding (Yoon et al.,2012a) and cognitive (theorizing) skills (Yoon et al., 2012b). We have also shown that this learning is largelyinfluenced by collaboration between peers and the AR device (Yoon et al., 2012b), dynamic visualizationaffordances (Yoon & Wang, in press), and preservation of informal participation such as self-directedexperimentation (Yoon et al., 2013).In this study, we investigate learning affordances of the third device “Bernoulli Blower” to scaffoldlearning about a conceptually challenging scientific concept. The exhibit features a plastic ball that is able tofloat in midair because it is caught between the fast moving air that is being blown out of a blower attached tothe exhibit device and the normal, slow-moving air in the room. Although the normal room air moves at a lowerspeed than the faster moving tube air, it exerts greater pressure onto the ball and is therefore able to keep the ballfloating in the stream of fast-moving air instead of being blown away. This idea – that speed and pressure of amoving fluid are inversely proportional – is extremely counterintuitive to learners. Studies have shown that mostpeople believe that pressure should be high where speed is high (Faulkner & Ytreberg, 2011). Consideringcommon daily experiences, such as observing how wind moves objects around in proportion to how strong thewind blows, this belief is not surprising. Furthermore, literature reveals that children often recognize air pressureby its movement (Sere, 1982). Where there is no perceptible movement, they think that pressure does not exist(Basca & Grotzer, 2001). In standard K12 science curricula, Bernoulli’s Principle is also often not taught byphysics teachers who either lack a clear understanding of the concept themselves and/or find it too difficult toexplain to students (Hewitt, 2004). Given these teaching and learning difficulties, we were interested ininvestigating how digital augmentations could support the learning of highly challenging science concepts. Wehypothesized that the addition of AR could help students visualize the behavior of air and air pressure, whichwould provide a valuable scaffold for students to build better knowledge of the science behind the floating ball.We tested this hypothesis with 58 middle school science students who visited the museum on a fieldtrip. Students were randomly placed in one of two conditions: condition 1 (device with no augmentation); orcondition 2 (device with augmentation). Through interviews conducted with students after they interacted withthe device, we measured student content knowledge of the Bernoulli Principle by asking the question, “Whatwere you supposed to learn from this device?” Responses were measured on a five point Likert-Scale ranginggenerally from limited understanding (1) to complete understanding (5). An independent samples t-test wasconducted to compare the amount of content knowledge gained in the two conditions. Results showed that therewas a significant difference in the knowledge scores of students in condition 1 (M = 2.66, SD = 0.55) andcondition 2 (M = 3.1, SD = 0.77); t(56) = -2.543, p = .014. In condition 1, 38% of the students had a level 2understanding (defined as providing simple observations or listing objects or concepts presented) and 59% had alevel 3 understanding (defined as identifying a relationship between two of three variables – air speed, airpressure, and the floating ball). Only 2% reached a level 4 understanding (defined as identifying a relationshipof both air speed and pressure and the floating ball). In contrast, in condition 2, only 17% had a level 2understanding. Although there was a similar frequency of level 3 responses, 21% reached a level 4 or 5understanding (defined as recognizing a relationship between varying air speeds and pressures and the floatingball). These results suggest that the digital augmentation had an effect on students’ content knowledge.A perusal of student responses illustrates how the AR impacted their learning. One student (ID6) incondition 2 who scored a level 5 said, “It helped you see the air currents that was coming from the tube and ithelped you see the high pressure air that was coming in from below and above. If air is moving quickly, it haslow pressure. If it's moving slowly, it has high pressure.” This student went on to explain that the activity wasdifferent from how they normally learned in school because of the screen and the display where she could“experience what it was instead of reading about it in a textbook”. She and two other girls also “tried to play agame” where they had to “get the ball to move around without completely cutting off the air current”. Here wecan see that the student was able to build an accurate understanding of the phenomena while at the same timeengaging in self-directed experimentation, which is an archetypal characteristic of informal participation. In thesymposium, we will present additional data from the interviews that provide further illustration of how the ARprovided other visualization scaffolding for students.In this study, we examined whether and how augmented reality could be used as an effective scaffoldto help visitors learn about difficult scientific concepts in the museum setting. Our findings showed positivegains as a result of student interaction with the digital scaffolds. However, similar to our other studies, we alsofound that there was room for even further growth in conceptual knowledge gains. Looking forward, we areconsidering additional ways to scaffold the experience to induce greater learning while at the same timepreserving the informal experience. Designing for content understanding will inevitably require increasedscaffolds, some of which are already common practices within museums such as grouping exhibits into clustersbased upon conceptually related content and including advanced organizers (Falk, 1997). In our future work, wewill investigate various aspects of multiple exhibit design with the addition of AR to understand how contentlearning and engagement can be maximally supported.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1463© ISLSConclusionTraditional scaffolding functions like inspiring interest in the task, reinforcing adherence to task requirements,reducing the degrees of freedom within the task, and providing feedback and repair functions, take on a verydifferent form outside of the usual formal classroom settings. The examples above all demonstrate the ways inwhich different resources were marshaled to support some or all of these features. For example, CoCensus andMEteor engage learners’ interest by “personalizing” the exhibits in different ways: CoCensus allows visitors tosee data that reflects “them” or their choices on a shared display, while MEteor allows visitors to “role play” asheavenly bodies. Zydeco helps learners adhere to task requirements by allowing visiting schoolchildren to quiteliterally carry a bit of their pre-visit planning with them, and pares away uneccesary degrees of task freedomwith an interface structured to place the focus on the desired information gathering activities. The ARIELexhibits show how coherence between visitor actions and visualizations of invisible forces can providenecessary feedback to visitors who would otherwise struggle with the exhibits, allowing them to adjust theirinteractions to hone in on the core content of the exhibits.All of these examples have designed features that work to synergistically recruit and employ otherpeople to support learning, bringing these examples of scaffolding closer to the original tutor-to-pupil definitionof scaffolding (Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976). The large displays and material properties of the ARIEL exhibits,MEteor (along with the side display), and CoCensus (along with the use of the floor space) all allow spectatorsto develop richer understandings of what participating visitors are doing with interactive exhibits, so that theycan provide counsel and guidance. With Zydeco, the guidance of the teacher’s counsel gets somewhat reifiedwithin the software itself by the collection of pre-selected tags, so that the students carry the teacher’s guidancewith them.Each of these projects also illustrates some of the challenges that are unique to scaffolding learning ininformal learning environments. The challenges with using Zydeco highlight how museums, despite ostensiblybeing settings which support open-ended inquiry learning, often lacked the curricular fit needed to support theinquiry learning questions students would generate. ARIEL showed how conceptual learning could be improvedwith augmented reality visualizations, but Yoon et al. warn that attempts to add additional scaffolds to attaineven greater learning gains must be balanced against not making the activities too highly-structured and schoollike, lest students lose interest. CoCensus showed that visitors were surprisingly ready to engage in jointexplorations of data visualizations, but might be too willing to accept shallow and naïve interpretations. MEteorhints that sometimes the best way to employ parents as learning resource is to (quite literally) get them to stepout of the way. Synergy does not magically result by combining learning resources. Informal learning designersshould be sure to take into account not just individual learning resources in their designs, but to consider howthe alignment across the social, material, and cultural resources in informal settings to produce learningexperiences that truly exceed the sum of their parts.ReferencesAsai, K., Sugimoto, Y., & Billinghurst, M. (2010). Exhibition of lunar surface navigation system facilitatingcollaboration between children and parents in science museum. Proceedings of the 9th ACMSIGGRAPH Conference on Virtual Reality Continuum and Its Application in Industry, 119-124.Ash, D. (2003). Dialogic inquiry in life science conversations of family groups in a museum. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 40, 138-162.Basca, B., & Grotzer, T. (April, 2001). Focusing on the nature of causality in a unit on pressure: How does itaffect student understanding? Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American EducationalResearch Association, Seattle, Washington.Cafaro, F., Panella, A., Lyons, L., Roberts, J., & Radinsky, J. (2013). I see you there!: developing identitypreserving embodied interaction for museum exhibits. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM annualconference on Human factors in computing systems (CHI 2013), 1911-1920.Conn, S. (1998). Museums and american intellectual life, 1876-1926. Chicago: The University of ChicagoPress.Crowley, K., Callanan, M. A., Jipson, J. L., Galco, J., Topping, K., & Shrager, J. (2001). Shared scientificthinking in everyday parent‐child activity. Science Education, 85(6), 712-732.Dunleavy, M., Dede, C., & Mitchell, R. (2009). Affordances and limitations of immersive participatoryaugmented reality simulations for teaching and learning. Journal of Science Education and Technology,18, 7-22.Falk, J. (1997). Testing a museum exhibition design assumption: Effect of explicit labeling of exhibit clusters onvisitor concept development. Science Education, 81, 679-687.Faulkner, B., & Ytreberg, M. (2011). Understanding Bernoulli’s principle through simulations. AmericanJournal of Physics, 79(2), 214-216.Hall, T. & Bannon, L. (2006). Designing ubiquitous computing to enhance children’s learning in museums.Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 22(4), 231-243.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1464© ISLSHewitt, P. (2004). Bernoulli’s Principle: Understanding Bernoulli’s principle as it applies to aerodynamic lift.The Science Teacher, 71(7), 51-55.Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring science: The cognition and development of discovery processes. Cambridge, MA:MIT Press.Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1979). Laboratory Life: The Social Construction of Scientific Facts. London: Sage.McNeill, K.L. & Krajcik, J. (2011). Supporting grade 5-8 students in constructing explanations in science: TheClaim, Evidence, and Reasoning Framework for talk and writing. Allyn & Bacon: Boston.Monmonier, M. (1991). How to lie with maps. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.National Research Council. (2009). Learning Science in Informal Environments: People, Places, and Pursuits.The National Academies Press, Washington, DC.New Media Consortium. (2012). NMC Horizon report: 2012 K-12 edition. Austin, TX: The New MediaConsortium.Quintana, C. (2013). Contextual fit between formal and informal contexts for middle school science inquiry. InS. Yoon (Chair), Promises and perils of using digital tools in informal science learning environments:Design considerations for learning. Panel presentation at the 2013 Conference on Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, Madison, WI.Quintana, C. (2012). Pervasive science: Using mobile devices and the cloud to support science education.Interactions, 19(4), 76-80.Quintana, C., Reiser, B., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Golan, R., Kyza, E., Edelson, D. C. and Soloway, E.(2004). A scaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 13(3), 337-386.Radinsky, J., Melendez, J., Roberts, J. (2012) Do the Data Strike Back? Students’ Presentations of HistoricalNarratives about Latino Communities using GIS. In Josh Radinsky (Chair), Tools for ConstructingHistorical Narratives: Teaching African American and Latino Histories With GIS Census Maps.Symposium conducted at the meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Vancouver,B.C., Canada.Roberts, J., Cafaro, F., Kang, R., Vogt, K., Lyons, L., & Radinsky, J. (2013). That's Me and That's You:Museum Visitors' Perspective-Taking Around an Embodied Interaction Data Map Display. InProceedings of 10th International Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning(CSCL).Roberts, J., Lyons, L., & Radinsky, J. (2012). Connecting Visitors to Exhibits through Design: Exploring UnitedStates census data with CoCensus. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of the LearningSciences (ICLS 2012) – Volume 2, Short Papers, Symposia, and Abstracts, 557-558.Sere, M. (1982). A study of some frameworks used by pupils aged 11-13 years in the interpretation of airpressure. European Journal of Science Education, 4(3), 299-309.Szymanski, M. et al, 2008. Sotto Voce: Facilitating Social Learning in a Historic House. In ComputerSupported Cooperative Work, 17(1), 5-34.Tabak, I, (2004). A complement to emerging patterns of distributed scaffolding. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 13(3), 305-335.Tare, M., French, J., Frazier, B. N., Diamond, J., & Evans, E. M. (2011). Explanatory parent–child conversationpredominates at an evolution exhibit. Science Education, 95(4), 720-744.Wood, D., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of ChildPsychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 17, 89–100.Yoon, S., Elinich, K., Wang, J., Steinmeier, C., & Tucker, S. (2012a). Using augmented reality and knowledgebuilding scaffolds to improve learning in a science museum. International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 7(4), 519-541.Yoon, S., Elinich, K., Wang, J., Steinmeier, C., & Van Schooneveld, J. (2012b). Learning Impacts of a DigitalAugmentation in a Science Museum. Visitor Studies, 15(2), 157-170.Yoon, S., Elinich, K., Wang, J., Van Schooneveld, J., Anderson, E., (2013). Scaffolding informal learning inscience museums: How much is too much? Science Education, 97(6), 848-877.Yoon, S., & Wang, J. (in press). Making the invisible visible in science museums through augmented realitydevices. Tech Trends.Zimmerman, C. (2000). The development of scientific reasoning skills. Developmental Review, 20(1), 99-149.Zimmerman, H. T., Reeve, S., & Bell, P. (2010). Family sense-making practices in science center conversations.Science Education, 94(3), 478-505.AcknowledgmentsThe work presented here was supported by the following grants: NSF INSPIRE 1248052 (Lyons & Roberts),NSF DRL 1020027 (Quintana), NSF DRL-1114621 (Tscholl & Lindgren), and NSF DRL 0741659 (Yoon,Wang, & Anderson).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1465© ISLS