Designing for Engagement in Environmental Science: Becoming"Environmental Citizens"Susan Bobbitt Nolen, Gavin Tierney, Alexandra Goodell, Nathanie Lee and Robert D. AbbottBox 36300, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-3600sunolen@uw.edu; gtierney@uw.edu, alexg79@uw.edu, nalee@uw.edu, abbottr@uw.eduAbstract: We report Design-Based Implementation Research (DBIR) on a year-longproject-based AP Environmental Science curriculum in 11 classrooms in two urbandistricts. We report its impact on students' engagement, practice-linked identities asenvironmental citizens and performance on a complex transfer task. Results from the initialdesign-redesign phase in a suburban district were replicated. Implementation data providednew information about how two design features (positioning students as change agents intheir own lives and gradually widening from local to global issues) contributed toengagement and identity development.Major Issues AddressedEnvironmental Science courses naturally fall at the boundary between science and citizenship. Students learnnot only the scientific concepts and processes needed to understand the world around them, they learn their rolesand responsibilities as citizens in the ongoing interaction between humans and that environment – their“practice-linked identities (Nasir & Hand, 2008).” An unfortunate byproduct of students’ increased knowledgeabout current environmental problems might be a sense of “doom and gloom.” In making sense of issues ofsustainability and human impact on the environment, students may learn to be passive, coming to believe thatenvironmental problems are so big that an individual can have no meaningful impact. In a project-basedcurriculum, this could lead to student disengagement with real-world and simulated activities that are the spineof the course (Parker, et al, 2013). We designed and tested an experimental, project-based, Advanced PlacementEnvironmental Science (APES) course focused on increasing engagement with scientifically-informed practicesby (1) emphasizing students' agency in making decisions that affect the environment and (2) supporting thedevelopment of practice-linked identities as environmental citizens. In this PBL curriculum, projects are thespine of the course, meant to provide a context and purpose for all learning activities. After a two-year designtest-redesign-test cycle in a suburban school (Goodell et al 2014), we used DBIR to study the implementation ofthe curriculum in 11 classrooms in two urban districts and its impact on students' practice-linked identities asenvironmental citizens, self-reported interest in environmental issues, and performance on a transfer taskrequiring hypothesis generation, requesting additional information, supporting/refuting hypotheses andproposing solutions to a real-world environmental problem.Theoretical FrameworkPractice-Linked IdentitiesTo understand the connections between students' engagement in project-based environmental science activitiesand their sense of their role in addressing environmental issues in the world, we turned to Nasir and Hand's(2008) concept of "practice-linked identities." Nasir and Hand define practice-linked identities as "the identitiesthat people come to take on, construct, and embrace that are linked to participation in particular social andcultural practices" in which there is a "sense of connection between the self and the practice" (p. 147). The kindof project-based learning embodied in the APES curriculum is intended to provide opportunities for students tolearn how specific practices can have positive or negative effects on the environment. By expansively framingcontent as transferrable to out-of-school contexts, the designers hoped students would identify with or take upthose practices in their daily decision-making (Engle et al., 2012). Considering the environmental impact ofeveryday decisions and using science to inform one's opinions and actions as a citizen in a democracy we call"environmental citizenship." To the extent that students took up practices and used concepts from the course inthis way, we considered them to have begun to develop practice-linked identities as environmental citizens.Nasir and Hand (2008) describe three dimensions of learning contexts that might support thedevelopment of practice-linked identities: "(a) access to the domain as a whole, as well as to specific skills andconcepts within it; (b) integral roles and accountability for carrying out those roles; and (c) opportunities toengage in self-expression, to make a unique contribution, and to feel valued and competent in the setting." (p.248). Contexts that supply all three dimensions would be expected to support higher levels of studentengagement as students begin to identify with the practice of particular contexts. Students in the PBL-APEScourse participated in real-world or simulation projects, As designed, the project-based APES course couldprovide access to the domains of environmental science and environmental citizenship through framingICLS 2014 Proceedings962© ISLSenvironmental science concepts and principles in the context of complex real-world (reduce your family'secological impact) or simulated real-world (design a sustainable farm, participate in a global energy summit)projects. Students were also clearly assigned roles in each project, and evidence from the year two redesignsuggested they saw these roles as "integral" and "accountable" to the project context. The first cycle, EcoFootprint, cast students in the role of collecting data at home and making proposals to their own families,providing what Barton and Tan have called "hybrid spaces" and opportunity to integrate home andenvironmental-science related identities and discourses (see also Tzou et al, 2010). In each project, students hadlatitude to make decisions and express personal interests and choice, and interview data provided evidence thatstudents felt "valued and competent in the setting." Survey data from year two also supported the connectionbetween engagement in the project tasks and end of year interest in the environment, after accounting for initialinterest in environmental science. Interview data suggested students had (further) developed their identities as"environmental citizens," able to suggest more specific solutions to problems, reporting more specific instancesof transfer to life out of school, and reporting less pessimism and more agency in addressing environmentalproblems than students in year 1 (Goodell et al, 2014).Expansive Framing for Transfer and the Development of InterestThe approach to project-based learning used in the APES course is consistent with what Engle and hercolleagues have called "expansive framing" to promote transfer (Engle, 2006; Engle et al., 2012; Engle,Nguyen, & Mendelson, 2011). By assigning roles in projects at the beginning of each cycle (e.g., sustainablefarmer, natural resource manager), rather than using projects as a way to apply learned knowledge, studentsshould learn with the expectation that the knowledge will be useful in the (at least immediate) future. To theextent that students found the projects to be authentic, that is, that they reflected the ways that real people in theworld used the concepts and practices they were learning, the projects also should also increase the extent towhich students see future value for transfer, increasing engagement and interest. Continuous participation inprojects was expected to trigger and sustain student interest in the content, providing an opportunity for studentsto develop a more stable identification with and interest in environmental issues. This, in turn, could beexpected to lead to students seeking out additional information and opportunities to use their environmentalscience knowledge in other contexts (Renninger, Bacharach, & Posey, 2008).ContextDesign-Based Implementation ResearchAs we moved our curriculum from a well-resourced suburban district to urban, poverty-impacted districts, wewere concerned with a variety of contextual and institutional characteristics that could impact implementation.In our larger project, we have adopted a DBIR approach to understanding and innovating around issues ofscaling (Penuel, Fishman, Cheng & Sabelli, 2011). In this brief report, we focus primarily on the effects ofimplementation differences, but it is important to note that the reasons for those differences represent persistentproblems of practice to which the APES curriculum might be adapted, or which districts need to address insome way if implementation in urban contexts is to be successful. For example, the districts in this studydiffered in the availability of time to regularly meet across sites to discuss and plan implementation. District 1had little or no history of such collaboration and researcher-organized meetings were not successful inestablishing it. District 2 had provided released time and consistent district-level encouragement to collaboratemonthly. Constraints of scheduling (block vs. modified block) and differential access to computers and otherresources required curriculum flexibility. Other common issues complicated implementation, including teacherand administrator turnover, student absences, and differences in historic achievement levels and expectations forstudents. The analyses presented here were made possible by the impact of these issues on implementation.Initial Design and Theoretical FrameworkThe project-based, Advanced Placement Environmental Science (APES) course provided students withopportunities to prepare for adaptive transfer through multiple, quasi-repetitive opportunities to learn and applyscientific concepts and processes in the context of real-life projects and simulations (Parker et al., 2011; 2013Schwartz & Bransford, 1998). All instruction occurred in the context of 6 multi-week simulation projects thatprovided reasons for learning from a variety of sources and experiences, and that attempted to cast students inroles as active problem-solvers in settings beyond the classroom (e.g., as "green" event planners, asenvironmental consultants, as representatives of various countries). This expansive framing (Engle, Lam,Meyer, & Nix, 2012), was not sufficient to overcome students' push-back based on the enormity ofenvironmental problems and their own lack of power in addressing them. Year 1 feedback from students andteachers led to a significant redesign of the curriculum focused on two main fronts. First, we re-ordered theproject cycles to help students develop active practice-linked identities by beginning with a local, real-worldproject (reducing their family’s Eco-footprint) and then gradually broadening their perspective across 5 projectICLS 2014 Proceedings963© ISLScycles, ending with a Global Energy Summit simulation. Second, we redesigned several project cycles toenhance the expansive framing of tasks and instruction to improve adaptive transfer to out-of-school settings(Engle et al, 2012). This redesign resulted in students being more likely to report an increased sense of personalresponsibility for the environment and adoption of specific sustainable practices, along with demonstratingincreased specificity in proposed solutions to environmental problems. This suggests that the designmodifications (changing the order of cycles to start with students as agents in their own families, redesigningcycles to emphasize agency and frame for transfer) had an impact on the extent to which suburban studentsdeveloped practice-linked identities as environmental citizens. Student interview data suggested that beginningwith the Eco-Footprint cycle was particularly important in helping students see the importance andenvironmental impact of their own decisions and practices. The curriculum was modified slightly in year 3 toemphasize the gradual widening of spheres of influence. The third-year project cycles as designed were, inorder, Eco-Footprint, My Community Ecology (as state resource managers), Food Systems (as sustainable farmdesigners), Ocean in Action (as citizens debating the introduction of aquaculture to their island ecosystem), andNegotiation of Nations (representing countries in environmental negotiations).Implementation in Urban SchoolsSuburban students in a relatively "green" region of the US might have brought significant prior knowledge andsustainable values into the course. The teacher, a curriculum co-designer, might have been particularly effectivein implementation, especially in year 2. In the third year, the expansion to two urban districts provided anopportunity to test the robustness of the curriculum while investigating local differences in context andimplementation that could affect its success. One new district was in the same "green" region, where it might beeasier to establish hybrid spaces because of the similar concepts and values of in- and out-of-school contexts.The second was in the middle of the US, in an area of concentrated and long-standing economic difficulty. Bothdistricts served a mix of students but included significant numbers of immigrant families and similarly highrates of free-or-reduced lunch qualification. Teachers differed in the extent to which they remained committedto implementation of the whole curriculum, resulting in differences in the number of cycles (curricular units)taught and the extent to which teachers curtailed project-based learning and supplemented with lecture-basedpresentations of information. All teachers were new to the curriculum, although some teachers in both districtshad experience teaching environmental science or environmental studies courses.Research QuestionsScalingWe were interested in whether the curriculum design was robust when implementation was expanded to districtsthat differed from the design environment. Specifically, did urban students develop practice-linked identities asenvironmental citizens as indicated by their reports of specific practices adopted and a positive rather thanpessimistic outlook for citizen action? In addition to collecting interview data on students' self-reportedenvironmental practices, we also assessed end-of-course Environmental Citizen Identity with items includinginterest in environmental issues, feeling that they knew enough to make good environmental decisions and abelief that "people like me" can make a difference. We also investigated processes theoretically involved in thedevelopment of practice-linked environmental identities. The extent to which students had opportunities forintegral roles and accountability and opportunities for self-expression was measured by class mean levels ofAgentic Involvement, a scale with items indicating engagement in the project tasks ("I actively participated")and the perception of an integral role in the group's learning ("I usually felt like I contributed to our learning").Scores on the end-of-course transfer task, an indicator that students had had access to the discipline and coulduse the practices of environmental science to address a complex environmental problem, were examined forlinks to two engagement measures, Agentic Involvement and Flow (reported concentration, losing track oftime), given initial interest in environmental issues (Initial Environmental Interest).ImplementationTwo main design changes were of interest: (1) engaging students at the beginning the year with a real-worldproject aimed at informing and influencing family members, and (2) sustaining engagement and a sense ofagency by positioning students as decision-makers in larger and larger spheres of influence over the course ofthe year-long curriculum. Although all classes implemented the first cycle, only about half implemented all ormost of the curriculum. Comparing students in these two groups of classes provided a means of examiningwhether the curriculum-length design change was necessary or whether similar results could be obtained by"jump-starting" engagement and identification by implementing the Eco-Footprint cycle alone.ICLS 2014 Proceedings964© ISLSSubstantiationMethodsParticipantsWe analyzed data from the classrooms of four teachers in three schools with a total of six APES sections fromDistrict 1 recruited to teach the experimental curriculum. All five APES teachers (five sections, five schools)from District 2 participated. District 2 adopted the experimental APES curriculum as a district with the consentof the teachers. Data from 217 students who completed pre- and post-course surveys were analyzed.Data CollectionStudents completed surveys at the beginning and end of the school year. Scales included Initial EnvironmentalInterest (Fall), and Agentic Involvement, Flow, and Environmental Citizen Identity (Spring). Students alsocompleted a written transfer task, the Complex Scenario Test (CST), which presented a real-world ecologicalproblem (e.g., flooding in Cambodia) and asked students to generate hypotheses, request additional information,support or refute hypotheses, and propose and justify solutions. Semi-structured interviews were conducted withapproximately 10% of the students to gather self-reports of transfer, along with other experiences in the course.ResultsScalingAnalysis of the end of year interviews replicated year 2 (suburban) results, indicating that many students weredeveloping practice-linked identities as environmental citizens. Most students interviewed (69%) provided bothspecific descriptions of changed personal practices and expressed a belief in their own agency and responsibilityin contributing to sustainability. The following example combines these characteristics:So just, like I said before, like, you know, I just changed. It changed me as a person…learning the facts and how many gallons of water get wasted a day and how it’s possiblethat we have another Tragedy of the Commons. I was like, “You guys can’t be showeringfor like 40 minutes each. And don’t leave the water running.” So that was really helpful aswell. We definitely recycle now a lot. And we have a little separate thing for compost aswell (Student 2970).Survey data were used to test the relationship between being in a class with higher mean levels of AgenticInvolvement and individual interest in the environment at the end of the course. The HLM analysis issummarized in Table 1.Table 1. Effects of classroom-level Agentic Involvement on end-of-year Environmental IdentityFixed EffectFor INTRCPT1, β0INTRCPT2, γ00AGENTICI, γ01INTRCPT2, γ10CoefficientStandarderrort-ratioApprox.d.f.p-value3.6677560.5490410.2313010.0388870.0922060.05333994.3185.9554.3362121136<0.001<0.001<0.001ImplementationSeveral analyses compared full implementation (at least 4 of 5 cycles) with partial implementation (EcoFootprint plus 1-2 additional complete cycles). Evidence of impact on practice-linked identities asenvironmental citizens was more limited in partial-implementation classrooms. All of the students who couldnot provide specific transfer examples or expressed a pessimistic, non-agentic position in post-course interviewswere in classes where the curriculum was only partially implemented. Five of the six full-implementationclasses were taught by teachers in District 2, where teachers planned and adapted as a group through the year.This is likely to have supported commitment to a challenging new set of teaching tools.Full implementation appeared to support engagement and interest more effectively than partialimplementation. HLM analysis of survey data, with beginning of year interest as a covariate, revealed thatpartial-implementation classrooms had lower reported levels of Agentic Involvement, Flow, and end-of-yearEnvironmental Citizen Identity (all p<.001). Since all classes implemented Eco-Footprint, these findingssuggest that an initial experience being positioned as environmental change agents, though powerful, was notsufficient. Positioning students as agentic in gradually widening of spheres of influence over the course ofAPES appeared to provide the support necessary to increase practice-linked identification with environmentalICLS 2014 Proceedings965© ISLSissues. Finally, reported engagement was positively related to scores on the Complex Scenario Test across theentire sample. Specifically, HLM analyses found that Agentic Involvement predicted CST scores for HypothesisGeneration, Supporting/Refuting Hypotheses, and Proposing Solutions (all p<001). Flow (task immersion)positively predicted scores for Hypothesis Generation and Proposing Solutions (both p<.05). These resultssuggest that, in addition to supporting identification with environmental citizenship, engagement in project taskspromoted student learning of the practices of environmental science.LimitationsWith the exception of the CST scores, the data reported here come primarily from students' self-reports. Videoobservation data in several of the project classes indicates that while many students were consistently engagedin project tasks, they may need additional supports in order to engage in the knowledge practices ofenvironmental science. The connections between engagement and performance on the CST may indicate deeperlearning for engaged students, but could also mean that engaged students were more likely to exert effort on theCST. These and other issues of implementation are the subject of ongoing research in the larger project.Relevance to Conference ThemeThe study reported here embodies the conference theme is “Learning and Becoming in Practice.” In the projectbased APES curriculum development project, providing spaces for students to develop as environmentalcitizens and as environmental scientists has been a key aim. The data presented in this brief paper suggest thatthe curriculum and its implementation did have an impact on students' practice-linked identities asenvironmental citizens. Students had opportunities to engage in the practice of both environmental science andcitizenship through the project. The developmental structure of the curriculum, moving from real-world hybridspaces focused on students' personal and family environmental practices through increasingly broader frames ofreference, seemed an important contributor to the curriculum's impact. The evidence suggests that studentengagement and identity development occurred alongside the knowledge practice of environmental scientists.By purposefully positioning students as decision-makers throughout the curriculum and by focusing on ways toaddress difficult environmental problems, we were able to reduce the disidentification, pessimism and resistanceto deep engagement often seen in environmental science courses.ReferencesBarton, A. C., & Tan, E. (2009). Funds of knowledge and discourses and hybrid space. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 46(1), 50-73. doi: 10.1002/tea.20269Engle, R. A. (2006). Framing Interactions to Foster Generative Learning: A Situative Explanation of Transfer ina Community of Learners Classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 451-498.Engle, R. A., Lam, D. P., Meyer, X. S., & Nix, S. E. (2012). How does expansive framing promote transfer?Several proposed explanations and a research agenda for investigating them. Educational Psychologist,47(3), 215–231.Engle, R. A., Nguyen, P. D., & Mendelson, A. (2011). The influence of framing on transfer: Initial evidencefrom a tutoring experiment. Instructional Science, 39(5), 603-628. doi: 10.1007/s11251-010-9145-2Goodell, A., Nolen, S., Tierney, G., Whitfield, L., Nguyen, D., Becherer, K., Cooper, S. E., Pak, C.-f. (2014).Designing for engagement in environmental science: Developing practice-linked identities. Paperpresented at the American Educational Research Association, Philadelphia, PA.Nasir, N. & Hand, V. (2008). From the Court to the Classroom: Opportunities for Engagement, Learning, andIdentity in Basketball and Classroom Mathematics. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(2), 143-179.Parker, W., Lo, J., Yeo, A. J., Valencia, S. W., Nguyen, D., Abbott, R., Nolen, S. B., Vye, N. L. (2013, online).Beyond breadth-speed-test: Toward deeper knowing and engagement in an advanced placement course.American Educational Research Journal.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing Research and Development at theIntersection of Learning, Implementation, and Design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.Renninger, K. A., Bacharach, J. E., & Posey, S. K. E. (2008). Learner interest and achievement motivation. InM. L. Maehr, S. Karabenick & T. Urdan (Eds.), Social Psychological Perspective on Motivation andAchievement (Vol. 15, pp. 425-460). London: Emerald Press.Schwartz, D. L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998). A time for telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 475-522.Tzou, C., Scalone, G., & Bell, P. (2010). The role of environmental narratives and social positioning in howplace gets constructed for and by youth. Equity & Excellence in Education, 43(1), 105-119.AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by grants 1261892 and 1251595 (Susan Nolen, PI) from the National ScienceFoundation, and grants from the George Lucas Educational Foundation (John Bransford, PI).ICLS 2014 Proceedings966© ISLS