Perspectival Computational Thinking for Learning Physics: A CaseStudy of Collaborative Agent-Based ModelingAmy Voss Farris and Pratim SenguptaMind, Matter and Media Lab, Vanderbilt University – Peabody CollegeEmail: amy.farris@vanderbilt.edu, pratim.sengupta@vanderbilt.eduAbstract: We examine the process through which computational thinking develops in aperspectival fashion as two middle school students collaborate with each other in order todevelop computational models of two graphs of motion. We present an interaction analysis ofthe students’ discourse and computational modeling, and analyze how they came to a jointunderstanding of the goal of the modeling activity. We show that this process involvesbringing about coherence between multiple perspectives: the object in motion, thecomputational agent, the other student, and graphs of motion.Introduction and BackgroundComputational thinking, modeling and programming are now regarded as core epistemic and representationalpractices in K12 science and engineering (NGSS, 2013). Wing (2011) described computational thinking (CT) asthe “thought processes involved in formulating problems and their solutions so that the solutions are representedin a form that can be effectively carried out by an information-processing agent” (p. 1). The development ofcomputational thinking is manifested in and deeply intertwined with representational practices such asprogramming and modeling, which in turn involve the design and development of computational abstractionssuch as defining patterns, generalizing from instances, and parameterization (Wing, 2006; Sengupta et al.,2013). In this paper, we present a theoretical framework for analyzing and understanding the role ofperspectives, or points of view, in the development of collaborative computational thinking in the context ofusing agent-based programming and modeling for learning physics.Prior research on learning physics using collaborative agent-based modeling has identified how sharedunderstanding among student dyads develops through divergence and convergence of their conceptualunderstandings (Roschelle, 1992; Roschelle & Teasley, 1995). The students in these studies used a modelingenvironment called the Envisioning Machine, in which they directly manipulated a graphical simulation of thevelocity and acceleration of a computational agent (similar to a Logo turtle) by altering the settings of thevelocity and the acceleration vectors. Similar to Roschelle and Teasley, we also use an agent-based modelingenvironment, because previous studies have shown that students can indeed develop deep understandings ofmotion as a process of continuous change using such learning environments (Sengupta & Farris, 2012).However, in our study, the use of programming plays a central role in the students’ interactions.Theoretical FrameworkAt the broadest level, we seek to answer the following question: How does computational thinking begin todevelop in a collaborative setting when students engage in agent-based programming in order to model themotion of an object as a process of change in distance and speed over time? To answer this question, we adoptthe lens of perspectival understanding (Greeno & van de Sande, 2007; Greeno & MacWhinney, 2006). Greenoand van de Sande (2007) defined the construction of perspectival understanding as a process of constraintsatisfaction. Following Thagard, they hypothesized that coherence––i.e., the compatibility or consistency ofinteracting representational elements (e.g., propositions, perspectives, meanings, etc.)––is the most generalconstraint (Thagard & Verbeurgt, 1998). Based on Greeno and his colleagues, we adopt the view that in acollaborative setting, manifold elements of the participating individuals’ conceptions are taken up in a new jointunderstanding that is shaped by participants’ points of view (POVs). For example, an interactant may operatefrom a point of view (POV) that is either enmeshed in the phenomenon or takes a depictive perspective, whichviews the phenomenon from a top-down or extrinsic perspective; however, the joint understanding that emergesduring interaction can include expressed constituents of multiple POVs (Greeno & van de Sande, 2007).Pedagogically, the ability of a user to take on the perspective of an actor within the system is animportant affordance of agent-based models (Wilensky & Reisman, 2006), and virtual environments (Lindgren,2012). In the context of understanding scientific phenomena that result from the aggregation of individual-levelactions (e.g., change in motion over time, ecological interdependence, or formation of traffic jams) adopting anagent-perspective enables the learner to use their intuitive knowledge––which is often in the form of embodiedknowledge (Papert, 1980)––in order to develop a deep understanding of how the collective phenomenonemerges from the aggregation of individual, agent-level actions. However, there is little understanding of theprocess through which learners begin to develop a perspectival stance. Our study offers a window into thisprocess. We show how two collaborating learners shift across and negotiate multiple perspectives––the object inICLS 2014 Proceedings1102© ISLSmotion, the other student, the programmable agent, and an aggregate, descriptive view of the graph––in order tointerpret and model computationally the motion implied by the graph(s). In Thagard’s terms, these perspectivesrepresent the elements across which coherence is established through a process of shifts and negotiationsbetween these perspectives (Thagard & Verbeurgt, 1998).Data Collection and AnalysisThe study took place in a classroom at a large private university in the mid-southern USA. The topic of thecourse was scientific modeling, and the course met on the mornings of six consecutive Saturdays during theregular academic year. Twenty students were recruited via web posting on the university website, ages 10 - 12(Grades 5 and 6). They were enrolled on a first-come, first-served basis and had no prior programmingexperience. The second author taught the course, while the first author acted as a facilitator during the third dayof the course, when the activity we report here took place. The children in the focal dyad are two 10-year-oldmales, Arnav and Liam (pseudonyms), who volunteered to do the task as a pair and agreed to talk about theirthinking with each other while they worked.We present in-depth analysis of 23 minutes of collaboration between the students. We use the casestudy method (Yin, 2009) and interaction analysis methods (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). The entire activity wasvideo recorded by two cameras focused on the children and their screens. Additional data were collected assaved files and screen captures from the student computers. We created multimodal transcripts of the discourse,and coded them line-by-line for the perspective, or POV, of the speaker. Our analysis focuses primarily on thestudents' talk, and teaching moves and interaction between researchers and students are also described whererelevant. We describe three significant episodes of interaction, and within each episode, we present an analysisof a salient, smaller segment of discourse. We also present a brief, summative analysis of the shifts andcoherence in perspectives during the entire interaction.Figure 1. Distance-time (Graph 1) andspeed-time (Graph 2) graphsFigure 2. The ViMAP interfaceThe Activity and Instructional HistoryThe goal of the focal activity was to generate an agent-based computational model for each of the two graphs,distance versus time (Graph 1, Figure 1), and speed versus time (Graph 2, Figure 1). In each model, studentswere asked to represent the motion of an agent in a manner that would match the motion represented in therespective graph. The graphs, as shown in Figure 1, were digitally projected on a large screen in the front of theclassroom for the duration of the activity. The students were working with an agent-based modeling and visualprogramming environment called ViMAP (Sengupta, Farris, & Wright, 2012), where the user creates acomputer program by dragging and spatially arranging programming commands from a library of commandblocks (Figure 2). ViMAP commands were specifically designed to support domain-specific learning inkinematics (Sengupta et al., 2012). When the user runs the program, these commands are then acted out inrepresentational space by a Logo turtle in a NetLogo microworld (Wilensky, 1999). In the activities leading upto the episodes reported here, students had developed ViMAP models of motion in which they generated turtlegeometry shapes, in which step-size of the turtle represented the speed of motion. For example, the rectangularspiral in Figure 2 represents constant acceleration, as the step size of the turtle increases by the same amountevery turn. In these activities, students developed models of several different kinematic phenomena, includingmotion on a roller coaster. All the students were familiar with line graphs from their regular science and mathclasses, although the activity we report here was the first time they encountered graphs of motion during thestudy.Episode 1: Negotiating the Meaning of the Distance GraphIn the first episode Arnav and Liam engaged in negotiation of how to interpret Graph 1 (Figure 1). Arnavwanted to program the ViMAP turtle to reproduce the shape of the graph, which is a common novice approachto interpreting and representing graphs of motion (McDermott et al, 1987). Liam, however, argued that thegraph meant that the distance was gradually going up. The segment below [2:29 – 2:48] illustrates Episode 1.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1103© ISLSArnav: Yeah, but no. Distance 6 ((left arm used to approximate slope of first segment ofgraph)).Liam: It's GRADUALLY going up.Arnav: No, because the next one is speed.Liam: No, no, dude. Think about the first graph ((points to graph)). It's not you-somethinggoes to 6, it's over time we go UP to 6. So then, (both?) is what we need to do.Arnav's interpretation of Graph 1 ignores the role of time over which the change in distance takesplace. We call this an extrinsic graph perspective, as he focuses on the shape of the line in Graph 1, and wantsto program the ViMAP turtle to reproduce this line. In other words, even though he did consider the actions ofthe computational agent, these actions would simply reproduce the shape of the line in Graph 1––i.e., the graphextrinsic perspective was driving the actions of the agent. Liam countered with a more sophisticatedinterpretation: that the graph meant that something is “gradually going up” to 6. Liam interpreted the graph froman intrinsic graph perspective. That is, he focused on how the shape of the graph came to be, and to do so, hetook on the perspective of actors (“we”), whose motion would gradually generate the shape of the graph(“...over time we go up to 6”). Also of interest here is that Arnav was unwilling to consider gradual change indistance as a representation of Graph 1, because Graph 2 shows speed––suggesting that he confused change inspeed with change in distance over time.Episode 2: How Far from Where You Are You're FromThis episode began when Arnav and Liam asked for help from the first author (Amy), who in turn, asked themto explain to her what they inferred about the motion of the putative object from Graph 1 (Figure 1). Thestudents described an object speeding up, slowing down, then staying the same. This verbal description matchedtheir computational model, which used speed up and slow down commands. But the students were confusingspeed with displacement; so, in order to encourage the students to think about displacement instead of speed,Amy then asked them if there are any two parts of the graph that are "the same." Arnav said that times 3 and 7(on the y-axis) indicated the same "distance from the starting point," using the same words the instructor usedwith the whole class. After Amy left, the following exchange ensued [18:19 – 18:30], in which Arnav explainshis interpretation of "distance from the starting point" to Liam.Arnav: It's not depending on how LONG it is ((uses pen as pointer to make an invisible lineacross the table surface)), it's depending on how far from where you are you're from,not how long the roller coaster actually is.Liam: Like he said, it how far FROM=Arnav: =No, so, if you're here ((right hand in front of chin))… and then you do a loop ((halfcircle upward motion)), and you come back ((half-circle downward motion)), you'llbe pretty much at the same distance as you started from.In Arnav's final turn of talk, he uses the example of a loop, similar to a vertical roundabout segmentduring a roller coaster ride. His embodied definition and gestural enactment evidence his shift to thinking aboutthe motion from the perspective of the agent in motion, which is at the same position in the beginning (time = 3)and end (time = 7) of the loop. Arnav and Liam’s ViMAP model represented the changes in displacement overtime, which evidences an agent perspective of getting further from, then closer to, a point in space. Arnav'sconstruction fused inanimate physics entities with flexibly construed animate objects. The verb forms areenduring and simple present. Taking the perspective of a non-human agent allows the embodied action totranscend time and setting. Throughout this segment, Arnav’s egocentric perspective was merged with theobject perspective. Arnav and the (imagined) object in motion are conjoined in simultaneous, multipleconstructed worlds: the here and now of the interaction, the visual representation, and the imagined physicalprocesses. Ochs and colleagues have identified this kind of speech in the discourse of professional physicists(Ochs et al., 1996). In this utterance, the physics entities are distances and points, articulated with “how long itis” (where ‘it’ refers to the length of the roller coaster track), and “how far from where you are you're from,” inwhich “where you’re from” is a point, and “how far you are from where you’re from” is a distance. The onlyverb used in the utterance, “are,” is simple present and enduring (Ochs et al., 1996), as it allows the embodiedaction to transcend time and setting. Similar indeterminate grammatical constructions, along with gesturaljourneys through visual displays, as observed in physicists’ discourse, constitute physicist and physical entity asco-experiencers of dynamic processes (Ochs et al., 1996).Episode 3: Coordinating Relationships among Speed, Distance, and TimeIn this episode, Arnav and Liam revised the loop to first make the turtle go down, and then up. Their thinkingwas that this motion could explain both Graph 1 and Graph 2, as the roller coaster car would get faster as it wentdown the downward half of the loop, and slow down as it went up the other half of the loop. The segment ofICLS 2014 Proceedings1104© ISLSconservation we report here [22:19 – 22:46] results from their efforts to repair trouble: the period of accelerationin Arnav’s proposed model did not correspond with the period of "getting further away" in Graph 1.Arnav: So we have to put it for 6 seconds ((adds repeating loop with a parameter of 6 sixseconds))…forward1, speed up 1 ((adds a forward command in the loop))Liam: Forward 1, speed up 1?Arnav: Yeah, because… Actually, we don’t need the speed up, because, see, each point onthat graph is one second, each point is one second, and all of them are the same(length?) we don’t need a speed up.Liam and Arnav referred back to the graphs, and then discussed the appropriateness of relevant ViMAPcommands, “Forward <Step-size>” and “Speed-up <Change-in-Step-size>”, for modeling the graphs. In doingso, they coordinated the change in distance as represented on the y-axis and time (x-axis) with the motion of anobject, as Arnav’s suggestion of a downward loop, gets taken up in joint action through constructive listening(Greeno & van de Sande, 2007) by Liam. Arnav then clarified that their ViMAP distance model did not requireacceleration, because the length of the line (in the graph) during each second is the same, thereby implying thatthe object traveled the same distance during each second. This reflects coherence between an extrinsic graphperspective (“each point on that graph” and “all of them are the same (length?)”), an agent-perspective (“wedon’t need a speed up”), and an implied object perspective. For the first time in the activity, Arnavcomputationally parsed the difference between moving forward at the same speed and speeding up.Shifts in Point-of-View During the Interaction: A TimelineFigure 3A illustrates the counts of points of view, coded line-by-line throughout the interaction, for both Liamand Arnav. Intermittent periods of unrelated, off-task are not included in this analysis. Since a focus of thisanalysis is on Arnav's changing definition of distance from the starting point, his point-of-view counts areseparated from Liam's and shown in Figure 3B. Four perspectives are represented: the object perspective, theagent perspective, the perspectives of one another, and perspectives based on the graph. The perspectives arecolor coded in black, teal, green, and yellow, respectively. At the beginning of the interaction (0:00 - 2:51), bothstudents primarily took a graph perspective. The segment reported in Episode 1 illustrates Arnav's extrinsicgraph perspective, while Liam adopted an intrinsic graph perspective. As the interaction continued, the studentsfocused on generating a program for the turtle so that it would carry out specific actions (2:52 - 04:43), thenedited the program and reran it (4:44 - 7:29), in order to generate the shape of the graph. Here, threeperspectives are at work simultaneously: the graph (both extrinsic and intrinsic), turtle (agent), and egocentric(i.e., each other).Figures 3A (left) and 3B (right). Arnav's & Liam’s point-of-view, combined count (Figure 3A, left);and Arnav’s points-of-view (Figure 3B, right).Between 7:30 and 8:20, the instructor (second author) clarified the intended meaning of "distance" tothe entire class, and Liam re-voiced this definition of distance to Arnav, who did not recognize any differencebetween that definition and the speed of the object. This was followed by an interaction between a facilitatorand Liam, in which Liam explained the meaning of their (incorrect) model, but Arnav did not participate (09:29- 09:53). In an extended interaction with the first author, (10:16 - 18:07), the students realized that their modelshowed changes in speed of the object in motion, but not its displacement. Episode 2, in which Arnav putforward a definition of "distance," began immediately after Amy left the students to change their model (18:09).In this segment, students integrated extrinsic and intrinsic graph perspectives with an object perspective (17:35 19:04). In Episode 3 (19:05 - 20:01 and 20:54 - 23:06), they begin enacting the motion (almost exclusively froman object perspective). However, when they began working on their program again, they coordinated the graph,agent perspective, and object perspectives (20:54 - 23:06). As these perspectives began to cohere, Arnavdemonstrated his emerging understanding of the relationships among speed, distance traveled, and time, asshown in Episode 3.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1105© ISLSConclusion and DiscussionWe have argued that when students engage in collaborative agent-based programming in order to model motionas a process of change over time, the development of computational thinking and learning physics co-occurthrough students’ negotiations of multiple perspectives or POVs. Coherence between these perspectives servesas the constraint (Thagard & Verbeurgt, 1998), and the students' understanding of the relevant physics ispropelled forward through a process of constraint satisfaction as these perspectives cohere. In our study,bringing about this coherence, in turn, was deeply tied to the children's computational doing, including agentbased programming and reflective discourse. In addition, the instructors’ prompts also pushed the childrentoward particular points of view. Similar to previous studies using agent-based modeling (Wilensky & Reisman,2006), our study also shows that the agent-perspective can indeed play a productive role in understanding therelevant scientific concepts; however, we also show that this perspective needs to be negotiated with others forconceptual growth. These other perspectives included the children's egocentric perspectives, perspectives basedon the graphs, and that of the (imagined) physical entity in motion. Achieving coherence between all theseperspectives enabled the learners to bridge what is happening now (i.e., the instantaneous position and speed ofthe object in motion) with what has happened until now (i.e., previous changes in the object’s position andspeed) – a feat that is challenging for even college-level physics learners (McDermott et al., 1987).ReferencesGreeno, J. G., & MacWhinney, B. (2006). Learning as perspective taking: Conceptual alignment in theclassroom. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Learning Sciences (pp. 930-1).Greeno, J. G., & van de Sande, C. (2007). Perspectival understanding of conceptions and conceptual growth ininteraction. Educational Psychologist, 42(1), 9-23.Lindgren, R. (2012). Generating a learning stance through perspective-taking in a virtualenvironment. Computers in Human Behavior, 28(4), 1130-1139.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.McDermott, L. C., Rosenquist, M. L., & Van Zee, E. H. (1987). Student difficulties in connecting graphs andphysics: Examples from kinematics. American Journal of Physics, 55(6), 503-513.Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. (2013). The National Academies Press.Ochs, E., Gonzales, P., & Jacoby, S. (1996). When I come down I'm in the domain state: Grammar and graphicrepresentation in the interpretive activity of physicists. Studies in Interactional Sociolinguistics, 13,328-369.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc.Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 2(3), 235-276.Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving.In Computer supported collaborative learning (pp. 69-97). Springer.Sengupta, P., & Farris, A. V. (2012). Learning kinematics in elementary grades using agent-basedcomputational modeling: A visual programming approach. Proceedings of the 11th InternationalConference on Interaction Design & Children (pp. 78-87).Sengupta, P., Farris, A. V., & Wright, M. (2012). From agents to continuous change via aesthetics: Learningmechanics with visual agent-based computational modeling. Technology, Knowledge & Learning.17(1-2), 23 - 42.Sengupta, P., Kinnebrew, J. S., Basu, S., Biswas, G., & Clark, D. (2013). Integrating computational thinkingwith K-12 science education using agent-based computation: A theoretical framework. Education andInformation Technologies, 18 (2), 351-380.Thagard, P., & Verbeurgt, K. (1998). Coherence as constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 22 (1), 1-24.Wilensky, U. 1999. NetLogo. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based Modeling. NorthwesternUniversity, Evanston, IL. URL: http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo.Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep, or a firefly: Learning biology throughconstructing and testing computational theories—an embodied modeling approach. Cognition andInstruction, 24(2), 171-209.Wing, J. (2011). Research notebook: Computational thinking—What and why? The Link Magazine. Retrievedfrom http://www.cs.cmu.edu/link/research-notebook-computational-thinking-what-and-whyYin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods (Vol. 5). Sage.AcknowledgementsFunding from the National Science Foundation (NSF Early CAREER # 1150230) is gratefully acknowledged.Thanks to Rogers Hall, Rich Lehrer & Kevin Leander for insightful comments on earlier drafts.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1106© ISLS