The Power of Networks as an Engineering SophomoreJanet Y. Tsai, Daria A. Kotys-Schwartz and Daniel W. KnightUniversity of Colorado Boulder, Department of Mechanical EngineeringJanet.tsai@colorado.eduAbstract: Sophomore year for engineering undergraduates is competitive, high-stakes, andwhere many students choose to leave engineering for alternate majors. Through the lens ofActor-Network Theory, this paper explains the existence and significance of networks ofpower within the engineering sophomore class as observed ethnographically, with specificattention to the implications of power differentials for engineering persistence and retention.OverviewThe 4-year engineering undergraduate curriculum is characterized by a rigid sequence of technical courses.Applied math and physics courses taken during the 1st and 2nd years are prerequisite requirements for subsequenttechnical engineering courses necessary for specialized engineering majors. Students who have difficulty withor fail a fundamental class during their first two years can seriously delay their graduation date or bediscouraged from finishing the degree. Such experiences are known to discourage students and have beencorrelated with early departure from engineering majors (e.g., Seymour & Hewitt, 1997). Nationally, 82% ofengineering students return for the second year, while only about 65% continue into the third year; there is amuch smaller attrition rate between the third and fourth years (Fortenberry, Sullivan, Jordan, & Knight, 2007).Engineering educators have focused on curricular interventions to improve the first-year experience(e.g., Sheppard & Jenison, 2007). However, little attention has been given to understanding the environmentalor structural barriers that engineering students face during the second year of their education. The courses of thesophomore year mark the descent into “the valley of despair” as students are confronted with a seeminglyendless march of technical requirements chained together with little wiggle room for electives or failure (KotysSchwartz, Knight, & Pawlas, 2010). The second year features gateway courses that eventually lead to thepractice of engineering, courses that initiate students into greater levels of abstraction and analytical engineeringproblem solving. At the large public university we studied, the traditional engineering math sequence isCalculus 1 and Calculus 2 in the first year, Calculus 3 and Differential Equations in the second year. As ourfocal instructor told students on the first day of class in Calculus 3:[This class is] somewhere between Calc 1, where everything is perfectly defined, and the 4year end where nothing is defined and you don’t know all the answers… it [uncertainty] has tostart somewhere and that is here [emphasis added].Within this challenging and uncertain environment, students must develop methods to survive thecompetition, including forming alliances and participating in networks like study groups, fraternities, andextracurricular programs. Students who successfully navigate the sophomore engineering terrain gain power inthe form of higher grades, greater confidence in their abilities, and privileged access to material and humanresources.Theoretical OrientationActor-Network Theory or ANT (Nespor, 2007) provides one means of examining the processes whereinstudents act in networks that place them on distinct educational trajectories in space and time. Networkresources, including fraternity exam archives, residential engineering honors programs, and tutoring programs,all operate in distinct space-time locations with restricted access. ANT describes learning as changes in theorganization (both temporal and spatial) of actors and networks, thus this theory offers a useful framework forstudying the organization of students and emergent power dynamics within the competitive environment of thesecond year of engineering school. In line with ANT, we seek to uncover and describe the “ongoing socialactivities” that shape actor-networks and learning among students (Nespor, p. 12).Using Actor-Network Theory, this study adopts an ethnographic approach in examining localclassroom contexts and associated course activities to understand how sophomore student participation inuniversity practices of engineering leads to power differentials. Differences in power among students can resultin differential access to actor-network resources and impact important educational outcomes such as retention.MethodologyWe observe two Calculus 3 classrooms: one, a large lecture-style with over 130 students, the second a smallerhonors section of only 30 students, both taught by the same Instructor of the Applied Math department at ourstudy site, a large public university. By first observing standard classroom practice, student actors and networksICLS 2014 Proceedings1601© ISLSof interest were identified for further detailed study through in-person open-ended interviews. Observationalfieldnotes provided the backbone, primary record of events to be analyzed by the qualitative research team.Passages of interest were flagged, subsequently coded, and used for initial reconstructive analysis (Carspecken,1996). Course artifacts including the syllabus, textbook, homework, exams, and projects, were collected tofurther inform the network analysis, though were secondary to our main focus on human actors.Reconstructive analyses were compared and coded with the observations, artifacts, and interviews toreveal network connections as perceived by the students and as performed publicly during class. Salient studentgroupings, as discussed below, were identified through initial coding of observational, interview, andreconstructive data.Preliminary FindingsPreliminary analysis of the data indicates several emergent trends. First, in both classes, the Instructor is a majorpower player who guides the organization of the classroom culture, maintaining the framework within whichstudents establish their own power hierarchies and actor-networks. The Instructor appears to be in charge, notonly governing grades, homework assignments, projects, and exams, but also controlling how lecture periodsflow, which students get their questions answered and which students get special attention.The students, meanwhile, group themselves according to different strategies they use to negotiate thepre-established power hierarchy (the curriculum and supporting infrastructures). This includes those who followstereotypical practices of good students like getting to class early and sitting in the front rows, as well asstudents who choose unorthodox strategies like playing games on their phones and ignoring most lectures.These student groups, or actor-networks, have distinctive characteristics, working styles, and methods ofpositioning themselves within the power hierarchy of the classroom. They not only have different positionswithin the power hierarchy, but they also have different levels of access to resources including Instructor help,previous exams, senior students to help with homework, and more. This power hierarchy is based on both validand non-valid indicators of academic power, as some students incorrectly prioritize the ability to write code inMathematica (a computer program) above conceptual understanding and communication of mathematicalconcepts, while other students eagerly share their test scores with their peers and know exactly where they standwith regard to the class’s normal distribution and bell curve.Conclusions and SignificanceUnderstanding how sophomore students organize themselves within actor-networks of power is essential forunderstanding how to support students within the competitive environment of engineering. Feeling empoweredor disempowered within one’s educational context affects not only student performance but also how much onefeels like one belongs and desires to remain in that context (Marra, Rodgers, Shen, & Bogue, 2012). This studytakes a new and novel look at what is happening in the second year of engineering school by analyzing thesocial currents of the process of becoming an engineer. This study breaks from traditional engineering educationresearch by incorporating methods from the learning sciences and observing the development of student cultureethnographically (Johri & Olds, 2011). Because engineering education occurs within the larger context ofsocietal power differentials, it is necessary to study and understand these processes in order to give moreengineering students better chances at success.ReferencesCarspecken, P. F. (1996). Critical ethnography in educational research: a theoretical and practical guide. NewYork: Routledge.Fortenberry, N. L., Sullivan, J. F., Jordan, P. N., & Knight, D. W. (2007). Engineering Education Research AidsInstruction. Science, 317(5842), 1175–1176. doi:10.1126/science.1143834Johri, A. and Olds, B. M. (2011), Situated Engineering Learning: Bridging Engineering Education Research andthe Learning Sciences. Journal of Engineering Education, 100: 151–185.Kotys-Schwartz, D., Knight, D. W., & Pawlas, G. (2010). First-year and capstone design projects: Is thebookend curriculum approach effective for skill gain? In Proceedings of the American Society forEngineering Education Annual Conference and Exposition. Louisville, KY.Marra, R. M., Rodgers, K. A., Shen, D. and Bogue, B. (2012), Leaving Engineering: A Multi-Year SingleInstitution Study. Journal of Engineering Education, 101: 6–27.Nespor, J. (1994). Knowledge in motion: space, time, and curriculum in undergraduate physics andmanagement. London; Washington, D.C: Falmer Press.Seymour, E., & Hewitt, N. (1997). Talking About Leaving: Why Undergraduates Leave The Sciences.Westview Press.Sheppard, S., & Jenison, R. (1997). Examples of Freshman Design Education. International Journal ofEngineering Education, 13(4), 248–261.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1602© ISLS