Reimagining Cultural Forms, Ethnographic Methods andResearcher Responsibilities in Studying Engineering and ScienceLearning: Honoring and Building on the Work of Margaret EisenhartCory Buxton, University of Georgia, buxton@uga.eduKaren L. Tonso, Wayne State University, ag7246@wayne.eduHeidi Carlone, The University of North Carolina at Greensboro, hbcarlon@uncg.eduAngela Johnson, Saint Mary’s College of Maryland, acjohnson@smcm.eduJrene Rahm, Université de Montréal, jrene.rahm@umontreal.caAbstract: Honoring and building on the work of Margaret Eisenhart, this set of papersdelimits the myriad ways that four studies have reimagined cultural forms, deployedethnographic methods, and conceived of researcher ethical responsibilities in studyingengineering and science learning. Framed by cultural production theory, criticalintersectionality, actor network theory, and a sociocultural-historical stance, these studiesillustrate the interconnected nature of learning and becoming processes, the complexity ofcultural forms and engineer/scientific identity productions, and the continued salience ofstructural forces to shape learning and becoming in life-wide settings. Ethnographic methodsserved these studies well by providing access to time-dependent processes, by immersing theresearchers in their field sites over time, and by allowing seeing from the inside out toprivilege the perspectives of research participants. Each study found ways to followindividuals and structures simultaneously, and to document cultural forms and variations inthe ways insiders took up cultural forms.Overall Focus and ThemeSociological and anthropological inquiries into patterns of wealth, social mobility, and opportunity in society,and the role that schooling plays in perpetuating or disrupting these patterns are now decades old. All of usinvolved in this symposium are engaged in the question of how societal forces influence learning in the contextsof science and engineering. Reflecting the 2014 ICLS theme of learning and becoming in practice, we considerhow the anthropology of education, and more specifically the scholarship of Margaret Eisenhart, offersimportant tools and insights for understanding and acting at this intersection of how people learn and howsociocultural forces influence that learning. Connell (1987) coined the term “practice theories” (as opposed tocategorical theories) to highlight the ways in which structures that had been taken for granted in prior theories(e.g., social reproduction theory) should become questions for research. Similarly, Levinson, Foley, and Holland(1996) argued that practice theories afford a reconsideration of the permanence of social structures through aclose examination of moment-to-moment social practices. By viewing structural categories as impermanent,practice theorists hope to more appropriately balance the disciplining power of social structures with the visibledifferences in how individuals, who seem to occupy the same structurally defined categories, actively makemeaning of the world around them, and exert personal agency within and against those structures (Eisenhart &Finkel, 1998). As Eisenhart (2001) argued over a decade ago,[E]veryday life, including life in schools, seems to be faster paced, more diverse, morecomplicated, more entangled than before. The kinds of personal and social relationships,exchanges, and networks we participate in seem to be taking new forms, tying togetherotherwise disparate people, and demanding some new ways of thinking about what to researchand how to do it. (p. 24)Despite these nuanced understandings of societal forces that are studied within the realm of educationalscholarship, there has been renewed enthusiasm within the political and policy realm for viewing schooling as amicrocosm of a meritocratic society, in which the smartest, hardest working, and most well behaved studentswill be rewarded with an education that can be parlayed into a socially and economically successful life (Hursh,2005). While the argument that education serves as a meritocratic equalizer to socioeconomic disparities hasbeen with us at least since the end of World War II (Themalis, 2008), this neoliberal viewpoint has gainedrenewed favor in the justifications for our current academic accountability systems (O’Neill, 2013). Powerfultools and arguments are required to push back against this neoliberal tide that paints successful learning, as wellas other successes in life, as individual accomplishments. Margaret Eisenhart’s work has provided us with someof those tools.The set of papers in this symposium takes up Eisenhart’s challenge of exploring new ways of thinkingabout how to research structure and practice, culture and identity, within the context of how people learn scienceICLS 2014 Proceedings1332© ISLSand engineering. While building on Eisenhart’s ideas in different ways and in different contexts, all of our workhighlights the ongoing value of attending to cultural forms, reinvigorating ethnographic methods, andreconsidering the ethical responsibilities of researchers with an eye toward challenging neoliberal assumptionsand promoting more equitable and meaningful science and engineering learning opportunities. We view ourwork as part of the interdisciplinary field of the learning sciences given our concerns for improving learningthrough designed educational settings, with a focus on human agency, values, motives, and goals central to thehuman sciences (Penuel & O’Connor, 2010).Cultural Production on an Engineering Campus: Learning, Power, andEngineer IdentitiesKaren L. TonsoThough anthropologists understand culture to be something produced in everyday activities among a group witha shared life, culture as a concept shifted from being given, to being made, from reproductions (e.g., Connell,Ashenden, Kessler, & Dowsett, 1982), to more open productions (Levinson, et al., 1996; Willis, 1977).Cultural forms provide the material towards, and the immediate context of, the construction ofsubjectivities and the confirmation of identity. It provides what were the most believable andrewarding accounts for the individual, his future and especially for the expression of his/hervital energies. (Willis, 1977, p. 173)As such, individuals moved from objects of cultural processes to actors in cultural processes. Studies ofhigh school life (e.g., Eckert, 1989; Foley, 1990; Willis, 1977) suggested the salience of schools to frameindividuals’ actions, to interpret those actions, and ultimately to elevate some ahead of others (Foucault, 1982),and to do so along well-worn societal structures – social class, gender, race/ethnicity – smuggled into life atschool.[I]dentities are improvised – in the flow of activity within specific social situations – from thecultural resources at hand. Thus persons and, to a lesser extent, groups are caught in thetensions between past histories that have settled in them and the present discourses andimages that attract them or somehow impinge on them. (Holland et al., 1998, p. 4)Beginning with a strand of research that fed into Women’s Science (1998), I was open to possibilitiesfor cultural change that might be allowed in a college setting incorporating out-of-school practices. Here I hopedto document to what extent “Individuals respond to the structural alternatives, and as they do, [if] they activelynegotiate and sometimes contest the identities produced for them” (Eisenhart, 1996, p. 183). In many earlyconversations, Eisenhart asked: “What do people make of their world?,” while I persistently wondered “Andwhat does their world make of them?” Both questions proved crucial. Thus, in the early 1990s with hope forindividual actions leading to cultural change, I took a cultural production stance, and followed how schoolpractices and societal forces impinged on individuals’ becoming members of a campus engineering culturewhile student engineers did real-world engineering projects for out-of-school clients. I found that engineeridentity productions demonstrated learning processes, power relations, local culture, and societal constraints.Student Engineers Identities as Powered, Gendered, Cultural FormStudents displayed a wide range of ways to be engineers. In student design teams, terms referring to one anotheras different types of engineer emerged, and these proved a ready discourse (ala Foucault) for recognizing oneanother’s expertise and for chastising unacceptable behavior. These engineer identity terms provided a richcultural calculus for belonging, or when absent or silent on certain things, also marked not belonging (Tonso,2006). Students’ actions were given meaning using these terms, even as students actively hid behaviors to avoidbeing admonished by colleagues. Students organized terms into two larger categories: Over-Achievers andNerds. Clearly, Over-Achievers ruled, since campus elevated them via culturally salient recognition routines.Some among Over-Achievers deployed their power to the detriment of others. For example, an extraordinarilyhard-working student might arrive for a meeting just on time and have a higher status teammate miscast him as aslacker (lazy, worthless teammate). Within the categories, only six terms (out of the 36 most-prevalent terms)referred to women. Most were pejorative, except for “sorority woman,” which most women student engineersrejected. The absence of terms for women (in the portions of the identity terrain that marked being engineers)made women invisible as engineers. Over time as students learned how to be engineers on campus, somestudents asserted themselves using the terms, and others actively hid some aspects of their selves to avoid beinghassled. But being a woman proved impossible to hide, making women student engineers hypervisible aswomen. Ultimately, student social interactions helped produce cultural forms made evident in the identityICLS 2014 Proceedings1333© ISLSterrain, even as extant cultural forms framed insider actions. The campus exemplified a culture filled withtensions about being engineers and doing engineering. In addition, this research highlights cultural productionprocesses which depend on the simultaneity dance between cultural forms and individuals, the give and take of ashaping-and-being-shaped-by process, which I argue proves central to understanding learning in socioculturalcontexts. As Eisenhart later wrote: “we can no longer conceive of social groups of people with a culture that isclearly bounded and determined, internally coherent, and uniformly meaningful” (Eisenhart, 2001, p. 17).Methods that Reinvigorated Studying Cultural FormsTwo strategies used in this study augmented classic ethnographic methods of participant-observation fieldnotes,ethnographic interview, and artifact analysis of student reports and oral presentations (Spradley, 1980). First apaired set of interview questions unpacked the identity terrain. Using a queue-sort strategy (Holland & Skinner,1987), I initially asked students to list, then define or describe terms they used to refer to one another asengineers, then in a subsequent interview asked them to sort the most prevalent terms into categories that madesense to them and to explain their sorting. Second, coupling this approach with quasi-longitudinal fieldwork offirst-, second-, and fourth-year courses (but different students in each course) provided the time dimensioncentral to understanding learning as a process. First-year students knew little about the terms, second-semestersophomores used the terms sparsely, and seniors had a deep understanding, illustrating how student engineers’expertise extended well beyond the intended curriculum and was learned over time.Rethinking the Ethical Responsibilities of ResearchersTwo issues framed my interpretations of my ethical responsibilities, especially to document variety, conflict,and tension among participants. First, I had been struck by the extent to which researchers, especially in STEMsites of practice, did not comment on gendered findings (Downey, 1993; Nespor, 1994), while others focused onthem (Foley, 1990; Hacker, 1989; Holland & Eisenhart, 1990; Traweek, 1988). I endeavored to see genders inall humans, women and men, and to interrogate the diversities of femininities and masculinities, instead of usinggender as a demographic binary. Late in the research, one set of interview questions provided a serendipitouslyrich set of responses. First I asked: “What is it like to be a man here?” and followed with “Would it be differentif you were a woman?” Later in the interview, I engaged in a conversation about equality and what it meant onthis campus. Responding to the first two questions, students provided a large collection of stories aboutinequitable circumstances, but later told me “we’re all equal engineers.” Unearthing this illogic illustrated thepower of cultural forms to create in the mind’s eye the imagined cultural situation – equality – in spite ofconsiderable empirical evidence to the contrary. Second, I began the research with reservations about researchconducted either by social scientists lacking engineering credentials or by engineering educators who lackedsocial science capabilities. Having worked for 15 years as an engineer allowed me not only to follow students’engineering talk but also to evaluate it, while my anthropological training helped me investigate how thingscame to be the way they were, instead of focusing overmuch on only seeing what they were.How Actor Network Theory Can Challenge the Assemblages of SchoolAccountability and Science LearningCory BuxtonA central facet of the Language-Rich Inquiry Science with English Language Learners (LISELL) project is theLISELL professional learning framework. The five components of this framework offer opportunities forparticipants (teachers, students, parents, and researchers) to position themselves in different ways for varyingpurposes in distinctive spaces. Among other questions, we have explored how varied identities for learning aremade possible for participants based on how they choose to position themselves and how they are positioned byothers (i.e., school administrators, other participants, project materials) in the multiple spaces of our worktogether. We wonder how participants may gain new insights about themselves and about others based on thisvariable positioning and the identities afforded across these spaces. At the same time, possible identities areconstrained by components of the broader networks in which the LISELL professional learning framework isembedded, such as one’s immigration status and English language proficiency. While our full model considersthe positioning of teachers, researchers, students and family members, for the purpose of this paper we limit ourconsideration to the roles that teachers and researchers play across the five components of the professionallearning framework, while attending to Eisenhart’s notions of reconceptualized cultural forms.In the Teacher Professional Learning Institute, the teachers’ initial positioning is as critical evaluatorsof the LISELL pedagogical model and then as co-developers of classroom content and practices, while theresearchers’ initial positioning is as advocates for the pedagogical model and then as co-developers of classroomcontent and practices. In the Student Biotechnology Academy, the teachers are positioned both as instructorsand as Spanish language learners, while the researchers are positioned as facilitators and participant observers.In the professional learning spaces of Grand Rounds classroom observations, the teachers are positioned asICLS 2014 Proceedings1334© ISLScollaborators observing their peers and being observed in turn, while the researchers are positioned as coobservers, learning how project practices are enacted in classrooms. In the Steps to College through ScienceBilingual Family Workshops the teachers are positioned as participant observers, Spanish language learners andadvocates for their students, while the researchers are positioned as teachers, facilitators, and learners acrossboth organized and impromptu learning experiences. Finally, in the LISELL assessment workshops, teachers arepositioned as assessment experts and reflective practitioners, while the researchers are positioned as assessmenttrainers and as facilitators of reflections on learning from student writing.Attending to Cultural FormsHeeding Eisenhart’s (2001) call that new ways of thinking may be needed to better understand the diverseentanglements of life in schools without abandoning the notion of culture, the LISELL project has been usingActor Network Theory (or ANT) to identify the resources that are mobilized to establish (or assemble) ourprofessional learning framework (Law, 2004). We view ANT as a powerful bridge between anthropologicalthinking about culture and the practices of design that may directly influence learning (Latour, 2008). While nota new theory (Callon & Latour, 1981), ANT has remained obscure in educational research (Fenwick &Edwards, 2013). By insisting on the principle of symmetry – that human actors and influences should not beprivileged over non-human actors such as devices, documents, or spaces – ANT provides a novel lens forunderstanding how social forces (including knowledge) gather allies (and enemies) to become more and more(or less and less) stable over time (Callon, 1986). This process – translation in ANT terminology – can be usedto explain how the growth and shrinking, the stabilizing and destabilizing of networks, shape the ways in whichsocial organizations function (e.g., how our professional learning framework, co-constructed by researchers,teachers and other participants, become stabilized and mobilized in some spaces but not in others). Following anANTish view of how practices are shaped, we looked for obligatory passage points (key points through whichactors must pass once a network has been stabilized), such as teachers being observed by their peers duringgrand rounds observations or researchers having their materials critiqued by teachers during the teacher institute.We also attended to stable mobiles (elements of a network that stabilized to the point that they can be lifted outof one context and moved to another and still function with the same meaning), such as classroom materials forsupporting English learners that are developed by teachers in our project spaces and then taken up by teachers inother schools). When taken together, these ANT concepts provide a different way of examining the moment-tomoment social practices in our LISELL professional learning interactions, as well as the relationships betweenthe disciplining power of social structures such as a school accountability system and the individual andcollective agency shaped by LISELL project participation. For example, we have explored how the stablemobile of a superintendent’s non-negotiable practices for instruction became hybridized with the LISELLpedagogical model to destabilize certain classroom practices that hindered the science learning of ELL students(Buxton, Kayumova & Allexsaht-Snider, 2013).Reinvigorating Ethnographic MethodsANT may provide a way to reinvigorate ethnographic methods with its attention – via symmetry – to a range ofresources that include people, devices, decisions, documents, organizations, and the connections between all ofthese. As Eisenhart (2001) noted,If we are going to trace relationships that stretch out across time and space; and if we are goingto analyze activities and cultural forms that are taken up locally but formed or controlledelsewhere, we would seem to need some new ways of doing ethnography, or at least somedifferent methodological priorities. (22).Thus, in the LISELL project, we held true to certain fundamental principles of ethnography (e.g.,participant observation and researcher journaling) while also exploring new approaches to data collection andanalysis. For example, by purposefully constructing the five distinct settings and interaction styles in ourprofessional learning framework and inviting different sets of participants from across multiple schools andcommunity contexts into these settings, we have been able to study how the same individuals practice sciencelearning identities situationally. Further, by developing an ANT sensibility toward symmetry, we have tracedrelationships that involve not only people but non-human actors as well. For example, we were able to considerhow the various settings of the professional learning framework influenced the ways that English and Spanish,as well as everyday and academic language, were used as tools to support science learning. Thus, theprominence of Spanish and Spanish-English fusions in the Steps to College family workshops caused teachers toengage differently in the learning process, for example, by listening more and talking less.Rethinking the Ethical Responsibilities of ResearchersFinally, in the LISELL project we have taken up Eisenhart’s challenge that researchers be ethically responsiblefor painting a balanced and respectful picture of what and whom we study and to grapple with what it means toICLS 2014 Proceedings1335© ISLScreate positive change when actors hold divergent ideas in complex contexts. For example, our diverse 9-personresearch team represents 6 countries of birth and speaks a total of 10 different languages, positioning us quitewell to be both alert and sensitive to the implications of cultural and linguistic differences, as well as how thosedifferences influence learning opportunities across the contexts of our professional learning framework. Wehave tried to balance the voices of various stakeholders (families, students, teachers and researchers) as wethink, talk, and sometimes argue together about what makes science learning authentic and worthwhile and howsuch learning can be fostered for all students within the current accountability structures in our schools. Forexample, we have had lengthy discussions about the value of outstanding academic achievement ifundocumented students are prohibited from attending selective institutions of higher education.Possibility of Multiplicity: A Spatial Analysis of an Afterschool ParticipatoryScience Media Project as Lived by Youth, Student Teachers, CommunityOrganizations and ResearchersJrene Rahm“What are the images that are useful for researchers to “think with” in the contemporary world? Will the imageswe have relied on for years work or do we need new ones?” (p. 16), a question Margaret Eisenhart (2001) askedover a decade ago and that we build on in this paper. We are reporting on an action research project that entailspartnerships among a University and its teacher education program, community organizations, and high schools.That is, we look inside two different afterschool media-science clubs that we ran for two academic school yearsin partnership with two secondary schools in Montreal, science organizations like the Botanical Garden(summer internship for youth participants), and the University of Montreal (student internships in clubs),inspired by the Fifth Dimension Model (Cole, 2006). Theoretically grounded in sociocultural historical research,each afterschool club is understood as a complex activity system, embedded in a network of culturallyheterogeneous activities that are in continuous transformation and movement (Engeström et al., 1999; Sanninoet al., 2010). As advocated by the Connected Learning Research Network report (Ito et al., 2013), youth wereoffered opportunities to pursue media projects on scientific questions and topics they deemed meaningful, underguidance of caring adults and other youth, and as such, supportive of engagement, self-expression and youthvoice. The study also responds to issues raised recently in the National Academies Press report, “A Frameworkfor K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas” (2012), and its emphasis onpromoting scientific literacy for all, with science literacy being “a democratic ideal worthy of focused attention,significant resources, and continuing effort” (p. 277). In many ways, the project we describe can be seen as “asignificant resource” we put in place in two high schools to complement school learning for youth and studentteachers, a project driven by high academic goals and standards for all participants and partner organizations.Two years into the project, however, it became clear that new lenses were needed to “think with” tounderstand what is happening within each partnership and established system. As Eisenhart contends, we were“pushed by theoretical and social currents to trace cultural forms ‘upward’ and ‘outward’ so as to consider howthey are manifested and produced in networks of larger systems.” Yet, simultaneously, we were also “pushed‘downward’ and ‘inward’ to see how cultural forms become part of individual subjectivities or imaginations” (p.22). It made us build upon ideas central to multi-sited ethnography in that we grounded our understandings ofcultural forms in space-time configurations and a “posited logic of association or connection among sites”(Marcus, 1998, p. 90), both imagined and lived or brought alive in situ. Moving inwards helped us first posit acertain design of the clubs while making possible the study of their transformation within each complex systemover time. That is, the science clubs were grounded in research on youths’ participatory cultures (Jenkins et al.,2009), and designed to build upon youths’ cultural on-line practices of creative media productions, pursuedthrough collaborative problem solving or the posting on blogs and podcasts. By situating the imaginary in theliterature on new media culture, a youth participatory framing and making of the clubs was possible. At thesame time, it left us to wonder about whether our designing for learning worked, and if so, for whom?Next to methodology, we also needed to mobilize different conceptual tools to understand what washappening and the significance it might have for different learners. We mobilized theories of spatiality whichhelped us focus on the premise that “how a space is seen, experienced, and understood depends on thepositionality of people relative to the space” and their position within society and history (Moje, 2004, p. 15).Accordingly, we could explore in what ways the club was experienced and perceived by our student teachersand how that differed from the manner the researchers, instructors and youth lived the clubs, which in each casewas tangled up in complex ways with the larger relational logic of its place. For instance, our student teacherswere caught off guard by the orderliness of the club despite its location in an underserved community. Theywere recognized and positioned as outsiders by the youth in the club, who referred to them as strange. As aconsequence, the research and researchers became mediators of worlds, smoothing out a complex interplay ofpositioning grounded in different spatial histories and current ways of life among student teachers, and youth.The project and its transformation over time also challenged the ethical responsibilities of us as researchers. ForICLS 2014 Proceedings1336© ISLSinstance, it led us to focus on the sustainability of the clubs over time, beyond the three year funding cycle of theproject, a challenge many Fifth Dimension projects have struggled with in the past (Cole, 2006). It also led us tore-envision the project as a dialogical one (Matusoy, 2011). We not only promoted dialogue among differentmembers of the partnerships, but made an effort to continuously explore and focus on multiple voices at stake inthe project, those of youth, animators, student teachers, researchers and professionals from the many partneringinstitutions. It led to a new research imaginary marked by contradictions and complexity, yet making possible animaginary of the possibilities of multiplicity in terms of learning, identity work and space-time trajectories. Insum, the paper offers one story of an attempt to think in new ways “about what to research and how to do it” (p.24) that Margaret Eisenhart called for a decade ago.Learning Science at the Intersections of Race, Class, and Gender: ALongitudinal Study of Girls Negotiating What it Means to “Be Scientific”Heidi Carlone and Angela JohnsonHistorically, pre-adolescent girls’ science learning is framed in multiple ways, including but not limited to: anachievement gap problem; a problem with deficit knowledge and skills; girls’ lack of interest and/or “scienceidentities”; school science’s lack of relevance to girls’ interests, goals, and funds of knowledge; lack of rolemodels and mentors. Many of these framings are consistent with neoliberal, meritocratic views of school,science and learning. They are based on the assumption that addressing the problem will make for a better, moreequitable, school science. Yet, we argue that the existing framings of the problem may not be the problems girlscare about solving, that cause them struggle, or that are integral aspects of their identity work.Attending to Cultural FormsEisenhart (2001) argued about the limitations of the traditional ethnographic strategy of conceptualizing theschool or classroom’s culture as a “fairly stable adaptation to the external forces impinging on it” (p. 24), whichleaves unexamined the ways external forces get produced in everyday practices, and the ways the classroom canbe considered as “a point of entry…to the study of economic, cultural, and political relations shaping thecurriculum, teaching, and kids’ experiences” (Eisenhart, 2001, p. 24; citing Nespor, 1997, p. xiii). FollowingEisenhart, we study science learning settings, not only for what they teach us about science but, moreimportantly, for what they teach us about inequity and how power is produced and reproduced.The study we report on here brought this point front and center. Our original goal was to study thescience identity work of ethnically, racially, socioeconomically, and linguistically diverse students across threeto four years of school science after experiencing one year of excellent fourth- or fifth-grade science teaching.However, when we focused on identity work practiced by the girls in the study (n=13), entangled in complicatedlives in school, the problem that concerned them was how to be a girl in science, with the emphasis on girlrather than on science. Their identity work in school science was focused on figuring out what kind of girl to be,not on being scientific. Our specific research questions are: Within and across four years of school science: (1)What is the nature of girls’ identity work? (2) What femininity practices do they make use of in their identitywork? (3) How do these versions of femininity intersect with race and class? (4) How do the girls’ culturalpractices impact their identity work as science learners?Reinvigorating ethnographic methodsThis study draws, in part, on classic, ethnographic methods of observation, interview, and artifact collection—what girls did, said, and produced (Spradley, 1980) in school science over three to four years. As Eisenhart(2001) argued, “To be involved directly in the activities of people still seems to be the best method we have forlearning about the meaning of things to the people we hope to understand… conventional ethnography, it turnsout, is still a good methodological choice in many situations” (p. 25).We did just that—carefully observing, talking to, and learning from girls over time in their schoolscience settings, with home visits, lunch talks, and observations in other school settings during our final year ofdata collection. These kind of longitudinal, ethnographic data of students’ science learning and participationover time, though representative of “classic ethnography,” remains rare in the learning sciences literature.Trained by Eisenhart to study classrooms ethnographically, to examine patterns of activity that giverise to shared meanings across groups, we found it a methodological challenge to focus on individuals’ identitytrajectories across time. Further, though we looked for ways individuals creatively leveraged resources fromvarious cultural worlds to craft more satisfying identities for themselves, macro-level structures of race, class,and gender loomed large in each girl’s trajectory and became more prominent and relevant over time. So, weused multiracial feminist theory and intersectionality (Archer, et al., 2012; Collins, 2000; Johnson, Brown,Carlone, & Cuevas, 2011; Morris, 2007) as prominent study lenses. Doing so allowed us to consider how race,class, and gender combine in a matrix of oppression (Collins, 2000) and shaped girls’ science educations andidentity work, creating “unique obstacles” (Morris, 2007) for those located deeper within the matrix ofICLS 2014 Proceedings1337© ISLSoppression. A central assumption of this lens is that race, class, and gender are examined, in combination, asperformances rather than traits: African American girls “practice,” rather than “have” Black femininity. Thesepractices, patterned over time into cultural forms, make an “acceptable” racial class-based, and gendered,identity appear to be “fixed” and/or “natural” (Archer, et al., 2012; Butler, 1990). Identity work, as intersectedwith larger social structures, is particularly relevant in settings of power, like science. We focused in on girls’performances of femininity, which allowed us to represent “diversity as well as commonality” of girls’ meaningmaking and identity work in school science (Eisenhart, 2001, pp. 24-25).FindingsIn fourth grade, most girls made regular bids to be recognized for scientific and/or academic performances; allwere “pleasers.” However, girls of color engaged in more identity work to be a “girl in science” in settings withnarrower meanings of “science person.” In those settings, girls took up other, more interesting and accessibleroles. Nearly all girls were encouraged to “speak up” except: (1) Two confident African American girls fromworking class backgrounds: One was positioned as a leader who needed to learn to share (Aliyah); the other waspositioned as a “loud Black girl” (N’Lisha) (Fordham, 1993); (2) An English language learner from a workingclass background (Celeste) encountered obstacles in authoring a “competent” science identity in a classroomwith narrow definitions of “success.”By sixth and seventh grade, “nurturing” and “standing up for others” became subversive, notcelebrated, practices—especially true of girls of color from poverty/working class backgrounds. Belonging, orminimizing “otherness,” became more prominent across time for nearly all girls. More girls performed assubmissive or invisible by 7th grade; most were Latina girls from poverty, or working class backgrounds.“Pleasing adults” was consistent across time for most; but, over time, some girls of color unevenly performed as“resistant” or “rebellious.” Bids for leadership or dominance, though rare in 4th grade, became even rarer in 7thgrade. All girls, except for Yazmin and Luisa (two, very academically strong Latina girls from working classbackgrounds) changed their practices based on classroom norms.DiscussionGirls did not need to, nor did most want to, engage in “scientific identity work” to be successful in schoolscience. By 7th grade, they were not asked to be particularly “scientific.” In the few instances when asked to bescientific, most did so with little struggle or resistance, suggesting that they had “learned” school science,though without perhaps learning to be scientific. We wonder: Have many of them (all “good students”) solvedthe “school science” problem?All but two working class Latinas changed their practices based on classroom norms. We wonder: Ifthe norms were altered to hold students accountable to more robust science practices, would theirgendered/raced/classed-based identity work become less prominent? Would they learn more science? We havesome indication that this may be true for two of the White girls who experienced robust school science in sixthgrade. We do not know if this would be true of the girls of color because they did not generally experiencerobust school science in 6th or 7th grades.African American girls from working class/poverty backgrounds were more likely to perform antihegemonic, “stronger” feminine roles (leadership, standing up for others). We attribute this to a resource calledla facultad, the ability to read a social situation and respond accordingly (Anzaldúa, 1999; Johnson et al., 2011).This is a precarious resource. In sum, our study engaged us in the “‘work of ordering’ the forms of social life ofwhich [our] research activity” became an integral part (Penuel & O’Connor, 2010, p. 280). This process becamean “entry-point” (to pick up on Eisenhart’s earlier quote) to a complex web of interconnections, leaving us muchto still disentangle.Significance of Collective Work, Lessons Learned, and Moving ForwardGrounded in widely different K-16 science and engineering learning settings, these ethnographic studies – of theways in which cultural forms impinge on, and are produced through, social interactions in everyday life –illustrate how nuanced analysis can better shape equity-driven educational processes. Tonso’s engineeringstudents learned to view their world through campus-culture-tinted lenses and to overlook contradictoryempirical evidence. Their cultural identity terrain was framed by both campus culture and societal structures,and implied cultural knowledge about power, positioning, and belonging as an engineer. Buxton foregroundshow non-human actors, such as policy documents and lab materials in schools, can be central to the wayscultural forms are practiced and how networks where cultural forms are enacted are continuously beingstabilized and destabilized. Rahm’s work in high school settings traced the paths of cultural formssimultaneously moving outward toward broader networks and inward to understand the making of individualidentities. Carlone and Johnson’s study illustrated how students’ identity work fit into cultural practices, whichwere permeated with societal structures, especially gender, race/ethnicity, and social class. Both Tonso’s andCarlone and Johnson’s research studies illustrate how the situations within which identities form in someICLS 2014 Proceedings1338© ISLSlearning settings can seem unable to support identities that simultaneously link scientific ways of being withfemininities, even as these researchers make evident that much of what students learn falls outside the intendedcurriculum of the sites, raising prickly questions about studies that assume narrow conceptions of “curriculum.”In contrast, the studies by Buxton and Rahm offer illustrations of how complex the unpacking of everydaypractices can be when attempting to design contexts for science learning that attend to multiple and conflictinginterwoven discourses and practices (Latour, 2008). Taken together these studies demonstrate that life in theselearning settings is both complex and constrained by cultural possibilities that are all too often overlooked instudies of learning; cultural possibilities that essentially constitute the kind of reframing of learning researchcurrently being called for by the learning sciences.In all four studies, learning was seen as a process that played out over time, that encompassed far morethan the intended curriculum in the sites studied, and that embodied a wide range of cultural forms and structuralforces at play in learning settings. All of these studies have implications for designing learning environments inways that take equity and inclusion seriously. Buxton, Carlone and Johnson, and Tonso suggest the need tocontinue to study structural forces to enhance the potential for providing all students with equitable learningopportunities. Carlone and Johnson, and Tonso found that learning settings do not always recognize all whodemonstrate capabilities considered important in learning settings, suggesting the limitations of studying personsextracted from context. Rahm and Buxton called for taking youth’s perspectives into account in designinglearning settings that matter. These studies also make explicit that learning and becoming are inextricablyinterconnected, and that cultural forms not only shape learning possibilities, but are tied to the agency oflearners and researchers (O’Connor & Penuel, 2010).Taking an ethnographic approach contributes to research in the learning sciences in a variety of ways.As Tonso suggests, ethnography allows augmenting data-collection and analysis strategies to unearth implicitcultural forms, such as the queue-sort strategy used for unpacking the identity terrain. Ethnography also allowsincorporating both spaces (Buxton, Rahm) and non-human actors (Buxton), and the influences of both onidentity formation and learning. Because of its commitment to prolonged engagement and persistent observation(Lincoln & Guba, 1985), ethnography makes possible longitudinal and quasi-longitudinal research activities thattrace students’ shifting identity work and learning (Carlone & Johnson, Tonso), and provides importantcomplements to current longitudinal studies of cognitive change. Ethnographic researchers may study contextsthat are extant (Tonso, Carlone & Johnson) but through interaction with participants in those contexts, maycreate a positive influence. Ethnographic researchers may also study settings in which they have intentionallypositioned participant groups and organized spaces (Buxton, Rahm), to facilitate more (inter)active andparticipatory ethnographic methods. In either case, these methods may be conducive to research in the learningsciences. The studies clearly speak to the call of “organizing for learning” locally and globally, and as such,entail research that takes us places not always comfortable but that are constitutive of the kind of research thatmay in turn lead to transformation and action (O’Connor & Allen, 2010).Finally, all four studies illustrate the importance of considering the ethical responsibilities ofresearchers in ways that may be informative to the field of the learning sciences. Each of us made a consciousdecision to understand the world of our participants from the insiders’ vantage point, often privileging themeaning making of the researched over that of the researcher. Taking diverse voices and perspectives seriouslyproves essential to creating equitable learning settings. Buxton created intentional spaces for different groups ofstakeholders, including often silenced groups such as undocumented parents, to ensure hearing each group’sconcerns and needs related to learning and academic success. Carlone and Johnson focused on the identity workdone by students and the ways in which some student identities became marginalized and silenced over time,which highlights the responsibilities researchers have to understand learners’ motivations which is yet anothercritical piece for learning scientists. Rahm illustrates how working dialogically across participant groups, andcontinuing beyond the limits of funding cycles, can serve to promote life-long learning while also addressing theethical commitments we struggle with and yet must live up to as researchers. Tonso’s work suggests thatmaking gender (and other circumstances) of all participants visible, and of matching researcher expertise totopics of study, are fundamental to organizing ethical research not only because such research takes allparticipants (groups) seriously, but also because it makes relevant how all people learn.Each of us began our research careers under the guidance of Margaret Eisenhart, yet, over time, ourresearch diverged in novel ways in response to central themes taken up in Margaret’s scholarship. As our studiessuggest, we have each traveled into arenas that allowed us to develop new lines of thought. Whethercomplicating notions of engineer identity in ways not foreshadowed in “scientist” identity research (Tonso),layering race/ethnicity and social class with gender (Carlone & Johnson), thinking deeply about how to includea “significant resource” in an after-school program (Rahm), or studying actor networks as a practice of design ina multi-site ethnography (Buxton), each of these studies explicitly responded to challenges articulated byEisenhart. Because it has been enormously generative for our research, and that of others who similarly owetheir impetus to Eisenhart’s scholarship, we honor her work. As a body, this research suggests that the depth ofMargaret Eisenhart’s contribution to the learning sciences extends to theorizing, methodological strategies, andICLS 2014 Proceedings1339© ISLSempirical results that provide a unique vantage point on how people learn and become, in science andengineering settings, and beyond.ReferencesAnzaldúa, G. (1999). Borderlands/La frontera (2nd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Aunt Lute.Archer, L., DeWitt, J., Osborne, J., Dillon, J., Willis, B., & Wong, B. (2012). Balancing acts: Elementary schoolgirls’ negotiations of femininity, achievement, and science. Science Education, 96(6), 967-989.Brown, A. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Bruner, J. (1999). Postscript: Some reflections on education research. In E. C. Lagemann & L. S.Shulman (Eds.), Issues in education research: Problems and possibilities (pp. 399-409). San Francisco,CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.Buxton, C., Kayumova, S., & Allexsaht-Snider, M. (2013). Teacher, researcher and accountability: Discoursesshaping democratic practices for science teaching in middle schools. Democracy & Education, 21(2),Article 2.Hawkins, J., & Pea, R. D. (1987). Tools for bridging the cultures of everyday and scientific thinking. Journalfor Research in Science Teaching, 24, 291-307.Lave, J. (1987). Cognition in practice. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Callon, M. (1986). Some elements of a sociology of translation: Domestication of the scallops and the fishermenof Saint Brieuc Bay. In J. Law (Ed.) Power, action and belief: A new sociology of knowledge? (pp.196-233). London, England: Routledge.Callon, M. & Latour, B. (1981). Unscrewing the Big Leviathan: How actors macrostructure reality and howsociologists help them to do so. In K. D. Knorr-Cetina and A. V. Cicourel (Eds.) Advances in SocialTheory and Methodology: Toward an Integration of Micro- and Macro-Sociologies. Boston, MA:Routledge: 277-303.Cole, M. (2006). The fifth dimension: An after-school program built on diversity. New York, NY: Sage.Collins, P. H. (2000). Gender, Black feminism, and Black political economy. Annals of the American Academyof Political and Social Science, 568, 41–53.Connell, R. W., Ashenden, D., Kessler, S., & Dowsett, G. W. (1982). Making the difference: Schools, familiesand social division. Sydney, Australia: Allen & Unwin.Connell, R.W. (1987). Gender and power: Society, the person and sexual politics. Palo Alto, CA: StanfordUniversity Press.Downey, G. L., Hegg, S. & Lucena, J. (1993). Weeded out: Critical reflection in engineering education. PaperPresented at the Annual Meeting of the American Association of Anthropologists.Eckert, P. (1989). Jocks and burnouts: Social categories and identity in the high school. New York, NY:Teachers College Press.Eisenhart, M. (1996). The production of biologists at school and work: Making scientists, conservationists, orflowery bone-heads? In B. A. Levinson, D. E. Foley, & D. C. Holland (Eds.), The cultural productionof the educated person: Critical ethnographies of schooling and local practice, pp. 169–185. Albany,NY: State University of New York Press.Eisenhart, M. (2001). Educational ethnography past, present and future: Ideas to think with. EducationalResearcher, 30(8), 16-27.Eisenhart, M. & Finkel, E., with Behm, L., Lawrence, N., & Tonso, K. (1998). Women’s science: Learning andsucceeding from the margins. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.Engeström, Y., Miettinen, R., & Punamäki, R.-L. (Eds.) (1999). Perspectives on activity theory. Cambridge,England: Cambridge University Press.Fenwick, T. & Edwards, R. (2013). Researching education through actor network theory. Malden, MA: WileyBlackwell.Foley, D. E. (1990). Learning capitalist culture: Deep in the heart of Tejas. Philadelphia, PA: University ofPennsylvania Press.Fordham, S. (1993). “Those loud Black girls”: (Black) women, silence, and gender “passing” in the academy.Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 24(1), 3-32.Foucault, M. (1982). The subject and power. Critical Inquiry, 8(4), 777-795.Hacker, S. (1989) Pleasure, power, and technology: some tales of gender, engineering, and the cooperativeworkplace. Boston, MA: Unwin Hyman.Holland, D. & Eisenhart, M. (1990). Educated in romance: Women, achievement and college culture. Chicago,IL: University of Chicago Press.Holland, D.C. & Skinner, D. (1987). Prestige and intimacy: the cultural models behind Americans’ talk aboutgender types. In D.C. Holland and N. Quinn (eds.), Cultural Models in Language and Thought (pp. 78–111). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1340© ISLSHolland, D.C., Lachicotte, W., Jr., Skinner, D. & Cain, C. (1998) Identity and agency in cultural worlds.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Hursh, D. (2005). Neo-liberalism, markets and accountability: Transforming education and underminingdemocracy in the United States and England. Policy Futures in Education, 3(1), 3-15.Ito, M., Guitérrez, K. Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Schor, J., Sefton-Green, J., Watkins, S.C. (Eds.). (2013). Connected learning: An agenda for research and design. A research synthesis reportof the Connected Learning Research Network. Retrieved July 8, 2013 http://connectedlearning.tv/whatis-connected-learningJenkins, H., Clinton, K., Puruchotma, R., Robinson, A. J. & Weigel, M. (2009). Confronting the challenges ofparticipatory culture: Media education for the 21st Century. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. RetrievedJuly 24, 2012 http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/Confronting_the_Challenges.pdf.Johnson, A., Brown, J., Carlone, H., & Cuevas, A.K. (2011). Authoring identity amidst the treacherous terrainof science: A multiracial feminist examination of the journeys of three women of color in science.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48(4), 339-366.Latour, B. (2008). A cautious Prometheus? A few steps toward a philosophy of design. Keynote lecture for theNetworks of Design History Society. Cornwall, England.Law, J. (2004). After method: Mess in social science research. New York, NY: Routledge.Levinson, B. & Holland, D. (1996). The cultural production of the educated person: An introduction. In B.Levinson, D. Foley & D. Holland (Eds.). The cultural production of the educated person: Criticalethnographies of schooling and local practice. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.Levinson, B.A., Foley, D.E. & Holland, D.C. (eds.) (1996). The cultural production of the educated person:critical ethnographies of schooling and local practice. Albany, NY: State University of New YorkPress.Lincoln, Y. S. & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.Marcus, G. (1998). Ethnography through thick and thin. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Press.Matusov, E. (2011). Authorial teaching and learning. In E.J. White & M. Peters (Eds.), Bakhtinian pedagogy:Opportunities and challenges for research, policy and practice in education across the globe (pp. 21–46). New York: Peter Lang Publishers.Moje, E. B. (2004). Powerful spaces: Tracing the out-of-school literacy spaces of Latino/a youth. In K. M.Leander, & M. Sheehy, (Eds.), Spatializing literacy research and practice (pp. 15-38). New York, NY:Peter Lang.Morris, E.W. (2007). “Ladies” or “Loudies”?: Perceptions and experiences of black girls in classrooms. Youth &Society, 38(4), 490-515.National Academies Press (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts,and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: National Academies PressNespor, J. (1994). Knowledge in motion: Space, time, and curriculum in undergraduate physics andmanagement. London: Falmer Press.O'Connor, K., & Allen, A.-R. (2010). Learning as the organizing of social futures. In W. R. Penuel & K.O'Connor (Eds.). Learning research as a human science. National Society for Studies in Education,109(1), 160-175.O’Connor, K., & Penuel, W. R. (2010). Introduction: Principles of a human sciences approach to research onlearning. National Society for the Study of Education, Volume 109, Issue 1, pp. 1–16.O’Neill, O. (2013). Intelligent accountability in education. Oxford Review of Education, 39(1), 4-16.Penuel, W. R. & O’Connor, K. (Eds.) (2010). Learning research as a human science: Old wine in new bottles?National Society for the Study of Education Yearbook; 109 (1), 268-283.Sannino, A., Daniels, H., & Gutierrez, K. D. (Eds.) (2010). Learning and expanding with activity theory.Cambridge University Press.Spradley, J. P. (1980). Participant observation. Orlando, FL: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.Themalis, S. (2008). Meritocracy through education and social mobility in post-war Britain: A criticalexamination. British Journal of Sociology of Education, 29(5), 427-438.Tonso, K. L. (2006). Student engineers and engineer identity: Campus engineer identities as figured world.Cultural Studies of Science Education, 1(2), 1–35.Traweek, S. (1988). Beamtimes and lifetimes: The world of high energy physics. Cambridge, MA: HarvardUniversity Press.Willis, P. (1977). Learning to labor: How working class kids get working class jobs. New York: ColumbiaUniversity Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1341© ISLS