Metacognitive Planning and Monitoring: 9th Graders Performing aLong-Term Self-Regulated Scientific Inquiry in a Complex SystemBillie Eilam, University of Haifa, Israel, beilam@edu.haifa.ac.ilAbstract: A comprehensive daily-report instrument supplying metacognitive prompts wasused to promote a high-achieving group of 5 ninth graders' collaborative planning, execution,monitoring, and adjustment of a long-term, open-ended ecological inquiry about a liveecosystem (greenhouse). Prompts guided the group's discussion and documentation of eachlaboratory session's planned and executed behaviors, aiming to trigger students' metacognitivecues about gaps and progress along the yearlong project. Fine-grain analysis of sessiontranscripts, students' written documentation, and videotapes for this single group case yieldeda recurrent pattern of within-session behavior and evidence for the group's use ofmetacognitive knowledge and skills over time as well as salient difficulties. Discussionfocused on the role of specific components in this student centered self-regulated long-termlearning environment – the daily reports, the teachers, and the live ecology inquiry context.Implications were discussed for future research and long-term inquiry-driven scienceeducation design.Major Issues AddressedThe present study addresses metacognitive planning and monitoring, using a specially designed prompt forenhancing learners’ Metacognitive Awareness (MA) while performing a long-term, authentic open inquiry oflive complex ecosystems, in an environment of full personal and academic autonomy. Such an environment hasthe potential to activate metacognitive knowledge (Chinn & Hmelo-Silver, 2002), overcome some inherentdifficulties and develop MA (Eilam, 2002; Eilam & Aharon, 2003). The present study examined learners' realtime on line MA while planning a complex long-term yearly ecosystems inquiry, executing these plans,monitoring outcomes in light of set goals and adjusting thoughts and actions. Metacognitive prompts (DPSRI –Daily Planning Self-Report Instrument) were provided for facilitating a case group of high-achieving 9th graders'metacognition as evidenced through their observed verbalizations, behaviors and written self-reports.Potential Significance of the StudyThus far, metacognition and monitoring have been mostly examined in shorter computer-based simulations. Thepresent environment of a long-term inquiry enables the on line fine-grain studying of MA due to the continuous,dynamic, and interactive process of thinking and rethinking that involves flexibility, judgment, andmetacognition, applied in response to changes occurring in the researched system. I also suggest a novelprompt/tool for promoting, scaffolding, and studying MA, planning and monitoring. Presented on paper, theDaily Planning Self-Report Instrument (DPSRI) scaffolds learners' MA. Last, although planning is a coreelement in metacognition, knowledge about students’ planning is deficient.Theoretical and Methodological ApproachesRooted in the constructivist and sociocultural perspectives, a group case study method was selected toinvestigate students’ MA. A case is a specific, complex, functioning, well-bounded, integrated system,characterized by patterned consistent behavior that is clearly differentiated in some of its features from othersystems (Stake, 1995).ParticipantsThe single distinct group (one of eight in the classroom) of 5 high-achieving and motivated ninth graders (twogirls and three boys), performed the ecological inquiry collaboratively with the final distant goal of producing ascientific report of their research. The group was unique in its composition and in its personal and socialboundaries, distinct patterns of interactions and collaboration, and their different inquiry boundaries. No roleswere assigned and no persistent “leaders” emerged. Because MA is related to domain knowledge (Alexander etal., 2011) this high achievers group was expected to provide a worthwhile case for analysis of students' MA.The Learning ContextLaboratory Schedule and Physical LayoutThe inquiry was performed over 30 sessions, in weekly session of 3 hours (including breaks), in the schoolscience laboratory. The group occupied one table of the 10 contained in the lab. Students collaborated on theICLS 2014 Proceedings937© ISLSDPSRI. Students built two greenhouse ecosystems (control and experiment). Members had to learn about theirselected ecosystem and its components, formulate a broad topic of interest, focus gradually on possible researchquestions, raise hypotheses based on their knowledge of ecology and biology, choose one hypothesis forexamination in their greenhouse, and select its biotic and abiotic components. The case group examined the"greenhouse effect" by increasing the CO2 amounts and measuring the system varied variables (e.g.,temperature, number and behaviors of organisms and related processes.) Initially, the group collected a set of allpossible measures from both the experimental and control systems (e.g., organisms' size and weight; plants'number of leaves; bacteria samples from the soil, air, and leaves; temperature; pH) over a 1-month period.Students designed their own representations like tables, graphs, and drawings to document the lengthy datacollection. Then, the group introduced CO2 from a special container into the "experimental" system only.Students cared for their systems, collected and processed data, generated conclusion and submitted a writtenreport.Student AutonomyIn order to enable students’ free planning and managing of the inquiry, the onus of responsibility was shiftedentirely onto students to plan, perform, and manage their long-term inquiry as they saw fit, after consideringpossible alternatives and choosing among them according to self-determined goals and resources. Groupmembers were granted complete autonomy over their behavior, including decisions regarding taking breaks,coming to sessions, or homework. Students were never reprehended for anything but disrupting a classmate'slearning. They had to present their research in a school conference and submit a final written scientific report.Support MechanismsStudents have never experienced such a lengthy SR project, and teachers’ external feedback about the quality ofregulation and the inquiry performance were mostly avoided to enable their autonomic decisions. Therefore,support and scaffolding of MA were provided as: (a) The DPSRI (see below) including practice of its use and atextbook about inquiry and its skills; (b)Teacher guidance; (c) Theoretical courses in ecology, taughttraditionally and concurrently with the 3 weekly laboratory hours; (d) Students’ files.Scaffolding Tools to Provide Metacognitive PromptsPrompts were developed based on literature concerning SRL, prompts, cues and metacognition. It requiredlearners' continuous real-time reporting about their performance in each session and enabled calibration ofthoughts and behaviors by planning and monitoring plans execution. Planning. Planning is intentional, promotesgoal attainment under specific circumstances, enhances performance, allows for anticipation of consequences bygenerating external representations of future behavior prior to enactment, which guides future planning insimilar situations, prevents some mistakes, and involves the employment of metacognition to transform learningintentions into action plans. Planning is enhanced by a less structured environment (Jordan, Ruibal-Villasenor,Hmelo-Silver, & Etkina, 2011), but is particularly difficult in it because of the unknown variables and theuncertainty about actions' results (Allen, Hendler, & Tate, 1990). Concrete and attainable goals are set followingthe examination of the task's features (on-going inquiry) and serve as proximal regulators that emerge from thedecomposition of distal goals. The initialization of relevant actions is ensured by selecting a set of activities,determining their enactment order, and coordinating these actions to achieve the stated goals. Planning involvesawareness of one’s own metacognitive knowledge and resource allocation (e.g., time, space, equipment) whileconsidering the affordances and constraints of the specific circumstances, as well as the efforts that need to beinvested to attain the goal (Gollwitzer, 1996; Prins, 2002; Ward & Morris, 2005). Monitoring. If execution ofplans is not monitored, evaluated, and revised accordingly, no change in behavior would be possible.Metacognitive monitoring enables control and management over the effectiveness of learners’ executed actionsand cognition that may affect behavior. Monitoring activity relies on learners’ ability to perceive internal and/orexternal cognitive, affective, and/or situational cues (Carver & Scheier, 1990). Perceived cues are triggered bycomparisons between current and goal state and constitute feedback that initiates learners’ MA, which in turnproduces a behavior to reduce perceived gaps by changing plans or parts of them. Time management. Timemanagement is a core component of planning and monitoring and is subjectively experienced; students’ diversetime orientations may shape their mode of engagement with tasks (Duncheon & Tierney, 2013). Very little hasbeen published on this issue as related to scientific inquiry. During a long-term, complex process of inquiry,time constraints call for increased efficiency and require making metacognitive decisions concerning choicesamong alternative actions and time management. Cues suggesting an unexpected rate of progression towardgoals may influence planning.The Daily Planning Self-Report Instrument – DPSRICompletion of the DPSRI included (see Figure 1): (a) Reporting concrete, limited goals that could be achievedduring the session; (b) Reporting suggested plans in the “suggested plan” column, by: (i) selecting andICLS 2014 Proceedings938© ISLSdescribing context-dependent, accurately defined activities (e.g., to read about the frog) and categorizing themusing the ready activity segment labels pool (e.g., gathering information); (ii) determining the sequence ofactivity execution; (iii) allocating time to each activity; and (iv) determining the setting for performing theactivity (e.g., cooperatively, individually); (c). Reporting enacted performance: Students completed the “enactedplan” column separately for each planned segment, immediately after its execution to decrease cognitive loadand increase accuracy of reporting. These “enacted” reports included the recording of (i) the performedactivity’s description and segment label, (ii) their actual sequencing, (iii) their duration, and (iv) the work settingused; (d). Assigning homework.DAILY PLANNING SELF-REPORTHour8:158:258:35ActivitydescriptionPlanningTalk to thetechnicianMeasuring8:45Student Name: TimGroup: WhiteDate: January 24Session Goals: Complete the principles and raise a research questionSUGGESTED PLANSegment labelTimeallocatedSettingCompleting theDPSRIGroupTechnicalIndiv.Technical:Taking care ofsystemInformationgathering:Collecting dataGroupActivitysegmentAsk theteacher aboutthe Temp.Caring forthe biotic,ENACTED PLANSegment labelTimeusedSettingInformationgatheringGroupTechnical:Taking care ofsystemGroupPlantingplantsFigure 1. An Example of The Daily Planning Self-ReportThe DPSRI self-report differs from other instruments in several key features that increase its validity andachieve additional benefits: (a) Activity description and categorization using a pool of ready segment labels, forincreasing objectivity and creating a uniform “language” of self-reporting, which facilitated student comparisonsbetween the planned and enacted columns within a session as well as comparisons of reports between sessions,thereby enabling cue input and monitoring of plan effectiveness, promoting MA. In addition, this uniformity andobjectivity increased coders’ inter-judge agreement; (b) Reporting on-line of enacted activities immediatelyfollowing their completion, rather than after the entire 3-hour session, thus reducing the effect of cognitive loadand increasing reporting accuracy; (c) Legitimacy of reporting any enacted activity, thus reducing socialdesirability; (d) Monitoring planned-enacted identified gaps, thus providing evidence of MA. Because reasoningabout gaps causes and making decisions regarding necessary future behavioral changes, is difficult and requireMA, changes in planning along the year may be indicative of MA and enables deepened insight into students’behaviors. In addition, successful enactment must account for past similar experiences and may even includemonitoring through the examination of previous DPSRIs. The intrusiveness involved in externalizing students’actual behaviors probably also influenced such behaviors by increasing MA of certain planning and timemanagement elements. A 90% inter-rater reliability while rating 20% of the reports was accepted.Data Collection and AnalysisGroup's working modes and interactions over the year were recorded by a video camera and discourses werefully transcribed. Data were analyzed from these transcripts and members' completed DPSRI and videotapeswere consulted in cases of ambiguity. Transcript analysis focused on utterances related to the DPSRI, whichyielded ample evidence on students' MA.Identifying the Group's Content and Sequence of Work PatternsThe aggregated selected utterances were repeatedly read by two experts in biology and in learning and werescrutinized for internal consistency regarding the group's work patterns over the year as related to completingthe DPSRI. Central student activities were identified in their chronological order in each single session, and thenactivity sequences were compared between sessions (inter-judge agreement of 86% regarding the group'sbehavioral pattern). Work pattern showed very few deviations despite changing contexts.Report AnalysisThe written DPSRI materials were read carefully by the same two judges to identify explicit direct and indirectevidence of students' MA, as manifested by their planning, gap monitoring, reasoning about those gaps, andadjustments of subsequent plans. The DPSRIs were analyzed within and across the predetermined phases ofself-reporting (i.e., goals, suggested plans, enacted performance, and assigning homework). Reports wereICLS 2014 Proceedings939© ISLSanalyzed within each single session, and changes in behaviors were traced across sessions (83% inter-judgeagreement).Major Findings, Conclusions, and ImplicationsGroup Behavioral PatternOverall, a consistent 4-part pattern emerged: (a) Preparations for planning: Browsing through the inquirytextbook and examination of the systems to decide what needed to be done (e.g., exercises) and be studied (e.g.,ecology knowledge). (b) Collaborative planning and recording plans in the DPSRI. After planning, studentscopied from each other plans to yield identical reports. They filled the goals supported by the inquiry textbook(“We saw what we have to do. We have to gather materials to focus the topic onto a limited subject forinquiry“), and the suggested plan column by discussing activity segments and settings but rarely arguing abouttime allocation. Categorization of activities into label segment was acquired over few sessions. Initially,planning was mostly intuitive, based on past experiences and school habits and norms rather on monitoring.Around the fifth session students exhibited MA probably evolving from perceiving DPSRI cues. Time pressureswere explicitly expressed and affected planning. (c) Enacting plans: Students reminded each other to fill in thiscolumn after completing each activity. (“G: Wait, before you go out, report the enacted. R: Right, let’s fill outthe daily report.”)	   Most sessions' discourse exhibited students’ implicit comparisons between the planned andenacted, evidencing students’ perception of metacognitive cues (D: “We're behind, look at the yearly report. T:But the whole idea is that you move forward in the inquiry at your own pace.”). They verbally expressed theirperceived results of such comparisons (time lags, gaps in activities), and tried to repair them by changing plans.From the eighth session on, they accepted gaps as inevitable but monitored their thinking and progress inattempt to improve future plans. Some activities (reading and exercises) were always enacted individually,whereas inquiry related activities were performed in collaboration. To save time students frequently performeddifferent activities in parallel within the same activity segment.Group Written Reports Over Time: Metacognitive AwarenessTo reveal MA as manifested by students' written reports, the DPSRIs were compared and analyzed over time.Because their reports were almost identical only one of them was examined. Findings are presented according tothe DPSRI phases, indicating what can be construed as MA for each.(a). Setting proximal goals. MA was evidenced in realistic, relevant, logically sequenced goals thatcould be operationalized. These were usually related to structured and linear tasks (e.g., to gather specificinformation). Ill-structured tasks resulted in general goals (e.g., design the experiments) that impeded students’ability to enact plan successfully. From midyear on, goals demonstrated increased MA of situational factors(e.g., time) and future group need (e.g., devoting a lesson for fixing the system). (b) Suggested and enactedplans. MA was evidenced in the accurate definition of easily applicable and limited scope activities that werealmost always categorized correctly to the general segment labels and by students’ added new customizedsegments according to identified needs. Planned-enacted gaps initiated MA monitoring, and identification of theproblem that caused it expressed in the enactment of an unplanned segment; changing break time to be after adiscussion was completed because “a discussion after we come back is never the same”; or inserted unplanned“teacher consultations” after being aware of their lack of understanding during a planned discussion. (c)Allocating time resources. MA was evidenced in students’ comments about a temporal gap and along time. Forexample, when too many activities were previously planned for a particular time unit, they reduced them in thefollowing plans, when plans did not include break to save time and students felt hungry and tired, theyintroduced breaks in the following session plan after discussing the problem; acknowledging that they havelearned that a new unfamiliar activity requires more time than familiar ones; administrating homework andmeeting after school to compensate for time lags; consciously allocating session time for devising the suggestedplan. (d) Setting: A preference for a collaborative work was found probably due to the challenging task.However, MA was evidenced when students flexibly shifted to individual work when time constraints cues wereperceived. (e) Homework were Assigned initially, when no gaps were perceived, due to habits and norms. MAwas evidenced when time gaps have been perceived and homework were expected to save time. In addition todeveloping MA students demonstrated several difficulties such as a deficient ability to identify missing domainand procedural knowledge in their own cognition, evidenced by the longer-than-anticipated time required forprocessing information and by the help-seeking segments that were introduced only later, while enacting theplan; difficulty in operationalizing perceived cues into actions that would improve performance; unsuccessfulattempts to strike a balance between different dichotomous factors like, time constraints and activities to becarried out, deep narrow understanding and superficial broader understanding, individuals’ needs and groupneeds, or between personal preferences and more efficient options. Such balance can only develop throughdiverse experiences of learning to navigate in complex learning environments and to negotiate among itscomponents.ICLS 2014 Proceedings940© ISLSConclusions and ImplicationsA deficient knowledge exists about planning and monitoring as expressing MA applied in a long-term inquiry.Evidence of MA are difficult to observe. The present instrument explicated such evidence and hence promotedunderstanding of these phenomena. Researchers' efforts should be continued and directed toward thedevelopment of refined instruments that may capture the application of different metacognitive components.The current findings demonstrate the possibility of providing students with opportunities recommended by manyresearchers of science education: namely, to experience an authentic self-regulated inquiry that will promote thedevelopment of students’ MA and science. The findings suggest that in spite of the many difficulties involved,high-achieving students at this age can cope with the complexity of the environment, utilize its sources, and gainacademically and personally from their experiences. However, such a project requires teachers’ expertise,students’ full autonomy, and length of time. To achieve better planning abilities, and to construct accurate andflexible knowledge representations of planning, students have to experience and train in learning environmentsthat promote their ability to orchestrate diverse activities while performing complex, long-term tasks.ReferencesAlexander, P. A., Winters, F., Dinsmore, D. L., & Parkinson, M. (2011). The role of domain knowledge in selfregulated learning. In B. Zimmerman, & D. Schunk (Ed.), Handbook of self-regulation of learning andperformance. New York: Routledge.Allen, J. F., Hendler, J., & Tate, A. (1990). Readings in planning. San Francisco: Kaufman.Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1990). Origins and functions of positive and negative affect: A control-processview. Psychological Review, 97, 19-35.Chinn, C. A., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2002).Authentic inquiry: Introduction to the special section. ScienceEducation, 86, 171-174.Duncheon, J. C., & Tierney, W. G. (2013). Changing conceptions of time: Implications for educational researchand practice. Review of Educational Research, 83(2), 236-272.Eilam, B.. (2002). Strata of comprehending ecology: Looking through the prism of feeding relations. ScienceEducation, 86, 645-671.Eilam, B. (2012). System thinking and feeding relations: Learning with a live ecosystem model. InstructionalScience, 40(2), 213-239.Eilam, B., & Aharon, I. (2003). Students’ planning in the process of self-regulated learning. ContemporaryEducational Psychology, 28, 304-334.Ge, X., Chen, C. H., & Davis, K. A. (2005). Scaffolding novice instructional designers’ problem-solvingprocesses using question prompts in a web-based learning environment. Journal of EducationalComputing Research, 33(2), 219-248.Gollwitzer, P. M. (1996). The volitional benefits of planning. In P. M. Gollwitzer, & J. Bargh (Eds.), Thepsychology of action: Linking cognition and motivation to behavior (pp. 287-312). New York: GuilfordPress.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Surabhi, M., & Lei, L. (2007). Fish swim, rocks sit, and lungs breathe: Expert-noviceunderstanding of complex systems. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(3), 307-331.Jordan, R. C., Ruibal-Villasenor, M., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Etkina, E. (2011). Laboratory materials:Affordances or constraints? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48(9), 1010-1025.Pieschl, S. (2009). Metacognitive calibration: An extended conceptualization and potential applications.Metacognition Learning, 6, 205-211.Prins, F. J. (2002). Search & see: The roles of metacognitive skillfulness and intellectual ability during noviceinductive learning in a complex computer-simulated environment (pp. 15-49). Leiden, TheNetherlands: Print Partners Ipskamp.Schraw, G., Crippen, K. J., & Hartley, K. (2006). Promoting self regulation in science education: Metacognitionas part of a broader perspective on learning. Research in Science Education, 36, 111-139.White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making science accessible toall students. Cognition & Instruction, 16(1), 3-118.ICLS 2014 Proceedings941© ISLS