Varied Appropriations of Tools from Professional Development:Moving Beyond LevelsHuy Q. Chung and Elizabeth A. van Es, University of California, Irvine, CA, USAEmail: hqchung@uci.edu, evanes@uci.eduAbstract: In this empirical study we trace teacher’s appropriation of literacy teaching toolsfrom professional development and the varied ways they enacted these tools in theirclassrooms. Teacher appropriation is important in studying professional development becausefar too often studies do not account for teacher learning and how this learning sustains reformminded practices. Using two years of qualitative data we traced the appropriation of tools andtheir impact on instruction. Pushing on Grossman, Smagorinsky, and Valencia’s (1999) fivelevels of appropriation, results indicate that the teachers appropriated tools for differentpedagogical reasons, such as appropriating the tools to organize their students’ learning, toaccommodate their students’ learning needs, and to integrate other professional developmentinitiatives. Implications on designing and sustaining teacher learning in professionaldevelopment are discussed within.IntroductionIn the past decade, researchers, policymakers, and practitioners have given increased attention to the impact ofteachers on student achievement (Baker et al., 2010; Darling-Hammond et al., 2009; Yoon et al., 2007). Thelogic behind this focus stems from studies that conclude that teachers significantly affect student achievement(Nye, Konstantopoulos, & Hedges, 2004). Teacher effects matter even more for schools in lower socioeconomic communities that experience high teacher attrition. In order for systematic change to happen inschools and to sustain a strong culture of teaching, education researchers call for an investment in teachers andtheir practice (Ball & Forzani, 2011; Morris & Hiebert, 2011). Large amounts of funding have been provided toschools and districts to offer professional development programs to improve teaching in hopes of increasingstudent learning (von Zastrow, 2010). A substantial amount of research related to these efforts focuses on theimpact of professional development on student achievement (Baker et al., 2010; Guskey, 2002; Wallace, 2009;Yoon et al., 2007). This emphasis is clearly important; policymakers and taxpayers deserve to know if suchefforts are making a difference for students. However, we argue that ensuring lasting impact of teachers’practice and long-term improvements on student learning requires a comprehensive understanding of, andattention to, teacher learning and the relationship between teachers’ long-term learning and classroom practices.While research on teacher education points to the complexity and longevity of developing teacherexpertise, studies of the effectiveness of professional development on student achievement have ignored thiscritical piece of the puzzle. To be clear, research in this vein does look at factors that contribute to teacherlearning, such as time spent in professional development, opportunities for active learning and collaboration,and instructional support (Desimone et al., 2002; Garet et al., 2001; Guskey, 2002). However, these studies donot examine how these settings provide or limit teachers’ opportunities to learn, the nature and development ofthat learning, and how the contexts in which they work interact with their participation and learning inprofessional development. We argue that research that examines the impact of professional development notonly consider the effect on student performance, but also what and how teachers learn in professionaldevelopment contexts, and how that impacts their thinking and practice, which is consistent with other researchthat advocates for a more comprehensive approach to studying the effects of professional development onteachers (Desimone, 2009; Opfer & Pedder, 2011). In this study, we propose a model to broaden the conceptionof impact studies to account for several components that influence both what and how teachers learn anddevelop in their profession. Specific attention to teachers’ appropriation of pedagogical tools will be used as anexample of this broadening. If teachers are so essential to student learning as research suggests, then attention toteachers’ learning, development, and well-being are equally important to consider.Literature ReviewThe last decade of research on teacher effectiveness has provided important insight into factors that have thepotential to improve teaching and in turn impact student achievement, such as opportunities to collaborate and afocus on student learning outcomes (Guskey, 2002; Thompson, Windschitl, & Braaten, 2012). Three of the maincontributions from this literature are the knowledge that most teachers experience professional development ona regular basis, but what that looks like varies across school contexts (Garet et al., 2001; Vescio, Ross, &Adams, 2008), the establishment of an empirical base for what makes for effective professional development(Darling-Hammond et al., 2009; Desimone et al., 2002; Garet et al., 2001), and the conclusion that professionaldevelopment can impact student achievement (Darling-Hammond, 2000; Guskey, 2002; Wallace, 2009).ICLS 2014 Proceedings418© ISLSDespite these contributions, these studies are also limiting in that they do not capture what and howteachers learn, or the sort of useable knowledge they develop for their teaching. They also neglect how the local,school, and district contexts influenced teachers’ ability to take up the ideas they learned in professionaldevelopment for their practice over time. Teaching is a complex activity. It requires an extensive knowledgebase about teaching, content, learners, and school contexts (Shulman, 1986), development of beliefs andidentities as teachers (Richardson, 1996), and constant improvement of teaching practices through criticalanalysis and reflection. As Schoenfeld (2011) argues, learning to teach, and developing expertise in teachingtakes time and is slow to develop.Impact studies fail to take the complexity and time investment of learning to teach into account andthus often find selected outcomes (i.e., student achievement) plateau or fade after the initial year(s) ofprofessional development (Borman, 2005). Moreover, institutional memory and the expectations that arise outof the cultures of schools also influence the impact of professional development on teachers’ practice(Grossman, Smagorinsky, & Valencia, 1999). As with any reform, policy climates change, schools responddifferently, and interpret initiatives to meet their context. Thus, another reason why meaningful learning gainsmay not be sustained is that the designs do not account for the complexity of schools responding to policyclimates, the challenges of building a climate of learning and improvement for all students, and school leadersguiding teachers in focused improvement on teaching practice (McLaughlin & Talbert, 2006).PDTeachingStudent AchievementFigure 1. Limited Conception of Impact of Professional DevelopmentIn sum, research on the effectiveness of professional development on student achievement attempt tostreamline the impact process, but do not currently account for the complexity of teacher learning and changingteaching practices (Opfer & Pedder, 2011). Figure 1 illustrates this limited conceptual model for studying theimpact of professional development. In this model, the teacher is largely absent. Instead, the focus is on studentoutcomes, and teachers’ practice (teaching) is used to explain these results. To put it another way, theprofessional development program is designed to leverage certain teaching practices that have been identified toimprove student achievement. Often times, these practices are advocated for without attention to the context ofwhere these practices will be enacted or by whom. If student achievement improves then the professionaldevelopment program is seen as successful; however, these successes may ignore other important factors thataccount for their success such as contextual factors, particularly teachers, their experiences, and learning.CognitionEnactmentContextTeacher & Teacher LearningPDTeachingStudent Learning &AchievementTimeFigure 2. Expanded Conception of Teacher DevelopmentImportantly, across much of this research, studies of teacher learning are largely absent and littleresearch examines how teachers were supported while they implemented new teaching practices (Penuel,Gallagher, & Moorthy, 2011). The model we propose (see Figure 2) incorporates many of the factors wedescribed that operate to influence teacher learning. These factors include:••Teachers’ cognition, including knowledge, beliefs, and identity;Teachers’ local enactment of practices promoted in professional development;ICLS 2014 Proceedings419© ISLS••The local, state, and national policy context, as well as the school culture and community onteachers’ learning;Time invested for sustained change in teaching and student learningIn this model, the link between professional development, teaching and student achievement remains. However,additional elements are incorporated to expand the conceptualization of how researchers and policy makersshould seek to understand the impact of professional development on teachers. Moreover, in this model, wehighlight the reciprocity between these elements. We ground our argument using research on how learningoccurs in the interactions that take place among multiple reference points. These reference points includeteacher cognition, teacher enactment, and teacher context which are understood as developing and interactingwith each other over time. The following paragraphs provide a brief, but concise review of why these factorsmatter for research on teachers participating in professional development, with specific attention to teachers’appropriation of pedagogical tools.Research in teacher education shows that knowledge for teaching matters and plays a significant role ininfluencing student learning (Hill et al., 2008). Shulman’s (1987) seminal work identifies at least seven differenttypes of knowledge that teachers need to develop to be effective and highlight how they are inter-related anddifficult to develop. Teacher beliefs are another aspect of teacher cognition that influences teaching (Pajares,1992; Richardson, 1996; Stipek et al., 2001). Richardson (1996) underscores the fact that teacher beliefs arestrong and enduring and develop from different life experiences that can either be personal, experienced duringschooling, or developed in formalized settings such as in their teacher education programs and drives behavior.In regards to teacher enactment, we also adopt Shulman’s (1987) vision of teaching and teachereducation, arguing that teachers are professionals who are capable of “enacting –of acting in a manner that isself-conscious with respect to what their act is…” (p. 13). In other words, teachers do not just do what others tellthem to do nor do they simply adopt the strategies they learned as students; rather, they are aware of theirthinking as they teach and they make conscious decisions about their practice based on what they know andbelieve (Schoenfeld, 2011). Consistent with Shulman (1987) and the situative perspective (Wenger, 2010), theprocess in which this change happens can be characterized as an appropriation for practice. Appropriation(Rogoff, 1995) refers “to the process by which individuals transform their understanding of and responsibilityfor activities through their own participation” (p. 147) in group settings. The interactions that occur during thesejoint activities shape both the group and community as a whole, as well as the individual. This individualshaping is the appropriation process. During this process individuals discuss and come to agree on sharedunderstandings around particular artifacts, processes, and language and take what is most useful for them duringan activity to serve their own purposes. Their knowledge and beliefs also shape what they come to appropriate(Rogoff, 1990). In the context of professional development, even though the group may have an agreement,each individual will come to appropriate tools from professional development differently (Grossman,Smagorinsky, & Valencia, 1999). In other words, teachers will modify and adapt what they learn in professionaldevelopment based on their knowledge, beliefs, and context (Grossman, Smagorinsky, & Valencia, 1999;Rogoff, 1995). In some cases, the intent remains (Neuman & Cunningham, 2009) and in other cases, teachersgreatly modify the information learned and their interpretation of the practice is not in the spirit of the originalprofessional development program (Brown & Campione, 1996).Related to teacher enactment is the idea of tools assisting teachers in their teaching. Situated learningtheory explains that tools embody knowledge valued by their creators and community of users (Pea, 1993).However, individuals take them up and use them in ways that are most suited to their needs. Curriculummaterials are one example. Remillard’s (2005) review of curriculum use explains that historically, curriculummaterials have been viewed as a means to reform teaching practice. However, research on curriculum usereveals mixed findings. Some research suggests that teachers embrace new materials, while others reject andsubvert the goals of curriculum. Remillard (2005) proposes that this is the case because the “teacher-curriculumrelationship is intertwined with other teacher practices, is dependent on the particular teacher and curriculum,and is situated in a specified context” (p. 212). Attending to this relationship is necessary for understanding thesuccess of materials to transform teaching.Research on teacher cognition and teacher enactment draws attention to the individual teacher. A thirdaspect we include in the model is the context in which the teacher is situated. Here, we draw attention to theinfluence of the professional development contexts, the organizational contexts, and the policy contexts onteacher learning and changes in practice (Talbert & McLaughlin, 1994). Situated learning theory posits thatteachers are nested in contexts and within each context they must learn to negotiate the “rules” for each. Eachcontext can be considered as a system with inherent goals. However, actors within these systems also must worktogether to create mutually negotiated practices that are within cultural norms and boundaries, are agreed upon,and concrete.One of the criticisms of current studies of the impact of professional development on students is thatthey are limited in timeframe (Baker et al., 2010). That is, these studies look at the year that teachers are inICLS 2014 Proceedings420© ISLSprofessional development and then look at test scores or teacher change in practice that same year. Thepresumption behind these studies is that professional development will impact student learning in that sameyear. However, Richardson and Placier (2001) point out that teacher change is neither linear nor predictable butis rather more idiosyncratic and can take years to manifest in practice. Webster-Wright (2009) also argues thatprofessional development studies need to consider what it takes for authentic teacher learning, citing that time isan essential need and that teacher learning is an indefinite process. Darling-Hammond et al. (2009), Garet et al.(2001), Guskey (2002), and Hawley and Valli (1999) identified the need for sustained and supportedprofessional development opportunities that are beyond one-shot workshops (Goldenberg & Gallimore, 1991).Thus, we argue that studies of the effectiveness of professional development on student achievement andlearning take into account time for teacher learning that includes teacher cognition, enactment, and contexts.Situated learning theory suggests that learning is not unidirectional. Instead, the communities in whichpeople participate both shape and are shaped by the members of the group (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989).Additionally, Kazemi and Hubbard (2008) argue that research attend to the co-evolution of teachers’participation across contexts. That is, they contend that teachers will take up what they learn in professionaldevelopment in different ways and thus changes in practice will vary across participants. Because of thisvariation, they will bring back to subsequent professional development activities different experiences, whichwill influence how and what they learn in future professional development activities. The model we proposegives attention to this movement because it is critical for understanding if and how teachers are impacted byprofessional development and thus improve student learning.Finally, this model adds student learning as an additional outcome of interest. While studentachievement is critical, current approaches to measuring achievement are narrow in focus (Baker et al., 2010).Additionally, current conceptions of learning suggest that learning is not just about pieces of knowledge, butalso includes how learners manage their learning and knowing, how they develop practices for participating in acommunity, and how they learn to use tools and resources for productive participation (Brown, Collins, &Duguid, 1989). These dimensions are needed in studies of the impact of professional development on teachersand students because without acknowledging these dimensions as critical components, professionaldevelopment initiatives have little chance of having a lasting influence (Borko, 2004; Desimone, 2009).Study ContextFor this qualitative study, we utilize our expanded conception of teacher development (see Figure 2, above) toframe our study on the impact of a two year professional development program, the Pathway Project, onteachers’ appropriation of tools, namely, cognitive strategies for reading and writing analytically. Cognitivestrategies are conceptual tools and processes that can help students become more meta-cognitive about theirwork (Olson & Land, 2007). In her book, The Reading/Writing Connection, Olson (2011) likens the cognitivestrategies as tools within a tool kit where they are drawn upon depending on the task at hand. Some cognitivestrategies introduced in the Pathway Project include planning and goal setting, tapping prior knowledge,revising meaning, adopting an alignment, and making connections.These strategies are disseminated through teacher professional development. The intent of the programis to provide teachers with lessons and materials to introduce the cognitive strategies to students towards theintended goal of writing analytical essays around either fiction or non-fiction texts, collaboration and support inthe use of cognitive strategies, and additional literacy professional development such as strategies on how toteach poetry, use Socratic seminars, or developing academic vocabulary. This professional developmentprogram is the perfect context for us to study the following question: How do teachers appropriate and enact thePathway Project tools for use in their teaching of writing over time?The teachers in this study come from the two lowest-performing middle schools from an urban schooldistrict serving a majority population of under-represented minorities (98% Latino; 88% low-income; 80%English language learners [ELL]; and 74% qualify for free and reduced price lunches [FRPL]). The two middleschools are Lion Middle School (ELL: 59%; FRPL: 92%) and Sparrow Middle School (ELL: 56%; FRPL:92%). The entire English language arts department from both schools participated in three professionaldevelopment contexts for two years, during Academic Years 2011-2012 and 2012-2013. Each year, 32 teachersattended a series of 6 full release days, a series of 5 two-hour after school workshops, and 36 weekly grade-levelmeetings involving on-going professional development around the Common Core State Standards, cognitivestrategies use, and instruction around analytical writing. Of note is the fact that a total of 48 unique teachersparticipated in the Pathway Project, but only 17 teachers were able to participate in the Pathway Project for twoyears with 15 teachers laid-off the first year of participation and 15 new teachers hired during the second year ofparticipation. Data will only come from teachers who participated both years.Data SourcesApproaching this question requires comprehensive qualitative data analysis using a variety of sources of data tounderstand how the teachers’ understood the intent behind the Pathway Project tools as well as how they takeICLS 2014 Proceedings421© ISLSthem up and use them in their teaching. The data sources for this study consisted of two years of field notes ofthe professional development settings, 80 observational protocols from literacy coaches, 34 teacher self-reportsduring written reflections, and 6 teacher focus group interviews. The field notes came from 12 full release daysand a series of 10 two-hour after school workshops over two years. The protocols were conducted on randomannounced days by two literacy coaches. Their feedback came in the form of letters that outlined what learningactivities took place during instruction and how the teachers incorporated or did not incorporate the PathwayProject tools while teaching. The teacher self-reports were reflections on the Pathway Project, what tools theyused from the Pathway Project, which tools they found the most valuable, and how their teaching has changedas a result of the Pathway Project. Finally, the focus group interviews were conducted at the end of each year ofimplementation. They were done in grade level groups and addressed the affordances and limitations of thePathway Project on the teachers’ instruction.Analytic MethodsAnalysis was done in three phases. During the first phase a comprehensive list of tools, lessons, and materialsprovided to teachers during professional development meetings was generated through field notes, theobservational protocols, and questions from teacher reflections practice surveys. The three types of toolsidentified in this phase include tangible tools, conceptual tools, and experiential tools (e.g., unit and lessonplans). During the second phase, the first author coded the 80 feedback letters from the literacy coaches for all17 teachers and traced the presence of the tools identified during the first phase and noted how they were beingused. The first author also used the surveys and the focus group interviews collected during both years for allteachers to triangulate the data. In the third phase, the first author qualitatively analyzed how these tools wereappropriated, adapted, or adopted by comparing their enactment to field notes of how these tools were meant tobe used when introduced during the professional development days. After analysis, the second author pushed forconfirming and disconfirming evidence as well as for robust examples of these appropriations to developvalidity across the data set.We approached the data with a top down, bottom up approach and analyzing them for concepts (Corbin& Strauss, 2008) by considering how a wide range of tools are used or not used, when they are used, and to whatextent they were appropriated from the Pathway Project to understand the degree in which the principles behindthese tools have been internalized when in practice (Rogoff, 1990). Moreover, we also characterized how theteachers utilized these tools in different ways by triangulating their use with other data and constantlycomparing their use (Miles & Huberman, 1994) with, for example, the focus group interviews or teacherreflection surveys. In this study we also move beyond the five levels of appropriation that Grossman,Smagorinsky, and Valencia (1999) proposed as a framework to study teachers’ appropriation of tools. Thoughthe levels are a good guide, we argue that a more comprehensive understanding of how teachers appropriatetools and for what purposes is more useful in designing professional development for teachers.ResultsIn general, there were five distinct patterns in which the teachers appropriated the Pathway Project tools. Thefive patterns are grouped around the purposes for appropriation: appropriation as organizing student learning,appropriation as incorporating competing professional development goals, appropriation as accommodation ofstudent learning needs, appropriation as addressing gaps in the curriculum, and appropriation as engagingstudents. The following paragraphs provide examples of how teachers appropriated the Pathway Project tools inthese ways, demonstrating the complexity of enacting professional development.Appropriation as Organizing Student LearningThe majority of appropriations came in the form of teachers creating different tools pulling disparatecomponents of the Pathway Project tools together into packets that walked students through the reading,interpreting, and writing of complex textual analysis emphasizing the use of cognitive strategies, graphicorganizers, writing prompts, and essay components. Other ways they organized their students’ learning wascreating a check list of tasks, rearranging the sequence of the curriculum, or only using the basic components ofa curriculum to address the demands of time and pacing.Appropriation as Incorporating Competing Professional Development GoalsWhile the Pathway Project tool was an important focus for the teachers in this study, their district also had otherprofessional goals for the teachers. In order to address the demands of both the Pathway Project and their otherprofessional development activities, some teachers would combine different tools together to meet thesedemands. For example, thinking maps and graphic organizers, a district-wide initiative, were incorporated intothe texts that the teachers were given from the Pathway Project. Other teachers would also use the cognitivestrategies with Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocols (Echevarria, Short, & Powers, 2006).ICLS 2014 Proceedings422© ISLSAppropriation as Accommodation of Student Learning NeedsAnother prevalent pattern of appropriation was adjusting the Pathway Project tools as accommodating studentlearning needs. A common theme from the focus group interviews revealed that the teachers felt the tools fromthe Pathway Project were too advanced for the majority of their students who were either English languagelearners, special-needs students, or below grade level in terms of reading and writing. They would often changethe complexity of the curriculum materials by reducing the cognitive demands of writing prompts, by replacingtexts given to them with other texts with less demanding language, by chunking lessons across multiple daysrather than one single day as they were intended to be given, and by creating new tools with more scaffolds thanwere given to them.Appropriation as Addressing Gaps in the CurriculumSome teachers also addressed gaps in the curriculum given to the teachers. The curriculum from the PathwayProject addressed the teaching of analytical writing, specifically through the analysis of theme in both fictionand non-fiction texts. The curriculum also included ways to scaffold students in the different components of ananalytical essay, such as an introduction, body paragraphs, conclusion, a thesis about the theme, and textualevidence. These lessons all used different texts to be taught over two or three days. Some of the teachers felt thatthe curriculum was not comprehensive enough and would develop other tools or materials to address such gaps.For example, a teacher created a protocol for her students to use when engaging in Socratic Seminars. Theprotocol addressed students’ participation norms and sentence starters to use when discussing their text. Thisprotocol was not given to the teachers by the Pathway Project facilitators. Other tools were created to addresscontent standards, to expand concepts, and to scaffold students even more than what was covered by thePathway Project curriculum.Appropriation as Engaging StudentsFinally, many teachers were concerned about the complexity level of the materials disengaging students soincorporated technology, created new tools to capture student interests, and developed games incorporating thePathway Project tools for students. For example, another teacher developed a matching game for students toidentify and define what the cognitive strategies were. Other teachers incorporated the cognitive strategies intosilent reading activities or when discussing other types of writing.DiscussionThe students of the 17 teachers in this study incorporated many aspects of the Pathway Project curriculum andtools in their teaching. Many of them latched on to the tangible tools they were given such as cognitivestrategies posters, book marks with sentence starters, and color-coding strategies that helped their studentsrecognize gaps in their writing if they lacked textual evidence or commentary. What also resonated with theteachers was a process approach to writing and the meta-cognitive ways to engage with the texts they use intheir curriculum. Thus, the teachers learned how to teach their students through appropriating the various toolsfrom the Pathway Project. Separate analysis of the students’ writing from these 17 teachers showedimprovement in terms of the quality of their writing and quantity of their writing. In this regard, the teachers’appropriation of the Pathway Project tools led to an improvement in student learning around analytical writing.However, due to the limitations of the data we cannot attribute this improvement to just the Pathway Projectcurriculum. More systematic collection of data is needed to understand what aspects of the Pathway Project toolinfluenced the teachers’ teaching and what other parts of their professional lives impacted their teaching. Thislimitation demonstrates the complexity that is learning from professional development.ConclusionThe teachers appropriated the Pathway Project tools for different purposes and demonstrated the complexity ofteacher learning through their enactment of the Pathway Project tools. The teachers became a Pathway Projectteacher through their participation across two years. The teachers had to makes sense of the tools they weregiven and adopt and adapt them as they saw fit to meet their students’ learning needs and to meet the needs ofother professional development initiatives. The findings from this study demonstrate how complex teacherlearning is and how professional development can trace that learning. Moreover, by using appropriation as onecomponent of this complex endeavor, and demonstrating the varied ways teachers do so, this study moves thefield beyond the levels of appropriation to consider the purposes of appropriation and the affordances andlimitations of such appropriations on students’ learning.Teachers are the main vehicle in which education policy is enacted. Without attending to their learning,such as how they appropriate tools from professional development, sustained improvements in education cannotoccur. Moreover, systematic understanding of the impact professional development has on different domains isalso needed. Teaching is a complex practice. Research needs to acknowledge the complexity of teaching andrecognize that just bringing teachers together is not enough. Rather, a holistic and comprehensive view ofICLS 2014 Proceedings423© ISLSteaching is needed. This study adds to our understanding of the impact of professional development on teachers,their learning, and ultimately their students’ learning as a complex endeavor that is worthy to be studied throughcareful analysis of teachers’ appropriation of tools and the factors that influence this process.ReferencesBaker, E.L., Barton, P.E., Darling-Hammond, L., Haertel, E., Ladd, H.F., Linn, R., Ravitch, D., Rothstein, R.,Shavelson, R.J., & Shepard, L.A. (2010). Problems with the use of student test scores to evaluateteachers. Washington, DC: EPI Briefing Paper.Ball, D. L., & Forzani, F. M. (2011, Summer). Building a common core for learning to teach, and connectingprofessional learning to practice. American Educator, 35(2), 17-21.Borko, H. (2004). Professional development and teacher learning: Mapping the terrain. EducationalResearcher, 33(8), 3-15.Borman, G.D. (2005). National efforts to bring reform to scale in high-poverty schools: Outcomes andimplications. Review of Research in Education, 29, 1-27.Brown, A.L. & Campione, J.C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learningenvironments: On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble& R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovation inlearning (pp. 289-326). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Brown, J.S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32-42.Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2008). Basics of qualitative research (3rd edition). Los Angeles, CA: SAGEPublications.Darling-Hammond, L. (2000). Teacher quality and student achievement. Education Policy Analysis Archives,8(1), 1-44.Darling-Hammond, L., Wei, R.C., Andree, A., Richardson, N., & Orphanos, S. (2009). State of the profession:Study measures status of professional development. Journal of Staff Development, 30(2), 42-50.Desimone, L.M. (2009). Improving impact studies of teachers’ professional development: Towards betterconceptualizations and measures. Educational Researcher, 38(3), 181-199.Desimone, L.M., Porter, A.C., Garet, M.S., Yoon, K.S., & Birman, B.F. (2002). Effects of professionaldevelopment on teachers’ instruction: Results from a three-year longitudinal study. EducationalEvaluation and Policy Analysis, 24(2), 81-112.Echevarria, J., Short, D., & Powers, K. (2006). School reform and standards-based education: A model forEnglish-language learners. The Journal of Educational Research, 99(4), 195-211.Garet, M., Porter, A., Desimone, L., Birman, B., & Yoon, K.S. (2001). What makes professional developmenteffective? Results from a national sample of teachers. American Educational Research Journal, 38(4),915-945.Goldenberg, C., & Gallimore, R. (1991). Changing teaching takes more than a one-shot workshop. EducationalLeadership, 49(3), 69-72.Grosman, P., Smagorinsky, P., & Valencia, S. (1999). Appropriating conceptual and pedagogical tools forteaching English: A conceptual framework for studying professional development. National ResearchCenter on English Learning and Achievement, Report #12011.Guskey, T.R. (2002). Does it make a difference? Evaluating professional development. EducationalLeadership, 59(6), 45-51.Hawley, W. D., &Valli, L. (1999). The essentials of effective professional development: A new consensus. InL. Darling Hammond & G. Sykes (Eds.), Teaching as the learning profession: Handbook of policy andpractice (pp. 127-150). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Hill, H.C., Blunk, M. Charalambous, C., Lewis, J., Phelps, G. C. Sleep, L. & Ball, D. L. (2008). MathematicalKnowledge for Teaching and the Mathematical Quality of Instruction: An exploratory study. Cognitionand Instruction, 26(4), 430-511.Kazemi , E., & Hubbard, A. (2008). New directions for the design and study of professional development:Attending to the coevolution of teachers’ participation across contexts. Journal of Teacher Education,59(5), 428-441.McLaughlin, M.W., & Talbert, J.E. (2006). Building school-based teacher learning communities: Professionalstrategies to improve student achievement. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.Miles, M.B., & Huberman, A.M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook (2nd edition).Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.Morris, A. K., & Hiebert, J. (2011). Creating shared instructional products: An alternative approach toimproving teaching. Educational Researcher, 40, 5-14.Neuman, S.B., & Cunningham, L. (2009). The impact of professional development and coaching on earlylanguage and literacy instructional practices. American Educational Research Journal, 46(2), 532-566.ICLS 2014 Proceedings424© ISLSNye, B., Konstantopoulos, S., & Hedges, L.V. (2004). ‘How large are teacher effects?’ Educational Evaluationand Policy Analysis, 26, 237-257.Olson, C.B. (2011). The reading/writing connection: Strategies for teaching and learning in the secondaryclassroom (3rd edition). Boston, MA: Pearson, Inc.Olson, C.B., & Land, R. (2007). A cognitive strategies approach to reading and writing instruction for EnglishLanguage Learners in secondary school. Research in the Teaching of English, 41(3), 269- 303.Opfer, V.D., & Pedder, D. (2011). Conceptualizing teacher professional learning. Review of EducationalResearch, 81(3), 376-407.Pajares, M.F. (1992). Teachers’ beliefs and educational research: Cleaning up a messy construct. Review ofEducational Research, 62(3), 307-332.Pea, R. (1993).Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.), DistributedCognitions: Psychological and Educational Considerations, (pp. 47-87). Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Penuel, W.R., Gallagher, L.P., & Moorthy, S. (2011). Preparing teachers to design sequences of instruction inEarth systems science: A comparison of three professional development programs. AmericanEducational Research Journal, 48(4), 996-1025.Remillard, J.T. (2005). Examining key concepts in research on teachers’ use of mathematics curricula. Reviewof Educational Research, 75(2), 211-246.Richardson, V. (1996).The role of attitudes and beliefs in learning to teach. In J. Sikula, T. Buttery, & E. Guyton(Eds.), Handbooks of Research on Teacher Education (pp.102-119). New York: Simon & SchusterMacmillan.Richardson, V., & Placier, P. (2001). Teacher change. In V. Richardson (Ed.) Handbook of Research onTeaching (4th Edition, pp. 905-947). Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. New York, NY: OxfordUniversity Press.Rogoff, B. (1995). Observing sociocultural activity on three planes: Participatory appropriation, guidedparticipation, and apprenticeship. In J. V. Wertsch, del Rio, P., & Alvarez, A. (Eds.), Socioculturalstudies of mind (pp. 139-164). New York: Cambridge University Press.Schoenfeld, A.H. (2011). Toward professional development for teachers grounded in a theory of decisionmaking. ZDM Mathematics Education, 43, 457-469.Shulman, L. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2), 414.Shulman, L. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard Educational Review,57(1), 1-21.Stipek, D.J., Givven, K.B., Salmon, J.M., & MacGyvers, V.L. (2001). Teachers’ beliefs and practices related tomathematics instruction. Teaching and Teacher Education, 213-226.Talbert, J.E., & McLaughlin, M.W. (1994). Teacher professionalism in local school contexts. American Journalof Education, 102(2), 123-153.Thompson, J., Windschitl, M., & Braaten, M. (2012). Developing a theory of ambitious early-career teacherpractice. American Educational Research Journal. doi:10.3102/0002831213476334Vescio, V., Ross, D., & Adams, A. (2008). A review of research on the impact of professional learningcommunities on teaching practice and student learning. Teacher and Teacher Education, 24, 80-91.vonZastrow, C. (2010). Making professional development investments that matter. Learning First. Retrievedfrom http://www.learningfirst.org/making-professional-development-investments-matterWallace, M. (2009). Making sense of the links: Professional development, teacher practices, and studentachievement. Teachers College Record, 111(2), 573-596.Webster-Wright, A. (2009). Reframing professional development through understanding authentic professionallearning. Review of Educational Research, 79(2), 702-739.Wenger, E. (2010) Communities of practice and social learning systems: the career of a concept. In C.Blackmore (Ed.) Social Learning Systems and communities of practice. Springer Verlag and the OpenUniversity.Yoon, K.S., Duncan, T., Lee, S.W.-Y., Scarloss, B., & Shapley, K. (2007).Reviewing the evidence on howteacher professional development affects student achievement (Issues &Answers Report, REL 2007No. 033). Washington, DC: US Department of Education, Institute of Education SciencesICLS 2014 Proceedings425© ISLS