Teachers Becoming (Temporary) Engineers to Become BetterTeachersAyesha Livingston, Jamie Collins, Ara Kooser, & Vanessa Svihla, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque,NM, 87131ayeshaliv@gmail.com, jamiemae.collins@gmail.com, ghashsnaga@gmail.com, vsvihla@unm.eduAbstract: The new science standards incorporate engineering practices, but few teachers areprepared to enact these. This poster presents preliminary findings from professionaldevelopment that placed 14 teachers in university engineering labs for six weeks, trackingchanges in their understanding of STEM practices, their designs for their classrooms, and theimpact on their students. Preliminary findings demonstrate deepened teacher understanding ofSTEM practices and that their students begin with notions that do not match STEM practices.Major Issues AddressedAn increasing focus on engineering practices is evident in the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS),(National Research Council, 2012). However, teachers are unprepared to enact these practices; few teachershave experience in engineering.SignificanceThis study builds on and extends what is known about how teachers and their students learn engineeringpractices and develop STEM identities. Engaging teachers in advanced STEM research can provide them with adeeper understanding of STEM and renew their enthusiasm for teaching, but can be difficult to bring back to theclassroom (Blanchard, Southerland, & Granger, 2008; Johnston, 2003). The latter is crucial because researchhas shown that students who have an understanding of the core disciplinary practices- in this case, design- arelikelier to persist through a challenging course of study (Stevens, O’Connor, Garrison, Jocuns, & Amos, 2008).Learning is a coupled act of identity; who you are affects what you learn, but what you learn changeswho you are (Wortham, 2006). Authentic experiences support the development of engineering (Pierrakos,Beam, Constantz, Johri, & Anderson, 2009). We build on past research to investigate how engineering practiceswere taken up by teachers and their students, and how STEM identities developed.Methodological ApproachParticipants and SettingParticipants include K-12 teachers and their students. At the time of writing, consent forms for teachers are stillbeing returned, with a maximum sample size of 14. Teachers were recruited from rural and urban schoolsserving students traditionally underserved and underrepresented in engineering. As part of the applicationprocess, they submitted a letter from their principal committing to allow the teachers to implement project-basedengineering units in their classrooms. The teachers spent six weeks in a university engineering lab conductingresearch as a lab member and designing project-based units to bring the lab experience back to their schools.They were provided seven days of professional development on designing relevant project-based units.Measures and AnalysisThe teachers completed a daily end-of-day survey to provide brief snapshots of their experiences andinformation about with whom they interacted; this will be analyzed using social network analysis and opencoding. They also completed a pre and post survey that provided a detailed picture of their understanding ofSTEM practices (150 questions, with 20 constructed response items). The teachers are providing deidentifiedreports of student responses to a shorter survey that asks related questions. To date, two teachers have providedthese data and analysis of all data is in progress.The survey given to the students asked four open-ended questions: how they thought the work they didin their classes mimicked what an engineer did, what they might be doing if they were scientists working in alab like the one their teachers visited, and they were asked to define science and engineering. Likert-stylequestions included items that asked the students to rate their understanding of what they did in the classroom,how much the teacher guided their inquiries, and about their future intentions of going into the STEM fields.Likert items were analyzed using basic descriptive statistics and will be compared to post-unit responses andteacher responses. Open coding of the qualitative data is ongoing.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1625© ISLSFindings, Conclusions, and ImplicationsPreliminary findings suggest that the research experiences teachers had varied by lab. Some mentors wereexcited to have a teacher present, while others were not. The teachers all learned a great deal about social normsand the realities of lab work, including: (1) lab work occurred in evenings and weekends, but rarely in the earlymorning hours the teachers preferred to keep; (2) much time is spent waiting for experiments to happen; (3)equipment and materials are highly specialized and costly and require training prior to use; (4) the experimentsthey conducted led to highly specific, complicated results. They therefore initially struggled with how to bringthe experience back to their classrooms. Because the professional development also focused on ways to makeSTEM practices meaningful and relevant, most teachers found ways to accomplish this in their unit designs.Preliminary analysis of student surveys completed prior to the units indicate that few students areinterested in becoming STEM professionals (Figure 1). Student descriptions of what it would be like to be in thelab revealed an understanding based in school experience, with little understanding of STEM practices:• “I imagine it would be a lot like class; people would tell me what to do and I would have a littlefreedom to learn by myself.”• “It would be very interesting but it would be the same that we are doing in our labs. But withbigger problems to solve.”• “I think it would be really high tech and nice looking. I would just be helping to keep it nicelooking.”Figure 1. Student responses to “In future, I would like to be a ____”The poster will present detailed cases following the teachers from the research lab to their classrooms,connecting teachers’ beliefs to changes in student understanding of STEM practices.Connection to Conference ThemeThis on-going work is strongly connected to the conference theme, Learning and Becoming in Practice.Preliminary findings suggest that teachers –even with no prior experience in engineering—can learn by beingplaced in an engineering lab. By temporarily becoming engineering lab members, they developed strongeridentities as teachers who can engage their students in STEM practices.ReferencesBlanchard, M. R., Southerland, S. A., & Granger, E. M. (2008). No silver bullet for inquiry: Making sense ofteacher change following an inquiry-based research experience for teachers. Science Education, 93(2),322-360.Johnston, C. S. C. (2003). Translating the RET Experience to the Classroom. Paper presented at the Assessing,Determining, and Measuring the Impacts of the Research Experience, San Francisco.National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. In Committee on Conceptual Framework for the New K-12 ScienceEducation Standards, Board on Science Education & Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences andEducation (Eds.). Washington DC: The National Academies Press.Pierrakos, O., Beam, T. K., Constantz, J., Johri, A., & Anderson, R. (2009). On the development of aprofessional identity: engineering persisters vs engineering switchers. Paper presented at the Frontiersin Education Conference, 2009. FIE'09. 39th IEEE.Stevens, R., O’Connor, K., Garrison, L., Jocuns, A., & Amos, D. M. (2008). Becoming an engineer: Toward athree dimensional view of engineering learning. Journal of Engineering Education, 97(3), 355-368.Wortham, S. (2006). Learning identity. New York: Cambridge University Press.AcknowledgmentsThe authors would like to acknowledge funding for this research (NSF #EEC1301373).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1626© ISLS