Fusing a Crosscutting Concept, Science Practice, and aDisciplinary Core Idea in Single Learning ProgressionHayat Hokayem, Texas Christian University, 3000 Bellaire N, Fort Worth, TX, 76129, h.hokayem@tcu.eduAmelia Wenk Gotwals, Michigan State University, 325 Erickson Hall, East Lansing, MI, 48824,gotwals@msu.eduAbstract: In this paper, we report on a learning progression that fuses systemic reasoning(cross-cutting concept) and ecology (core idea) in what we call “ecological systemicreasoning”. We used semi-structured interviews with 44 students (1st through 4th grades). Theresults revealed that a hypothetical learning progression begins with anthropomorphicreasoning as the lower anchor and ends with complex causal reasoning as the upper anchor forstudents in this age.Project BackgroundRecently, learning progressions (“descriptions of successively more sophisticated ways of thinking about a topicthat can follow one another as children learn about and investigate a topic over a broad span of time”, NRC,2007, p. 214) have been used to examine how students learn over time. For example, Songer et al. (2009)describe an empirically based, fused learning progression for ecology and scientific explanations used to guidethe development of curricula and assessment items for elementary students (grades 4th – 6th). Although thisfusion approach gives important insights into students’ developing abilities to fuse disciplinary core ideas and ascience practice, they did not take into consideration a holistic approach that fuses the systems thinking as across cutting concept with ecology as a disciplinary core idea as students explain phenomena (a sciencepractice). Grotzer and Bell (2003) showed that 3rd graders can learn to reason in more sophisticated ways whentaught explicitly about causal reasoning. However, many students still lagged behind in understanding the globalpicture of species interdependency. Therefore, more empirical work is required to understand how youngerstudents reason about species interdependency in ecosystems, specifically before formal instruction. This studybuilds on the literature in two ways: (1) it explores students’ reasoning of ecosystems before instruction and (2)it uses the systemic reasoning approach to identify a hypothetical learning progression for students’ systemicreasoning in domain specific content.Chandler and Boutilier (1992) proposed a hypothetical reasoning model that applies to open systems,“dynamic system reasoning.” They proposed four properties for systemic reasoning: (1) systemic synthesis: i.e.,understanding that a change in one component affects others; (2) systemic analysis: i.e., there are criticalelements (like water molecules or sun) that are essential for the system (e.g., hydrologic system) to work andthey are different from incidental elements (e.g., storms); (3) circular connectivity: which is the opposite ofsystemic synthesis where the students are asked to make the system from the independent elements; (4) dynamicrecycling: i.e. molecules do not exit from the system but instead keep circulating in it. When examiningwhether students’ systems reasoning was ontologically different from Piaget’s formal operational reasoning orwhether it is a kind of reasoning that develops at the “heels of Piaget’s formal operational reasoning,” theyfound out that there were significant statistical differences between the two kinds of reasoning. That is, students’performance on the dynamic system reasoning task was a separate “ontogenic” category different from that ofPiaget’s. Building on Chandler and Boutilier’s framework, we have adopted two categories of systemicreasoning (circular connectivity and systemic synthesis) and developed a hypothetical learning progression forthose two categories. Note, that we also studied the learning progression for the other two categories, but due tospace limitations, we focus on those two categories because they required students to utilize two opposite skills:one of constructing the ecosystem from individual components, and one of analyzing the components a preexisting system. To organize the study, we pose the following research question:What are the patterns in 1st to 4th grade students’ systems reasoning with regard to constructing acomplex food web (circular connectivity), and with regard to relating the effect of changing one population onothers in the food web (systemic synthesis)?Method and Data AnalysisThe participants in this study were 44 1st through 4th grade students in a suburban Midwestern school. We usedsemi-structured interviews to probe students’ ideas about each of the four systemic reasoning categories. Allinterviews were transcribed verbatim and then the transcripts were checked against the recording. We had aniterative process of several rounds of coding: we first started by looking at students’ answers, took a smallsample and used constant comparative method (Strauss & Corbin, 1998) to derive general codes about studentsreasoning in the system. After deriving initial codes, we went back to the data and re-coded students answersICLS 2014 Proceedings1503© ISLSaccordingly and then went back to refine our codes, in an iterative process consistent with the learningprogression approach (Collins et al., 2004).	  Findings and ImplicationsThe results of this study revealed 5 levels in the hypothetical learning progression for systemic reasoning: thelower anchor (level 1) was anthropomorphic reasoning where students where students projected humancharacteristics or personal liking to their reasoning with no reference to any external mechanism or cause. Level1.5 was anthropocentric reasoning where students related their choices and reasoning to what they were used toin real life: they still did not utilize an external mechanism that considered underlying causes of the event, but atthe same time, they did not relate the reasoning to personal liking of human characteristics. Instead theyreasoned from their common everyday experiences. Level 2 was simple causal reasoning where studentsidentified one external factor that was influenced by the change. Level 3 was semi-complex causal reasoningwhich took into account more than one external factor affecting the phenomena, but at the same time did notrecognize how all populations influence each other. The upper anchor, level 4, was one where studentsrecognized the network of relations in the system.The results of this study revealed that many students could reason about ecosystems before exposed toformal instruction. The concentration on shelter as a condition to construct an environment concurs with Lehrerand Schauble’s (2012) finding that elementary students’ conception of ecology in general starts withanthropomorphic reasoning and develops to consider shelter as an important factor and moves on to add factorsreasoning about the influence of changing one population on all populations of the ecosystem. Moreover,similar kinds of reasoning to this study were found by Leech et al. (1996), who found that even older studentsare more likely to consider effects on direct populations than those of indirect populations suggesting that lowerelementary students reason in similar ways to middle and high school students. This means that with properinstructional materials, lower elementary students are likely capable of thinking at a systemic level and capableof appreciating the complexity of interactions in the ecosystems. This is supported by research that showed thatproper software models (Eilam, 2012) together with organized instruction allows successful learning of systemicreasoning in the context of ecosystems.This study is important for two reasons: first, it fuses a disciplinary core idea and a crosscuttingconcept to develop a unified learning progression of how students reason (a science practice) about ecology; andsecond, it continues the conversation of how learning progressions need to be revised in an iterative process thatbest captures students reasoning so that we can design effective instruction that fosters desired learning goals forour students. It is important to start conversations about the criteria of developing learning progression and whatcan be fused or teased apart because this renders learning progression research more coherent and directs futureresearch agenda in the field.ReferencesChandler, M., & Boutilier, R. (1992). The development of dynamic system reasoning. Human Development, 35,121-137.Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13, 15-42.Eilam, B. (2012). System thinking and feeding relations: Learning with a live ecosystem model. InstructionalScience, 40 (2), p213-239.Grotzer, T., & Bell, B. (2003). How does grasping the underlying causal structures of the ecosystems impactstudents’ understanding. Journal of Biological Education, 38, 16-29.Leach, J., Driver, R., Scott, P., Wood-Robinson, C. (1996). Children’s ideas about ecology 2: Ideas found inchildren aged 5-16 about interdependency of organisms. International Journal of Science Education,17, 129-141.Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2012). Seeding evolutionary thinking by engaging children in modeling itsfoundations. Science Education, 96, 701-724.National Research Council (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and Teaching science in grades K-8.Washington DC: The National Academies Press.Songer, N., Kelcey, B., & Gotwals, A. (2009). How and when does complex reasoning occur? Empiricallydriven development of a learning progressing focused on complex reasoning and biodiversity. Journalof Research in Science Teaching 46, 610-631.Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research. London, UK: Sage.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1504© ISLS