Keeping Up: Shifting Access to Gateway Resourcesin a Cycling Community of PracticeJoel Drake and Victor R. Lee, Utah State University, Logan, Utah, jrichdrake@gmail.com, victor.lee@usu.eduAbstract: While learning involves changes in one’s participation within a community ofpractice, changes in participants can also change access to resources key to newcomerparticipation. This poster presents a case study of a recreational cycling communityillustrating how community changes diminished newcomers’ access to resources for drafting.IntroductionA core tenet of sociocultural research in the learning sciences is that learning involves shifts in participation inthe practices of a community (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Rogoff, 1991). In this view, newcomers begin aslegitimate peripheral participants relative to an existing community. By navigating the community’s pathways toacceptance, the newcomers become full participants in the community. Regardless of the nature of these paths,membership in the community, and thereby learning, requires access to the social and material resources of thecommunity (Nasir & Cooks, 2009). Without access to these resources, newcomers remain marginal to thecommunity or may cease participating altogether. We argue that, in some communities, access to certain“gateway” resources is essential to maintaining newcomers’ access to the breadth of a community’s resources.As newcomers become full participants, their participation may help shape important aspects of thecommunity. This can include shifting newcomers’ access to gateway resources, a change that may facilitate orinhibit newcomers’ participation. This poster discusses a case of a community of recreational cyclists. Cyclinghas recently been identified as a potentially rich area of interest for research in the learning sciences because itinvolves specialized knowledge and complex physical and social interactions that must be mastered (Lee, 2013;Hirsh & Levy, 2013; Taylor & Hall, 2013). In this study, we sought to understand how changes in a cyclingcommunity affected novices’ access to a gateway resource.The Focal Community of Recreational CyclistsRecreational group cycling involves individuals who are interested in learning how to ride long distances ingroups. Beyond strength and endurance, group cycling requires riders to deal with various riding conditions(e.g., steep inclines, uneven terrain, changes in wind) while maintaining contact with the group. A gatewayresource for group cycling is drafting, which involves riders following another rider closely enough to reduceaerodynamic drag. By drafting, new cyclists can ride with experienced cyclists, opening their horizons ofobservation (Hutchins, 1996) and allowing them to see the breadth of the experienced cyclists’ practice.This study involved an adult recreational cycling group from a mid-size city in the IntermountainRegion of the United States. This group was established in 2006 by a bike shop with the goal of introducingbeginners to the practices of group riding. This cycling group was one of many in its local vicinity but waswidely known and recommended by cyclists throughout the region as one that was well suited for novicecyclists. Like many of the other local cycling groups, it met 1-2 times per week from Spring through Fall (thetypical cycling season) for group rides ranging from 20 to 100 miles in distance.Data Sources and AnalysisThe first author, a cyclist with seven years of experience riding in recreational groups, joined the focal group fora period of participant observation ranging from March through October 2013. He had no prior experienceriding with the focal group and was positioned as a knowledgeable newcomer participating both as a rider andas an observer researching group dynamics and changes over time. During the period of observation, the cyclinggroup had a core of 10 consistent riders and 40 other riders who participated less frequently. The group hadroughly equal numbers of men and women, though the balance among participants varied from week to week.The first author participated in and observed a primary group ride each week (i.e., a ride taking placeregularly on a weeknight) and also participated in some secondary rides (i.e., taking place on a weekend on anad hoc basis). Following each ride, he recorded written ethnographic field notes consistent with therecommendations of Emerson, Fretz, and Shaw (2011). He also obtained records from email lists and socialnetworking sites associated with the cycling group. The collection of records and notes were coded by the firstauthor following recommendations for qualitative data analysis from Saldaña (2012), then reviewed anddiscussed by both authors before the codes were refined, reapplied, and then reviewed for themes and patterns.A second data source was a set of videorecorded interviews with 11 adult cyclists from the region.These interviews were collected two years prior to the observations for other research purposes (Lee & Drake,2013) but were useful for a secondary analysis as they contained self-reports about prior experiences with thefocal cycling group. In particular, these interviews included two novice female cyclists who were very articulateICLS 2014 Proceedings1659© ISLSabout their prior experiences and were consistent attendees during the observed focal group rides. These twocyclists were treated as special cases for analysis given their continued participation in the focal cycling group.FindingsBased on interviews and from recorded conversations with cyclists during rides, the focal group was indeedinitially a very welcoming group for novices. Specifically, experienced cyclists made a point to explicitlydiscuss drafting technique with newcomers. For example, when Stacy joined the group as a novice cyclist, shewas resistant to learning drafting. She was not pushed to learn during her first ride, but on the second ride, theride leader insisted that she could and needed to learn how to draft so she could keep up with the group. By thetime of this study, Stacy had become a capable group cyclist and a leader in the group. Opportunities forlearning how to draft were typically provided in the form of one-on-one, in-ride modeling of body and bikepositioning for drafting.However, the departure of some oldtimers coupled with the sustained participation of a different classof newcomers led to changes in practices of the group. These newcomers brought more aggressive riding goalsand more athletic skill than did typical newcomers to this cycling group. The new class of newcomers regularlyrode with the local race-oriented groups and were taking advantage of an additional group ride to add to theirtraining regimen. With their riding skill and consistency, they quickly gained respect in the group. However, asgroup practices shifted to align with the goals of these newcomers, novices found it more difficult to join.Although this group had always included riders of many skill levels, the strong and experienced ridershad previously made conscious efforts to support the participation of novices through in-the-moment, explicitdrafting instruction, like in the example described earlier, so that slower riders could at least “keep up.”However, as the rides sped up, supporting novices became less important even to the remaining oldtimers. Forexample, four months into the six-month riding season, a young, novice rider was struggling to stay with thegroup during a ride. An oldtimer observed that the newcomer struggled to keep up because he drafted poorly.Another rider commented to him, “Well, it’s your job to teach him.” To this, the oldtimer responded, “That’s notmy job at all,” explicitly stating that the role of oldtimers as supporters of novices had indeed changed.DiscussionThe purpose of this poster is to describe, through a case study, how changes in a community’s goals andpractices can inhibit newcomers’ access to resources necessary for their peripheral participation. For the cyclistsin this study, this resource was community-supported competence in drafting. Drafting allowed novices tointeract with and observe the practices of individual oldtimers and the community as a whole. When maintainingnovices’ access to drafting knowledge was no longer a priority, many novices were left without a means ofjoining the community and discontinued participation. Identifying such “gateway resources” and how they aremaintained despite natural changes to a community of practice can help in understanding how a community maybe more supportive of novice participants and support movement along pathways for learning.ReferencesEmerson, R. M., Fretz, R. I., & Shaw, L. L. (2011). Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes, Second Edition.University of Chicago Press.Hirsh, A., & Levy, S. T. (2013). Biking with Particles: Junior Triathletes’ Learning About Drafting ThroughExploring Agent-Based Models and Inventing New Tactics. Technology, Knowledge and Learning,18(1-2), 1–29.Hutchins, E. (1996). Learning to navigate. In S. Chaiklin & J. Lave (Eds.), Understanding practice:Perspectives on activity and context (p. 35). Cambridge University Press.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge universitypress.Lee, V. R. (2013). Knowing and Learning with Technology (and on Wheels!): An Introduction to the SpecialIssue. Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 18(1-2), 1–8.Lee, V. R., & Drake, J. (2013). Digital Physical Activity Data Collection and Use by Endurance Runners andDistance Cyclists. Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 18(1-2), 39–63.Nasir, N. S., & Cooks, J. (2009). Becoming a Hurdler: How Learning Settings Afford Identities. Anthropology& Education Quarterly, 40(1), 41–61.Rogoff, B. (1991). Apprenticeship in thinking: cognitive development in social context. New York [u.a.: OxfordUniv. Press.Saldana, J. (2012). The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers. SAGE.Taylor, K. H., & Hall, R. (2013). Counter-Mapping the Neighborhood on Bicycles: Mobilizing Youth toReimagine the City. Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 18(1-2), 1–29.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1660© ISLS