Becoming an Activist-Mathematician in an Age of AusterityIndigo Esmonde, Joe Curnow, Dominique Riviere, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, CanadaEmail: indigo.esmonde@utoronto.ca, joe.curnow@mail.utoronto.ca, dominique.riviere@utoronto.caAbstract: In the wake of the global economic crises of the 21st century, governmentsworldwide have implemented austerity policies, involving dramatic reductions inexpenditures. These economic policies provide context for mathematization, as ordinarypeople grapple with the ways these policies affect their daily lives. In this article, we presentan analysis of interviews with members of a Toronto-based activist network that foughtagainst the City’s proposed budget cuts in 2011 and 2012. We found that the context ofactivism spawned a wide variety of mathematics problems related to the activists’ overarchinggoals: understanding the City’s use of mathematics, creating their own mathematics,storytelling to the public, and behind-the-scenes tactics. We highlight the ways mathematicalactivity was always ideological, always accomplished through a division of labor within thegroup, and always strategically selected. We close by considering processes by which activistmathematicians can be better supported by formal and informal education.Mathematical Activism in an Age of AusterityIn the wake of a controversial January 2012 Toronto City Council meeting to amend and approved the proposedbudget (including hundreds of millions of dollars worth of cuts), both supporters and opponents of the budgetcuts announced their victory. According to our informant Maria (all names of activists are pseudonyms), MayorRob Ford declared his victory because for the first time in many years, there had been no increase to the City’soperating budget. Activists and other opponents to the mayor’s cuts celebrated that they had defeated $80million in proposed cuts to public services and community programs.Both sides used mathematics to justify their perspective, yet their statements were diametricallyopposed. Which side was correct? We argue that both were correct, and this example highlights severalinteresting aspects of mathematics outside of school: what is computed is just as important as how it iscomputed, and the choice of mathematical problems and methods has an ideological component. The budgetconflict in Toronto in 2011 and 2012 is but one example of contemporary debates about economic policy,debates that are taking place at the local, provincial, national, and international levels in the wake of the globaleconomic downturn in the 21st century. Governments at all levels have introduced austerity policies, in whichthey dramatically reduce spending, resulting in cuts to services that disproportionately and negatively affectpoor and working class people. These policies affect everyone, however; therefore everyone has a stake inunderstanding the policies and in making their voices heard either for or against (and often, somewhere inbetween) the policies that their government representatives put forward. Because these policies have amathematical component, people who represent all sides of the debate around this issue are called on to becomepolitical mathematicians.In the fall of 2011, when international Occupy movements were talking about “the 1%” and Torontoactivists were holding mass public meetings to protest City budget cuts, we began to investigate how activistsbecome mathematicians. The public nature of activism makes activists a particularly accessible group of peopleto study, if we are interested in how people are mathematizing their understanding of contemporary economicpolicy. When faced with complex equations rooted in peoples’ real lives, like how many people will bedisplaced from a homeless shelter or how many jobs will be eliminated through restructuring, these activistshave necessarily become mathematicians. Their work is not only the public protest that people may expect, butalso includes mathematical negotiation, interpretation, and mobilization in order to contest the mathematicscirculated by those in favour of austerity, and to replace this mathematics with their own mathematically-basednarratives of the impacts of austerity on their communities.Our analysis examines one case study of activist work to understand the ongoing work of practicingand becoming a mathematician and an activist in an age of austerity. The major issues addressed in our studyinclude the relationship between identity, becoming, and mathematics in activist networks, as well as ananalysis of everyday mathematics as it is employed and contested in activist work. This study sheds light on thepoliticized nature of mathematics learning and practice and offers new contexts for studying mathematicallearning in community settings.In the analysis that follows, we introduce a theoretical framework centred on sociocultural and situatedtheories of learning. After explaining our methodological approach, we then turn our attention to the TorontoStop the Cuts network (StC), briefly describing their work before analysing the ways activists in the networktalked about and used mathematics in order to contest the austerity agenda of Toronto Mayor Rob Ford. Wefocus particular attention on activists’ overarching goals, and the ways that mathematics intersected with otherforms of knowledge as they worked towards these goals. We conclude with a discussion of how mathematicsICLS 2014 Proceedings134© ISLSfor social justice was accomplished collectively, and consider the implications for supporting and enablingpeople to better learn, teach, and deploy mathematical strategies in their struggles for equity and social justice.Learning as BecomingLearning is a social process that happens when people engage in collective practices together (Saxe & Esmonde,2005). Collective practices are “semi-stable, socially organized activities in which individuals participate andcommunicate with one another” (p. 176). Over time, as people work together to get things done, regularitiesbegin to emerge in the kind of problems that are framed, the resources that are used to solve these problems, andthe roles that people take on. Of course, each new problem or situation is an opportunity to begin anew, to adaptand change the resources one uses, or to take on a new role.In sociocultural and situated frameworks for understanding learning, learning can be understood as aprocess of becoming, both individual and collective, that is always understood in relation to the practice inwhich one learns. For example, children who were competent candy-sellers on the streets of a Brazilian city,were mostly unable to complete school mathematics tasks, and successful schoolchildren were unable tocomplete the tasks required for candy-selling (Saxe, 1991). As Saxe points out, the goals that are constructed inthese two contexts differ. In candy-selling, the main goal is to make a profit and to sell a lot of candy. In school,the goal is usually to solve problems in a teacher-approved way. The resources also differ, with a much widervariety of strategies, tools, and other people available in out-of-school contexts.Similar to Saxe’s findings, research in mathematics outside-of-school has predominantly found thatpeople are quite successful in the non-school mathematical tasks that they encounter on a daily basis, in theworkplace, in the home, and in their hobbies (Esmonde et al., 2013). Again, this competence should beunderstood in context: it is not that people are smarter outside of school. Rather, non-school contexts affordmany more resources than classrooms typically do, and people have much more freedom to organize theiractivities in ways that lead to success. Most striking, for our purposes, is the collaborative nature of many outof-school activities. Like social justice activism, carpet-laying (Masingila, 1994), dairy-work (Scribner, 1984),home improvements (Esmonde et al., 2013), and video games (Stevens, Satwicz, & McCarthy, 2008), all allowpeople to help one another and ask for help, and even allow them to extend the division of labor beyond theirimmediate circle by using a variety of resources, including seeking expert help (via the internet, visits tohardware stores, etc.).Research examples outside of school make particularly visible the role of values in mathematicalpractices. Although mathematics is often seen as a positivist science, mathematical models of the real world arebased on a worldview, and therefore on a set of values (Frankenstein & Powell, 1994). In home improvement,one may balance aesthetic values with a value for cutting costs. In game play, one may search for a particularlyelegant strategy. School mathematics also encodes a set of values that are embedded not only in the textbookexamples of mathematics, but in the ways students and teacher are expected to interact together. In contexts inwhich these values are brought to the fore (such as, contexts in which ideology is explicitly discussed anddebated), the relationship of one’s values to one’s mathematics will be more clearly visible.Drawing from this theoretical framework, in this study we investigate a context for mathematicspractices in which the work is collaborative, mathematical work is embedded with other forms of contentknowledge, and the values underlying mathematics are made explicit. In an age of austerity politics, socialjustice activism is a hub of value-laden mathematical work.MethodsToronto Stop the Cuts (StC) [http://www.torontostopthecuts.com/] was a network of community organizations,concerned individuals and neighbourhood committees who advocated to stop the budget cuts being proposed byMayor Rob Ford in Toronto. Formed in 2011 as a response to the cuts to city services outlined in the proposedCity budget for 2012, StC organized meetings in various neighbourhoods across Toronto and urged residents totake actions against the cuts to services such as transit, housing, daycare, and shelters. These actions includedmeetings, marches, dinners, councillor visits, lemonade stands, etc. StC also advocated through organizingonline campaigns such as citywide petitions. Overall, StC was committed to forming relationships with allies inorder to fight austerity at all levels. In particular, the network had three main demands for the City's Mayor andcouncillors: 1) Stop the budget cuts to public services and, relatedly, to stop the attacks on public sector workersin an effort to advance a privatization agenda; 2) Expand city services for all, because StC argued that publicservices in the city were inadequate even before the proposed budget cuts for 2012; and 3) Increase thecorporate tax rate, and reduce spending on the City's police services. Implicit in these demands was a critique ofausterity policies that "bail out" corporations while sacrificing public services, and a fear that increases in thepolice service's budget would negatively affect, and disproportionately so, the people who would be mostaffected by the other budget cuts (the city’s poor and working class, as well as racialized and undocumentedpeople).ICLS 2014 Proceedings135© ISLSThe StC network reflected the diversity of the city of Toronto, including diversity as considered interms of race/ethnicity, gender, sexuality, immigration status, neighborhoods in Toronto, socioeconomic status,age, linguistic background, and more. StC operated as a network with a number of subgroups. The primaryfocus of organizing happened at the neighborhood level. StC started several neighborhood groups andencouraged anyone in the City to start their own neighborhood group and join the network. The onlyrequirement was that all members had to agreed with StC’s three main demands as described above. Eachneighborhood group was expected to meet regularly and organize actions that made sense within their owncontexts. However, these subgroups were expected to bring their decisions to the “network meeting” fordiscussion and approval. The network meetings consisted of regular meetings with representatives from allneighborhood groups and committees. At these meetings, neighborhood groups updated one another on theirnews, jointly decided on policy, collaborated on larger actions and campaigns, and made requests for help.There were several committees that were created to support the work of the neighborhood groups and thenetwork as a whole. These included the research committee, tasked with doing research to answer questions thatarose at the neighborhood level (e.g., creating reports for each neighborhood committee about the demographicsand key issues in their neighborhoods), and the media committee, which was tasked with creating press releasesand monitoring the media for news about the budget process.For our research, two of us joined StC as participant observers for four months, from October 2011 toFebruary 2012. We were members of the Research Committee and helped field research requests from thevarious neighborhood groups. We also collected data at various public meetings and protests. Our dual role asresearchers and participants was clear to all StC members with whom we interacted. Our participation probablyhad a positive influence on our ability to recruit interview participants (described below), and also informed ourdata analysis because we had sufficient background knowledge to be able to interpret the interviews.Data and Interview QuestionsThis paper is based on an analysis of interviews with seven activists from the StC network. These activists wereall engaged regularly at network meetings, in addition to their activity within their neighbourhood group orsubcommittee. Our interview pool was small, but generally reflected the diversity of the StC network and thecity as a whole, with the exception that all of our interview participants had post-secondary degrees. We hadrecruited our participants by inviting anyone active with StC to conduct an interview on the use of mathematicsin activism. Informally, we were told that many people were reluctant to agree to an interview because they didnot feel qualified to discuss mathematics. Since our analysis in this paper focuses on elaborating the range ofmathematical practices of StC, we feel that our interview pool was adequate, but readers should remember thatwe were informed by a set of participants who felt more comfortable with mathematics than perhaps the averageactivist did.Each activist was invited to an hour-long, semi-structured interview. The interviews were videorecorded and stored on a secure data drive at the University of Toronto. The interview questions were informedby our theoretical framework in that our goal was to obtain a broad understanding of the collective practices ofactivism, and the specific role of mathematics as one aspect of the broader practice. The questions focused onelaborating the context of StC’s activism by asking them about the goals and mission of StC, the City’s use ofmathematics, and StC’s use of mathematics. We asked activists to be specific about their own roles andresponsibilities, especially in relation to mathematics, and we asked them what helped, and what hindered,people in doing, using and learning mathematics towards social justice.Research Questions and Data AnalysisThere was one major research question for this study: How is mathematics used outside of schools to analyze,educate about, and take action towards broad social justice goals? Within this question, we were interested inboth the types of mathematical tasks that were taken on, as well as the process by which these tasks wereaccomplished. However, as noted in the introduction to this article, we do not believe that it is useful to analyzemathematical tasks separate from the context in which they arose. Thus, we were also interested inunderstanding the complex forms of knowledge that were woven together in the work of Stop the Cuts activists.To investigate this research question, we began with creating a content log for our seven interviews.These content logs recorded a basic summary, minute-by-minute, of what was discussed in each interview.Following this, we began with a very basic round of coding, knowing that we were interested in how theactivists identified the mathematics that was used (“kinds of math”) and the ideological nature of mathematics(“ideology”). As the analysis progressed, we created a listing of all the different mathematical tasks that werenamed by the activists. This list was separated into themed categories, based on the overarching goals to whichmathematics was being used. (It is important here to note that due to the nature of the interview data, we wereunable to gain insight into the details of the mathematical tasks or the process by which they wereaccomplished. Such an analysis would require a very different set of methods. Thus, rather than analysingmathematical reasoning, here we present an analysis of the activists’ stories about the ways they usedICLS 2014 Proceedings136© ISLSmathematics, as well as its place within the broader collective practice.) After completing the coding of variouskinds of math, we considered what the activists’ stories about mathematics could tell us about some of thecentral aspects of our theoretical framework: resources, division of labor, and ideology/values.Our results, as presented here, rely on an analysis of the interviews alone, but we were able to drawfrom our background knowledge and participation in the group to help interpret some of the stories we weretold. At times in our presentation of findings below, we mention specific documents or websites that were usedor created by StC. These artifacts were all mentioned in the interviews, and our discussion of them is limited towhat we were told in interviews. Below, we link to specific documents or sites to make them accessible toreaders interested in the specifics of activist mathematics, but we did not do a formal document analysis for thispaper.What Is Activist Mathematics?We identified four overarching mathematical goals, which form the basis for the bulk of the analysis in thepaper: understanding the City’s use of mathematics, countering with their own mathematics, storytelling to thepublic, and behind-the-scenes tactics. All of the interview participants were able to describe many instances ofthe use of mathematics to achieve the four activist goals. We will discuss each of these themes in turn, but weacknowledge that activities within each theme were interconnected; for example, understanding the city’s use ofmathematics informed activist strategies for mathematics, as well as the storytelling that they engaged in for thepublic.Understanding the City’s Use of Mathematics and its Implications of the Budget CutsIn order to fight the budget cuts, first the activists needed to understand precisely what the cuts were, andfurther, they wanted to go beyond a surface understanding of the cuts to understand how the cuts would affecttheir communities. Activists expressed especial concern about the effect of the cuts on communities that werealready marginalized, including racialized people, undocumented people, homeless people, and people living inpoverty.One of the most foundational tasks for StC was to deconstruct the City’s reports, including the CoreServices Review (City of Toronto, 2011) that had been produced by external consultants in order to find the‘gravy’1 in City services. These reports (which can be found on the City’s website athttp://www.toronto.ca/torontoservicereview/results.htm) were filled with charts, tables, and mathematicalarguments. To further understand the impact of the cuts, StC members created maps (thus using spatial andgeometric reasoning) to display which services were likely to be affected by the cuts, in which neighborhoods.An example of such a map was displayed on the StC website (http://www.torontostopthecuts.com/january-10%e2%80%93-mapping-the-cuts-part-ii/) and was used to argue that the City’s high-poverty neighborhoodswould be more directly impacted than wealthier neighborhoods. The map included locations of cuts to publichousing, libraries, homeless shelters, childcare centres, public recreation centres, and long-term care homes. Themap was created by another Toronto-based advocacy group, Social Planning Toronto(http://www.socialplanningtoronto.org/). StC borrowed the map and displayed it on their website.Some of these numbers required further analysis. For example, the activists had a special focus onchildcare, and were able to draw from information contained in City websites to determine the number ofexisting childcare spots available in each neighborhood, and the number of spots likely to be cut. They couldthen consider the impact of these cuts by considering the number of people who would be unable to work due toinadequate childcare. For libraries, activists identified each of the libraries that would face cuts and were able topinpoint how many hours of service would be cut, or the numbers of staff, and from there, were able to discussthe impact on library services. They drew on a proposal for cuts to the City’s public transit network (TorontoTransit Commission, TTC) to alert City residents to which bus routes would have longer wait times. For cuts tohomeless shelters, they could describe how many more people would be “out on the street” than previous. In allof these instances, StC members were required to make sense of pre-existing mathematical calculations, andorganize them in ways such that their real-life impact could be easily understood.Countering With Their Own MathematicsOne major mathematical project was the creation of the activists’ People’s Poll (with results reported on the StCsite (http://www.torontostopthecuts.com/peoples-poll-results/). This poll was created for multiple reasons, onebeing that the activists felt that the City’s public consultation process was highly skewed. Aziz told us that "Wedidn't see uh, these, city-run, uh, town halls, which produced their own statistics, as legitimate by any means."He said that within StC there was wide agreement that "we need our own statistics." The activists wereconcerned about several aspects of the City’s polling. In interviews, several participants described how groupmembers had disagreed with the method of recruitment, because they felt that many City residents wereunaware of the polls that were conducted online and at Town Hall meetings around the City. In addition torecruiting online, StC’s major strategy was to go to public places to recruit participants for the People’s Poll. AICLS 2014 Proceedings137© ISLSsecond critique of the City’s data-gathering was that StC felt that the City’s poll questions were biased towardscuts. Stephanie pointed out that the City was asking people which services should be cut, rather than whetherservices should be cut.It should be noted that there was some disagreement within StC about the use of the People’s Poll.Some felt that since their poll “would never pass muster in terms of how surveys should be done” (Maria) andacknowledged that it would not be “statistically reliable” (Maria). Still, they decided to conduct the poll so thatthey would have some control over the data collection and reporting process. In addition, they felt it was avaluable organizing tool because it allowed StC members – especially new members – to go out intocommunities and talk with people about the issues. Thus, this mathematical task also served non-mathematicalpurposes.The interviews did not contain many other specific examples of StC activists countering with their ownmathematics, although several interview participants referred to this general process. For example, Aziz told usabout some analysis StC had done on library use. He said, “our issue isn't so much with the use of math. Ourissue is how are you using it and what are you quantifying.” The City had decided in advance that it would cuthours at selected libraries. In choosing libraries to cut, our interview participants said that the City had lookedmainly at circulation (how many books are checked out). StC felt that this was not a good measure of the use oflibraries; instead, they looked at the programs that libraries supported, and the number of people who made useof the various resources at the library – internet, reading rooms, children’s programs, and more.Maria reported on a mathematical task that StC had decided not to do, for ideological reasons. She toldus that some members of StC had wanted to create an alternative budget, to recommend how the city should useits funds. Others felt that this process would “pit vulnerable groups against each other” (Maria). This strategywent against StC’s three basic demands and was ultimately rejected. As Peter pointed out, liberals who did notoppose capitalism and were simply trying to shift the budget slightly would need to argue that their proposals“add up” mathematically (i.e., that there is enough funding for their proposals). As a radical anti-capitalistactivist, Peter did not feel that StC was obliged to argue that their three demands were economically feasible. Ashe put it, StC was “not concerned with the wellbeing of their [capitalist] system.”Storytelling to the PublicStC activists told us that numbers and mathematical arguments were an important part of their campaign toconvince the public of the rightness of their cause. "The use of statistics kind of carries this very factual, veryobjective kind of truth to it," said Aziz, and this statement about the rhetorical value of mathematics wassupported by several other interview participants. On the other hand, four out of the seven interview participantsmentioned that they believed that many people (activists included, but not limited to activist circles) were afraidof mathematics and didn’t feel qualified to engage in argumentation about the big numbers that were used in thebudget. Thus, although StC wanted to use numbers in flyers, speeches, and press releases, they were cautious tomake those numbers relatable to people (although they admitted to, at times, using big numbers as a scare tactic,just as they felt the City was doing).“Organizing is storytelling,” Ahmed told us, as he emphasized the importance of constructing storiesthat people can relate to. The People’s Poll was one tool that StC used in this storytelling, to convince the publicand the City government that vast numbers of people were opposed to budget cuts and austerity measures. Theresults of the People’s poll (and, in fact, the results of the City’s polling, flawed as they believed it to be) gaveStC a kind of “numerical legitimacy” (Ahmed) to show that overwhelmingly, City residents rejected theproposed cuts.Other examples of mathematics used in storytelling included key numbers that were included on flyersor press releases. For example, when StC discussed cuts to public transit or a proposed expansion of TTCservices, they sometimes included figures about ridership, or the number of people who have access to the TTC,speed, or cost. They would often place their own mathematical arguments side by side with the City’s, to arguethat the City’s plan did not make mathematical sense. For example, when the mayor argued that the City wouldhave a very large deficit (approximately $700 million), activists pointed out that he had cut the vehicleregistration tax ($60 per car) and the land transfer tax (a tax on real estate purchases), and that if he had notmade those cuts, the supposed deficit would be significantly smaller (both Ahmed and Stephanie discussed thisstorytelling narrative).The activists chose their numbers carefully for maximum effect. For example, Ahmed argued that largenumbers are very difficult for people to understand, so instead of presenting a large number like, for example,3000 people, StC would say something like “twenty-seven subway cars” (Ahmed came up with this number asan example during his interview; thus, it may not reflect an actual calculation that StC made, but is an exampleof the type of calculation). They argued that numbers like these were easier for people to relate to. However, inthe spirit of storytelling and relationship-building, they sometimes chose not to represent numbers. Ahmed saidthat early on in the organizing, they tended to use more data and numbers in their arguments to the public. Lateron, when they had built relationships with individuals in different communities who would be impacted by theICLS 2014 Proceedings138© ISLScuts, they tended to report more personal stories. For example, instead of reporting on the number of people whowould be impacted by cuts to WheelTrans (a public transit service for people who use wheelchairs), they mightcreate a video with one person telling their story and describing how they would be affected if they could notaccess WheelTrans anymore.Behind-the-Scenes Tactics and StrategizingThe work of organizing – of reaching out to as many people as possible through flyers, news and social media,public actions and protests – requires many skills, including some mathematical skills. Since StC activistsprimarily focused their organizing efforts at the neighborhood level, they gathered publicly availableinformation about the demographics of different neighborhoods so that they could tailor their organizing effortsto these neighborhoods.When creating banners, flyers, and other graphic images, they used mathematics as they measureddistances and centered text. When planning a march, they estimated the number of copies of flyers they shouldmake based on the numbers of StC activists who could go out and flyer in the various neighborhoods. Theyestimated the number of participants they would have (using information from social media and other sources)and based their recruitment efforts on achieving targeted numbers for various actions. For example, they used arough estimate that about half the people who rsvp’d for an event on Facebook would actually show up. At amarch, they would count the number of participants by coming up with an estimate of the number of peoplewho would fill a certain amount of space (e.g., a ten by ten foot square), and then estimating how many ten footsquares were filled. Or, they found estimates on the Internet of the number of people who could fill the street ina standard city block, two lanes wide, and then use this information to estimate turnout. When they timed eventsthat included marches, they estimated the amount of time it would take to march from place to place, especiallyif there were several stops with speakers or banner drops.They also collected data on their organizing efforts and analyzed them to see if they were reaching abroad demographic of the City. For example, they used Google analytics to see when people were accessing theStop the Cuts website, and they collected demographic information from signatories to a Declaration that theyhad produced, to see who was joining the StC cause.They used data to target their efforts in ways that they felt could be more fruitful. For example, usingdata about councilor voting patterns, they targeted city councilors in what was known as the ‘mushy middle’:rather than working to convince councilors who always voted for or against the mayor’s policies, they focusedon councilors who were more variable in their allegiance. They also used data regarding city resident votingpatterns to figure out which neighborhoods were more aligned with the mayor, and which were less supportive.Finally, within StC when there were conflicts, with some activists pushing for more radical orconfrontational tactics, and others arguing for more mainstream methods. Some of the activists drew from datato argue that StC had not yet been successful in its aims, and an escalation of tactics was necessary.Mathematics in Relation to Other Activist ToolsGiven our theoretical framework, it is important to consider the process of activist mathematics, not as a seriesof disconnected cognitive tasks, but as part and parcel of the work of activist groups. In this section, we discussthree findings about the process of activist mathematics that align with, and extend, our theoretical framework.These findings include: the necessity of appropriate content knowledge in order to mathematize inequality; thedivision of labor within the group; and the intentionality of activist mathematics.As Aziz pointed out, StC activists often disagreed with the City’s mathematics because they differed in“how you are using [mathematics] and what you are quantifying.” For example, with the library cuts, the Cityused primarily circulation numbers, whereas StC argued that the number of people who used the library, formany reasons beyond just taking out books, should be taken into account. In order to decide how tomathematize a real-life situation, deep content knowledge was necessary in order to make sense of how a givenpolitical and economic decision would affect people’s everyday lives. StC’s disagreements with the Cityhighlight that mathematical modeling of the world is always ideological. The ideological nature of mathematicswas revealed throughout the data reported above. StC’s deconstruction of the City’s math aimed to reveal theunderlying ideology of the cuts, their own mathematics was explicitly based on their ideological perspective(e.g., not being concerned about “the well-being of [the capitalist] system”), they selected numbers (or decidedagainst numbers) to make their stories to the public as convincing as possible, and their behind-the-scenesstrategies were based on an understanding of democratic ideologies in which getting as many people involved aspossible, to show “numerical legitimacy,” was paramount.In a related point, StC members often expressed much more certainty about their ideological standpointthan their mathematical models. As Alex explained to us, in StC there were “more people who could explainMarxism to you than could explain fractions.” Some mathematical tasks could be performed by any newcomerto the group: collecting data for the People’s Poll was considered an entry level task that could help newcomerslearn about the issues and build connections to the broader community. Other tasks, such as reading andICLS 2014 Proceedings139© ISLSsummarizing government reports, or collecting demographic information about the various neighborhoods, fellprimarily to the Research Committee. StC was an example of a community of practice in which variousspecializations emerged; no one member of the group would have been able to accomplish all that the groupcould accomplish together. Mathematics was one, but certainly not the only, aspect of activist work that wasspecialized to a subgroup. In this case, the division of labor extended beyond StC into other groups andindividuals who were pursuing similar goals. Through the Internet, news stories, and public forums and events,StC had access to the mathematical activist work of other organizations.Finally, this study’s findings differ from most out-of-school mathematics research in one significantway: the intentionality of the mathematics. In many studies of people’s participation in out-of-school activities,mathematics emerged as an invisible aspect of their work. People did not always recognize that the tasks theyaccomplished every day were mathematical. StC resembled these studies in one way: many of our interviewparticipants told us that the group never discussed the question of whether they should or shouldn't usemathematics. Rather, they discussed specific tactics: Should we conduct a poll? How might we analyze it?Would it pass muster? However, despite the lack of the label “mathematics,” the discussions and actions of theStC group showed the intentionality of their engagement in mathematics. All of our interview participants toldus that the City was using mathematics to intimidate the general public by using big numbers and doomsdaylanguage about deficits and inevitable cuts. With mathematics used as a weapon against them, all of the activistinterviewees told us that it was critical for them to be able to understand, and to counter, the City’s use ofmathematics. This suggests that community activism may actually be fertile ground to support people inunderstanding and using mathematics more intentionally and towards liberatory ends.Implications: How Can We Foster Activist Mathematicians?The StC campaign against austerity agendas in Toronto was partially successful. The group’s role wasinstrumental in eventually defeating some of the budget cuts and preserving most City services for the 2012budget. While the findings of this study, related to the grassroots mobilization of mathematics for social justice,are interesting in their own right as an example of informal mathematical engagement, we believe these findingsalso raise some questions about the role of formal education in supporting progressive social change.If we consider Alex’s argument that more activists could explain Marxism than fractions, severalquestions are raised. First, how can mathematics education support people in learning, doing and usingmathematics for social justice? In recent years, many educators and researchers have brought social justice intomathematics classrooms, with some success (Enyedy & Mukhopadhyay, 2007; Gutstein, 2006; Gutstein &Peterson, 2013; Turner, Gutiérrez, Simic-Muller, & Díez-Palomar, 2009). We would like to see more studies,like Gutstein (2006) in which mathematics students describe how these experiences supported theirmathematically-engaged activism in their lives outside of school. As an anonymous reviewer suggested, the fourthemes we presented in our findings (understanding government use of mathematics, countering with their ownmathematics, storytelling to the public, and behind-the-scenes tactics) might serve as a useful heuristic fororganizing mathematics teaching for social justice.Second, the flip side of Alex’s argument suggests the need for social and political education thatintegrates mathematics as a lens through which to see the world. Why is it that so many StC activists werecomfortable with the complexities of Marxism but frightened of the complexities of the City budget documents?Perhaps mathematics education researchers could venture into contexts devoted to social and politicaleducation, to develop an understanding of how mathematics is used (or possibly pushed to the background) insuch contexts.Finally, many of those responsible for mathematical aspects of StC’s activism were from middle-classbackgrounds with post-secondary degrees. How can educational contexts that are not limited to K-16 schoolssupport the integration of mathematics with all of the complex knowledge necessary for imagining and workingtowards a better world?Future studies in this area could address all of these issues: the ways in which mathematics educationsupports the mathematization of global and local economic policy; the ways in which social sciences or politicaleducation support people in drawing mathematics in to their understandings, and the ways people learn tomathematize the world through participating in out-of-school community organizing. We are particularlyinterested in detailed analyses, to supplement our broad view of the role of mathematics, to uncover tools,resources, and divisions of labor, which are effective at broadening people’s participation in politicalmathematics.Endnotes(1) Ford had promised that if elected, he would end the “gravy train” of City services and employment. The phrase refers toa situation in which a person can earn a lot of money with very little effort.ICLS 2014 Proceedings140© ISLSReferencesCity of Toronto. (2011). Core Services Review. (Prepared by KPMG). Toronto, ON: Canada.http://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2011/ex/bgrd/backgroundfile-40702.pdfEnyedy, N., & Mukhopadhyay, S. (2007). They don't show nothing I didn't know: Emergent tensions betweenculturally relevant pedagogy and mathematics pedagogy. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 139174.Esmonde, I., Blair, K. P., Goldman, S., Martin, L., Jimenez, O., Pea, R. (2013). Math I am: What we learn fromstories that people tell about math in their lives. In B. Bevan, P. Bell, R. Stevens (Eds.), Learning in outof school time. (pp. 7-28). New York: Springer.Frankenstein, M., & Powell, A. B. (1994). Toward liberatory mathematics: Paulo Freire's epistemology andethnomathematics. In P. L. McLaren, & C. Lankshear (Eds.), Politics of liberation: Paths from Freire(pp. 74-99). London: Routledge.Gutstein, E. (2006). Reading and writing the world with mathematics: Toward a pedagogy for social justice.New York: Routledge.Gutstein, E., & Peterson, B. (Eds.) (2013). Rethinking Mathematics: Teaching Social Justice by the Numbers.Milwaukee, WI: Rethinking Schools.Masingila, J. O. (1994). Mathematics practice in carpet laying. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 25(4),430-462.Saxe, G. B. (1991). Culture and cognitive development: Studies in mathematical understanding. Hillsdale, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Saxe, G. B., & Esmonde, I. (2005). Studying cognition in flux: A historical treatment of Fu in the shiftingstructure of Oksapmin mathematics. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 12(3&4), 171-225.Scribner, S. (1984). Studying working intelligence. In B. Rogoff, & J. Lave (Eds.), Everyday cognition: Itsdevelopment in social context (pp. 9-40). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.Stevens, R., Satwicz, T., & McCarthy, L. (2008). In-game, in-room, in-world: Reconnecting video game play tothe rest of kids' lives. In K. Salen (Ed.), The ecology of games: Connecting youth, games, and learning(pp. 41-66). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. doi: 10.1162/dmal.9780262693646.041Turner, E. E., Gutiérrez, M. V., Simic-Muller, K., & Díez-Palomar, J. (2009). "Everything is math in the wholeworld": Integrating critical and community knowledge in authentic mathematical investigations withelementary Latina/o students. Mathematical Thinking and Learning: An International Journal, 11(3),136-157.AcknowledgmentsThis research was funded by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of the Government ofCanada. We would like to thank the members of StC for allowing us some insight into their important activistwork. We would also like to thank Scott McDonald, Jennifer Langer-Osuna, Niral Shah, GLITTER (Group forthe study of Learning, Identity, and Teaching Towards Equitable Relations, including at that time LesleyDookie, Allison Ritchie, and Miwa Takeuchi), and anonymous reviewers for reading an early draft andproviding feedback.ICLS 2014 Proceedings141© ISLS