Re-grow Your City:A NetLogo Curriculum Unit on Regional DevelopmentArthur Hjorth and Uri WilenskyNorthwestern University, Evanston, ILEmail: arthur.hjorth@u.northwestern.edu, uri@northwestern.eduAbstract: This poster presents the design of an agent-based modeling activity for teachingregional development and social policy at the undergraduate level. Taking a Constructionistview of learning and design, it allows students to learn about the relationship between theemergence of particular socio-economic neighborhoods and the infrastructural design of cities,by ‘re-growing’ their own city.Mechanisms and ConstructionismDespite decades of social sciences research using agent-based modeling, its use in social sciences education isunderstudied. This poster presents a curriculum unit using agent-agent-based modeling to support a mechanismto-dynamic-focused, Constructionist approach to teaching social policy at the undergraduate level. In particular,this policy focuses on Regional Development, and on how social policies and infrastructural decisions can affectthe socio-economic emergence of a city’s neighborhoods. Epstein (1999) famously said about agent-basedmodeling in social sciences that, “If you didn’t grow it, you didn’t explain it.” By deploying a NetLogo model,the unit allows students to change the infrastructural and zoning design of their city and to ‘re-grow’ their owncity.College students struggle with understanding how social policies and urban planning affect the racialand socio-economic composition of a city’s neighborhoods. This should be cause for alarm, because if evenhighly educated citizens are unable to reason cogently about the relationship between policy intervention andoutcome, we run a serious risk of political inertia. Experimental research on policy learning suggests thatknowledge and beliefs about policy issues are correlated, and that a mechanistic approach to explaining policyissues can strengthen both understanding of an issue, and support of policies to address it (Clark, Ranney &Felipe, 2013). This suggests that taking a mechanism-focused approach to teaching about the relationshipbetween social policies and their outcomes may be productive in a social policy educational context. However,another line of research focusing on learners’ reasoning about complex systems (e.g. Wilensky & Resnick,1999) suggests that even if learners understand each of the individual mechanisms of a system, they may stillstruggle with understanding the dynamic system-level outcomes. As a remedy, agent-based modeling has beenused as educational tools for at least two decades, offering learners a ‘tool-to-think-with’ to cognitively offloadtheir knowledge about individual mechanisms, and let the model show how they dynamically interact. Agentbased modeling has been used for education in STEM (Wilensky & Resnick, 1995; Jacobson & Wilensky,2006). The present unit extends design and research experience from this work to education in social sciences.Use of agent-based modeling in education has typically taken a Constructionist approach to learningand to the design of learning activities. Constructionism holds that learning happens best when learnersconstruct external, shared, and personally meaningful artifacts (Harel & Papert, 1991; Papert, 1980). This unitimplements these design principles by encouraging groups of students to redesign a city that they are alreadyfamiliar with. Further, by drawing on a familiar city, students may activate educationally productiveepistemological resources relating to their personal experiences there.Description of ActivityThe curriculum unit is served through WISE (Linn, Clark, & Slotta, 2003), and the simulation activity isdesigned and run in NetLogo. Students in groups of 2-3 are first asked to decide on a policy outcome (‘commutetimes’, ‘quality of education’, ‘access to leisure areas’, or ‘pollution’). They are then asked to first explain whatthey aim to do with this policy outcome (e.g., ‘reduce commute time across the entire population’, or ‘increasequality of education for bottom 20% income bracket’). They are then asked to hypothesize how they will dothis, and to articulate some design principles for achieving their social policy outcomes. Once this is done, theNetLogo model is downloaded, and the simulation activity begins.Students must first re-zone their city and ensure that there is housing and workplaces for all citizens intheir city. They can zone five different kinds of areas: Dense Urban Area, Medium Urban Area, Light SuburbanArea, Subsidized Housing, and Industrial Zones which contain workplaces. Further, they can designate zonesfor public parks, and they can build highways and railroads. Once they have finished re-designing their city,they let the city “grow”. This causes new citizens to move to the city. These citizens have an income drawnrandomly from a distribution similar to that of the US. Each person finds a job in one of the Industrial Zones,and then decides where to live based on three principles: 1) it must be affordable relative to their income, 2) itICLS 2014 Proceedings1553© ISLSshould be close to their spending limit, and 3) it should provide a fast commute to their workplace. In otherwords: people want to live in a place they can afford, and will then weight the quality of the neighborhoodagainst how convenient it is for their commute. Whenever someone moves into a neighborhood, house prices inthat neighborhood and surrounding neighborhoods are adjusted so that the more high-income people move in,the higher the housing prices, and vice versa. This in turn affects who can afford to live there, and therebyaffects who move in as more citizens populate the city.After the city is fully populated, students must investigate how well they did, and reflect on what happened. Themodel provides two different ways for students to do so: Students can spatially visualize the different outcomeson the map (Figure 1) or they can see bar charts of the distribution of the outcomes per income decile (Figure 2).Figure 1: (Left) The designed city, (center) avg. incomes by area, (right) and avg. commute times by area.Figure 2: Customizable bar charts per income decile. (Left) Commute time, (right) access to leisure areas.Students are then encouraged to discuss whether they think they could improve on their designs, and if theychoose so, iterate over their designed city until they have re-grown their city in a way they feel meaningfullymeets their policy outcome goals, and makes the city a better place to live in. Finally students present their regrown cities to other groups in the class, accounting for their goals, their outcomes, and their policy and designstrategies for achieving them.Contributions and RelevanceWe believe that agent-based modeling in social sciences education is understudied, and under-designed-for.Agent-based modeling already has a decades long tradition in social sciences research and STEM education,with a focus on mechanism-to-aggregate-outcome explanations of phenomena, and taking a Constructionistapproach that enables learners to draw on multiple epistemological resources and connect informal, personalexperiences with more formal domain representations. Our curriculum unit draws on this work, but pushes it ina new, exciting direction: Toward social sciences educational contexts.ReferencesEpstein, J. M. (1999). Agent-based computational models and generative social science. Generative SocialScience: Studies in Agent-Based Computational Modeling, 4–46.Harel, I., & Papert, S. (1991). Constructionism. Ablex Publishing.Linn, M. C., Clark, D., & Slotta, J. D. (2003). WISE design for knowledge integration. Science Education.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc.Ranney, M. A., Clark, D., Reinholz, D. L., & Cohen, S. (2013). Knowledge Helps: Mechanistic Information andNumerical Evidence as Cognitive Levers to Overcome Stasis and Build Public Consensus on ClimateChange. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Berlin,Germany: Cognitive Science Society.Wilensky & Resnick, M. (1999). Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8(1), 3–19.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1554© ISLS