Toward an Argumentative Grammar for Socio-Cultural/CulturalHistorical Activity Approaches to Design ResearchMichael Cole, University of California-San Diego, mcole@weber.ucsd.eduYrjö Engeström, University of Helsinki, yrjo.engestrom@helsinki.fiAnnalisa Sannino, University of Helsinki, annalisa.sannino@helsinki.fiKris Gutiérrez, University of Colorado Boulder, gutierkd@gmail.comSusan Jurow, University of Colorado Boulder, susan.jurow@colorado.eduMartin Packer, University of the Andes, mpacker@uniandes.edu.coWilliam R. Penuel, University of Colorado Boulder, william.penuel@colorado.eduRaymond Johnson, University of Colorado Boulder, raymond.johnson@colorado.eduSamuel Severance, University of Colorado Boulder, samuel.severance@colorado.eduHeather Leary, University of Colorado Boulder, heather.leary@colorado.eduSusan Miller, University of Colorado Boulder, susan.miller@colorado.eduDiscussant: Kevin O’Neill, Simon Fraser UniversityAbstract: This symposium will introduce and illustrate the Socio-cultural/CHAT family ofapproaches to Design Research. Design Research has become central to the LearningSciences. It is a key strategy for the study of learning in settings outside the laboratory, and itembodies the twin goals building theoretical knowledge about learning and contributing toeducational practice. The contributors to this symposium will argue, however, that DesignResearchers need to be aware that they are designing artificial settings in which to studyculturally constituted, not biologically-given, processes of learning. The ‘argumentativegrammar’ of socio-cultural/CHAT Design Research will be outlined.Overview of SymposiumDesign Research (DR) has become central to the Learning Sciences. It is a key strategy for the study of learningin settings outside the laboratory. It embodies the twin goals of the Learning Sciences: to build theoreticalknowledge about learning, and to contribute to educational practices, broadly defined. Drawing upon theoreticaltraditions in cognitive science that trace a common genealogy to the work of Herbert Simon. Learning Sciencesresearchers have been at the forefront of testing and refining educational designs primarily in the artificialsettings of school-based classrooms.One might say, however, that contemporary DR in the Learning Sciences takes the form of designingartificial settings in which to study processes of learning that are themselves assumed to be natural properties ofhumans: perception, memory, attention, and learning itself. The contributors to this symposium will argue thatDesign Researchers need to be aware that they are designing artificial settings in which to study culturallyconstituted, not biologically-given, processes of learning. All the contributors take the position that learning is aculturally-mediated activity, not a purely natural process.This symposium will present several examples of a family of approaches to DR that we believe holdspromise for informing Learning Sciences in this burgeoning area of research and theory. We refer to this familyas “Socio-cultural” and “Cultural-historical activity theoretical” (CHAT). The family members share an interestin theories and methodologies that grew to prominence in Russia in the latter half of the 20th century and thathave found many adherents in contemporary approaches to learning and development, concerns that are centralto Learning Sciences. These approaches, taken as a whole, emphasize the cultural and institutional organizationof human action in various forms, in a wide variety of social settings ranging from classrooms in schools tocommunity settings and workplaces. Demonstrating the power of this family of approaches is a central goal ofthe symposium.It has been argued that DR requires an “argumentative grammar,” an explicit and clear logic for itsresearch methodology (Kelly, 2004). The papers in this session will articulate an argumentative grammar forsocio-cultural/CHAT Design Research, in terms of four issues: (1) defining the unit of analysis, (2)conceptualization of change, (3) kind of explanation sought, and (4) what counts as evidence.Because of the variety among Socio-cultural/CHAT Design Researchers, the contributors were eachasked to take up a common set of questions as a means of encouraging a shared focus.1.2.3.How are theory, methodology, and praxis linked in your approach to design?Who designs in the work you do?How is design bounded by the object of activity?ICLS 2014 Proceedings1254© ISLS4.5.Under what conditions does design activity produce new forms of activity and expandedagency, and for whom?What generalizes in design, and how?A Fresh Perspective on Design Research: The Science of the Doubly ArtificialMichael Cole, University of California San Diego; Martin Packer, University of the Andes BogotáHerbert Simon noted that “The world we live in today is much more a man-made, or artificial, world than it is anatural world. Almost every element in our environment shows evidence of human artifice” (Simon, 1996, p. 2).Artifacts, he pointed out, do not violate laws of nature, but they are aspects of nature adapted to human goalsand purposes. The natural sciences seek knowledge about natural phenomena; we ought to call, then, a sciencethat seeks knowledge about artifacts an “artificial science.”Simon defined information processing systems as “artificial” in the sense that they adapt to complexenvironments, “as though they were deliberately designed to fit those environments (as indeed they sometimesare)” (Simon, 1980, p. 33). Cognitive science, it followed, was a “science of the artificial.” Like engineering,medicine, business and architecture it was concerned with the contingent rather than with the necessary; withthings not simply as they are but as how they might be. Simon provocatively defined design in these terms:“Everyone designs who devises courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones” (p.111).Alan Collins subsequently suggested that “a design science of education must determine how differentdesigns of learning environments contribute to learning, cooperation, motivation, etc.” (Collins, 1992, p. 15).For Ann Brown, too, design experiments involve “engineering” the classroom while simultaneously conductingexperimentation. DR in education is “modeled on the procedures of design sciences such as aeronautics andartificial intelligence” (Brown, 1992, p. 141).Despite Simon’s insights into the importance of the artificial, however, design research in the LearningSciences has mainly taken the form of creating artificial environments while the phenomena within it areassumed to be natural properties of human organisms: sensation, attention, perception, and learning processesthemselves. Our own perspective, in contrast, offers a different way to advance Simon’s original insight. Theclassroom is already an artificial environment designed to bring about specific kinds of transformations in thestudents and teachers who act within it, before researchers arrive. In this sense, the behavior of those studentsand teachers is itself artificial; teaching and learning are not merely natural processes but are cultural activitiesthat are the product of human design. That is to say, teaching and learning are not the results of fixed anduniversal psychological processes, but the purposeful consequences of particular local and temporally boundedpractices that employ the material artifacts of their environment in order to create, to constitute, specificfunctional systems of psychological processes. Classroom teaching and learning has always already beendesigned, albeit sometimes in a tacit, unexamined fashion, or “old fashioned” manner.From this viewpoint, Simon was correct that human psychological functioning is artificial in the sensethat it is the result of adaptation to a contingent environment (though we would not agree with hischaracterization of psychological functioning as information processing). We argue, however, that humanpsychological functioning is in fact doubly artificial, since the environments to which it is an adaptation arethemselves artificial and contingent, the products of design.In short, then, DR as usually practiced within the Learning Sciences is the design of artificial settingsin which to study natural processes, while a CHAT-inspired DR is the design of artificial settings in which tostudy processes of design (i.e., “courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones”).Our proposal will be that CHAT-inspired DR is a science of the artificial in the double sense that we have justarticulated. This paper will illustrate this proposal by describing a form of CHAT-inspired DR that involvescreation of a out-of-school activity setting, the Fifth Dimension.DR has been at the core of the Learning Sciences, in so far as LS involves the study of learning outsidethe laboratory in real world settings. DR has been defined as having “dual goals”: contributing to educationaltheory as well as educational practice. However, in the 20 years since it was first defined, DR has beencriticized in various ways. It has been accused of paying insufficient attention to theory, and as often amountingmerely to the testing of theory whose origins come from outside the classroom. Instead, it has been argued, DRoffers the potential for “ontological innovation,” the positing and validation of new “categories of existence inthe world” (diSessa & Cobb, 2004, p. 84). We agree with this proposal, and will illustrate such innovation in theFifth Dimension.At the same time, DR has been accused of paying insufficient attention to practice, in the sense that itis usually the researchers’ definition of the practical goals of the design intervention that are emphasized.Instead, it is argued, DR should adopt a more critical stance, and seek to “develop sociotechnical structures thatfacilitate individuals in critiquing and improving themselves and the societies in which they function” (Barab etal., 2007, p. 263). We also agree with this proposal, and will illustrate the role of critique in CHAT DR.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1255© ISLSIn addition, DR has been accused of lacking a clear and explicit logic of inquiry, an “argumentativegrammar,” that is, a clear statement of “the logic that guides the use of a method and that supports reasoningabout its data” (Kelly, 2004, p. 118). It is important to note, however, that Kelly assumes that DR is at its heart aform of research that seeks to identify what is “necessary” in a situation of learning, and to separate this fromwhat is “contingent” (understood as “arbitrary”). Simon’s insight that cognitive science, and by extensioneducational research and in particular Learning Sciences, is a science of the artificial, that is to say of thecontingent, appears to have been lost. Our own starting place, in contrast, is with the observation that what is“contingent” - in the sense of what is locally customary and valued - is equally important to practices ofteaching and learning as what is necessary, and that what appears necessary often turns out to be contingent.We believe that when DR is properly understood as the design of (artificial and contingent)environments in order to study (artificial and contingent) practices of learning, an adequate argumentativegrammar can be provided. We shall outline such a grammar in the form of answers to the following questions:(1) What is the unit of analysis? (2) How is change conceptualized? (3) What kind of explanation is sought? and(4) What counts as evidence?Our presentation will offer, justify, and exemplify the following answers to these questions:(1) The unit of analysis is the activity system and its associated cultural practices created byparticipants from (at least) two different institutions.(2) Change is conceptualized as having its source in contradiction. Change can include not onlylearning and development but also dissolution and decay. An activity system may transform in aproductive way or it can die; people can forget what they have learned.(3) Explanation takes the form of the detailed articulation of constitutive processes. A sufficientlydetailed documentation of process-oriented design research makes it possible to observeconstitution and to reconstruct it as a real sequence of events.(4) Evidence is obtained by researchers who are themselves participants in the design process, tracingand documenting cultural practices over extended periods of time, at several levels of analysis,using a variety of methods (field notes, audio and video recordings).The goal of the project to be described is to change, and where possible, reduce, constraints on theactivities to be designed in order to obtain a deeper understanding of the learning potential of activities, incircumstances that differ markedly from the institutional constraints of standard classrooms. We have taken thisroute because Learning Sciences DR in the classroom typically takes for granted - and leaves unchanged inmany respects - the institutional roles that are defined by the school: those of student and teacher. DR may, andoften does, seek to transform these roles, but it does not, and arguably cannot, eliminate them. Yet these rolesimpose severe constraints on the character of learning and teaching. The people who inhabit such roles mustcover curriculum, often defined by externally imposed “standards,” and they must implement forms ofevaluation that lead to scores on tests, grades in courses, and ultimately ratings of their school. Within theseconstraints details can be changed - such as whether students work together and on what, whether the teacher isthe primary source of information or not - but the fundamental logic of the institution must be accepted byresearchers as much as by the participants with whom they conduct their studies.CHAT-inspired design research outside the school classroom takes advantage of the fact that it can, incontrast, start without many of these institutional constraints if not from scratch. Our design research in SanDiego takes place in the Learning Center of a government-subsidized housing project. In Bogotá it takes placein a small apartment rented from the parents of one of the founders of the non-profit organization Inti Tekoa,with which we are collaborating. In both cases, children and youth simply drop in from the street, or aredropped of by a parent or come with older family members. In San Diego, the adolescents and young adultscome from the local university. In Bogota, the adolescents are enrolled in a “social service” requirement fortheir secondary school, but we have worked hard to confound their expectation that they would find themselvesin something like a school classroom. In this basement apartment we can paint on the floor, decorate forHalloween to create a House of Horror, spray water, cut watermelon, invite in a passing dog, and simply mopthe floor afterwards.On the other hand, each of the participants at this site is involved in one or more institutions elsewhere:the university, the secondary school, their family. Each of us arrives with expectations, and with dispositions toact and interact that have been shaped by years, sometimes decades, of involvement in these institutions. Someof these expectations and dispositions transfer well into the site, while others do not. Documenting how thecontradictions among these expectations are resolved by participants by virtue of their collaboration in, and inorder to collaborate in, activities provides us with evidence we can use to reconstruct how our work in designingthe site articulates with the ways participants are themselves artificial, products of design processes of educationand work.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1256© ISLSFormative Interventions and Transformative Agency: Principles, Practice, andResearchYrjö Engeström and Annalisa Sannino, CRADLE, University of HelsinkiSome 35 years ago Urie Bronfenbrenner wrote that “research on the ecology of human development shouldinclude experiments involving the innovative restructuring of prevailing ecological systems in ways that departfrom existing institutional ideologies and structures by redefining goals, roles, and activities and providinginterconnections between systems previously isolated from each other” (Bronfenbrenner, 1977, p. 528). Thisrecommendation remains largely unheeded in educational research. This may be so in part because thetransformative agency of the learners and teachers has seldom been taken as central challenge in design-basedresearch.Bronfenbrenner referred to Soviet cultural-historical activity theory as a key inspiration. The historicallegacy of cultural-historical activity theory is one of theoretically and methodologically argued interventionism.This interventionist legacy has been picked up and systematically developed further in a few places in today’sworld, including Helsinki, Paris, and San Diego. We will present the Helsinki variation, which we will call amethodology of formative interventions (Engeström, 2011).This idea of formative interventions is being adopted in various educational research communitiesinternationally (e.g., Anthony, Hunter & Thompson, in press; Bronkhorst, Meijer, Koster, Akkerman &Vermunt, 2013; Eri, 2013). Research done using formative interventions focuses on transformations andlearning in object-oriented activities (Greeno & Engeström, in press), often outside schools, in workplaces andcommunities (e.g., Mukute & Lotz-Sisitka, 2012). The object of these activities is not self-evident; it is typicallyat risk or in crisis, ambiguous, fragmented, and contested. The object is rediscovered as a result of historical andempirical work of data collection and analysis with the help of conceptual models by the researcherinterventionists and the participants. The object is inherently contradictory from the beginning. Negotiationsemerge as shared tools and concepts are built to depict and handle the contradictory object and the conflictingmotives related to it. The emphasis is on the creation and implementation of “germ cells”, foundational modelsfor new patterns of the activity, usually first constructed in relatively bounded units that then open up, expandand multiply.The methodology of formative interventions is built on two epistemological principles, namely (1) theprinciple of double stimulation and (2) the principle of ascending from the abstract to the concrete (Sannino,2011). The first one was formulated and implemented by Vygotsky and his colleagues (e.g., Vygotsky, 1997).The second one stems from the classic works of Hegel and Marx, was brought into activity theory by thephilosopher Il’enkov (1982), and systematically implemented as foundation for a theory of learning andinstruction by Davydov (1990).The principle of double stimulation, in its full Vygotskian version, regards developmentally valuablelearning as a process in which the subject faces a paralyzing conflict of motives (first stimulus) which isresolved by discovering an artifact which is filled with meaning and turned into a sign (second stimulus) thatenables the subject to redefine the situation and to take volitional actions to break out of it. The principle ofascending from the abstract to the concrete depicts developmentally valuable learning as transforming aproblematic situation to discover and model an initial “germ cell” abstraction that is then applied andimplemented to construct a complex new concreteness. Both principles put the formation of volitional actionand transformative agency in the center of learning. We define transformative agency as breaking away from thegiven frame of action and taking the initiative to transform it. The new concepts and practices generated by thistype of expansive learning activity are future-oriented visions loaded with initiative and commitment frombelow. They cannot be predefined and safely constrained by researchers or authorities.For about 20 years, the methodology of formative interventions has been implemented in practice bymeans of a toolkit called the Change Laboratory (Engeström & al., 1996; Virkkunen & Newnham, 2013). TheChange Laboratory is used when an activity system or a cluster of activity systems faces an uncertain butnecessary transformation riddled with conflicting motives and energized by a possibility of reaching aqualitatively new, emancipated mode of activity. In Change Laboratories the practitioners, including students,take over the leading role in designing their future. The taking over is a crucial feature of a formativeintervention. This means also that the end result cannot be fully determined ahead of time and controlledthrough the process. The very point is to generate the unexpected - learning what is not yet there. This does notmean that the interventionists do not bring in their own ideas and aims. The dynamism of the intervention stemsfrom the tension and interplay between the interventionists’ and the practitioners’ ideas and intentions.We will describe and analyze three Change Laboratory interventions (one conducted in an academiclibrary in Helsinki, another one conducted among greenhouse vegetable growers in western Finland, and thethird one conducted in a school in Moscow, Russia) as implementations of the two epistemological principles.The methodology of formative interventions generates several varieties of research. These include (a)studies of manifestations of contradictions (e.g., Engeström & Sannino, 2011); (b) studies of expansive learningICLS 2014 Proceedings1257© ISLSactions and learning cycles (e.g., Engeström, Rantavuori & Kerosuo, 2013); (c) studies of expressions oftransformative agency (e.g., Engeström & Sannino, 2013; Haapasaari, Engeström & Kerosuo, in press); and (d)studies of concept formation (e.g., Engeström, Nummijoki & Sannino, 2012). We will conclude by discussingthese varieties and the prospective next steps in the development of formative interventionist research.Designing for Possible Futures: The Potential of Social Design ExperimentsKris D. Gutiérrez and A. Susan Jurow, University of Colorado BoulderThis paper is about designing for educational and social possibilities—designs that in their inception, socialorganization, and implementation squarely address issues of cultural diversity, social inequality, andconsequential learning. We draw on a cultural historical activity theoretic framework to discuss the developmentof sustainable and resilient learning ecologies for non-dominant communities. Researchers working within thistradition employ a diverse range of theoretical perspectives, including cultural historical activity theory, toattend to the mediating role of social contexts and practices in human meaning-making processes and the role ofresearchers’ efforts to improve the human condition of which learning is fundamental (Gutiérrez & Vossoughi,2010). The goal of this work, then, is to make possible a sustainable and dignified life for all humans. Thisrequires an interventionist stance that designs for new possibilities. Within this work, the approach to designfocuses on re-mediating (Cole & Griffin, 1983) the effects of social inequity on vulnerable ecologies andcommunities who live in “tight circumstances,” with particular attention to making visible the ingenuity inhuman activity (McDermott & Raley, 2011).Envisioning New Forms of Intervention and DesignThere are different kinds of interventions; however, few are theorized in ways that address a core humanproblem: our inability to resolve issues of cultural diversity and social inequality, to provide polyculturalsolutions, or to understand where one can allow for variability without turning it into a deficit (Cole, 1998;Gutiérrez, 2008). There is a need to formulate an alternative social science with a new social imagination, withsome scale of social concept about how people can learn resonantly, as they live together productively andinterculturally in resilient ecologies (Walker & Salt, 2006). There are extant models of this kind of formativeintervention research in the field. The “change laboratory,” for example, involves the collaboration ofpractitioners and researchers around an important and consequential problem of practice within an existingactivity system (Cole & Engeström, 2006; Engeström, 2011; Engeström & Sannino, 2010).Within this tradition, we discuss a new form of design: social design experiments (SDE)—culturalhistorical formations concerned with social consequences, transformative potential, and new trajectories forhistorically vulnerable people, especially people from non-dominant communities (Gutiérrez, 2008, Gutiérrez &Vossoughi, 2010). Organized around expansive notions of learning and mediated praxis, social designexperiments are oriented toward transformative ends through iterative processes of mutual relations ofexchange; specifically, SDE’s seek to (a) leverage the histories and repertoires of practice of members of nondominant communities to envision new futures and trajectories; (b) introduce new tools and practices forenvisioning new pedagogical and social arrangements; (c) underscore the role of diversity in ecologicalresilience and in re-mediating and sustaining viable and thriving ecologies; and (d) develop ecologically validinterventions and representations.Following Erickson (2006, p. 225), SDE’s require sustained first-hand observation, sharing in theaction and cognition of practitioners and community members. Studying “side by side” with research partnersjointly engaged in work to transform systems involves the researcher assuming the role of a collaborativepartner and a reflective “observant participant” who helps make visible the practices, meanings, andcontradictions that often become invisible to those closest to the action (Erickson, 1986, p. 157; Gutiérrez &Vossoughi, 2010).Two Models of Social Design ExperimentsWe elaborate two very different examples of social design experiments at very different scales to make the casefor a design methodology distinguished by its grammar of hope, possibility, and resilience (Gutiérrez, 2011). Todo so, we illustrate some key dimensions of this approach across cases. One illustrative case, an educationalintervention, privileges intergenerational collaboration that foregrounds the agency of learners in ways that aredistinct from the agency of designers and policy makers, for example, and emphasizes cross-institutionalpartnerships that promote new forms of engagement around learning; mediated by new technologies anddivisions of labor, learning is reorganized in ways that create spaces to experiment pedagogically acrossinstitutional settings: the University and the community.The second case involves a research team that has been studying a constellation of groups involved inthe local food justice movement in three Western U.S. cities. The groups have chosen to focus their study onissues of food access among the most underserved communities in the state. These include people living inICLS 2014 Proceedings1258© ISLSpoverty, vulnerable immigrant populations, and historically marginalized communities residing inneighborhoods with limited access to healthy and inexpensive foods. The problems facing these communitiesare entangled across multiple scales that include government (federal, state, and local), historical patterns ofimmigration, and shifts in global and local economies. Understanding how groups have chosen to intercede inthe food system so that it can better serve vulnerable communities requires studying their efforts at rescalingacross multiple levels of activity. We articulate the work of equity-oriented scalemaking in the local food justicemovement drawing on examples from our multi-sited research study (Jurow, et al., under review). That is, giventhe fact that there are no ready-made answers to solving the problem of inequity in this system, these groupshave developed unique strategies for transforming relations between communities, local food (its production,distribution, and consumption), and the geospatial organization of access to educational, environmental, health,and economic resources (Kurtz, 2013).Though these two examples differ in their scale of intervention, they share important design principlesthat make the history of the ecology and its participants, available resources, diversity, resilience, and thepossibility of new trajectories central to the conception of the design. Of significance, these interventions buildfor resilience and sustainability across longer timescales. Thus, while these interventions are aimed at local andinstitutional change, as social design experiments they are also aimed at broader social change through smalland larger scale instantiations or realizations of a possible future. We argue that collectively these approachesbecome generative of a new imagination that conceives of resilience over cultural historical time, a resiliencethat encompasses ecological thinking about social and environmental systems, including educational systems.This is critical if we are ever to conduct research on learning and design for the social good in ways that havetransformative and enduring consequences for people in vulnerable communities.Negotiating and Accomplishing the Object of Design in Research-PracticePartnershipsWilliam R. Penuel, Raymond Johnson, Samuel Severance, Heather Leary, and Susan Miller, University ofColorado BoulderIn Cultural-Historical Activity Theory (CHAT), understanding the object of activity is what helps us make senseof why individuals, groups, or organizations do what they do (Kaptelinin, 2005). The object bounds analysis ofactivity systems and interactions between activity systems: it is the reference point from which researchersdevelop claims about the organization and effects of activity (Spinuzzi, 2011). The object is also oftenunderstood as a kind of “shared problem space,” and as such, a site of intervention, transformation, and learning(Akkerman & Bakker, 2011; Engeström, 2011; Engeström & Sannino, 2010).Research-practice partnerships are emerging as new forms for organizing intervention research in thelearning sciences (Coburn, Penuel, & Geil, 2013). In these partnerships, the object of design emerges throughjoint negotiation of researchers and educators in particular educational systems, such as school districts (Penuel,Coburn, & Gallagher, in press). At the same time, the problem spaces of design often have the character of“runaway objects,” that is, objects held in common across multiple activities that take place across multiplesettings and with different configurations of actors (Engeström, 2008). Research-practice partnerships ineducation today take on such objects as “improving instruction at scale” (Cobb & Jackson, 2012) and“improving the success rate of community college students who place into developmental mathematics” (Dolle,Gomez, Russell, & Bryk, in press). As with other runaway objects, these are not in any single person, group, ororganization’s control, including participants in partnerships.The work of partnerships takes place at the boundaries of the cultural and institutional communities ofresearchers and practitioners. Researchers and practitioners’ cultural and institutional contexts are distinct, butalso related. They are distinct, in that the objects, tools, and community practices of researchers differ widelyfrom those of educators in schools and other settings (National Research Council, 2012). At the same time, thetwo worlds are related, because much of educational research aims to inform or directly intervene to improveeducational practice. In addition, there are many people and organizations who move across these boundariesand broker connections between them (Penuel et al., in press). Research-practice partnerships often entail theconstruction of boundary zones where they negotiate the object(s) of their design work, as well as boundarypractices, hybridized forms of practice that they design to help accomplish the partnership’s object(s).Constructing a Boundary Zone to Negotiate the ObjectWork at the boundary of research and practice often requires constructing temporary spaces for negotiating theobject of joint work and engaging in collaborative design. A key challenge to negotiating an initial object is toidentify, name, and confront problems or challenges that are of mutual concern to participants in the partnership.Because researchers and practitioners often define their respective problem spaces differently (NationalResearch Council, 2003), overcoming this challenge takes time and can benefit from explicit discussion andnegotiation (Dolle et al., in press). At the same time, the process may be facilitated when the work practices ofICLS 2014 Proceedings1259© ISLSboth researchers and practitioners have been disrupted, such as through the introduction of new policiesaffecting both research and practice. These policies may help partners to identify a “shared problem space”(Akkerman & Bakker, 2011), an object that they agree is important and that requires the ongoing mutualengagement of researchers and practitioners to accomplish.Accomplishing the Object in Research-Practice PartnershipsThe objects that give meaning to partnership activity require that partners influence activities outside theboundary zone. Sometimes, the object of a partnership requires mainly influences on mechanisms ofcoordination in systems. Examples include work focused on the coordination of professional developmentacross role groups in school districts (Jackson & Cobb, in press) and work that aims to coordinate youth’sopportunities to pursue science-linked interests across school and out-of-school settings in a community (Penuelet al., 2012). More common, however, is work that aims to develop new boundary practices that can helppartnerships accomplish objects focused on transforming educational systems. The aim of such work istransformation (Akkerman & Bakker, 2011), in which new, hybridized practices that bring together elementsfrom research and practices are developed and, ideally, integrated into new routines and procedures throughoutthe system.An Example: The Inquiry HubThe Inquiry Hub is a research-practice partnership among researchers, curriculum publishers, and a large, urbanschool district in the Western United States. The Inquiry Hub’s activities are funded through a grant from theNational Science Foundation (NSF); its principal investigators include representatives from both researchorganizations and the district. The partnership’s activities are framed by the object of the funding agency,improving STEM education through researcher-initiated research and development projects. However, thespecific object of the partnership is a focus of ongoing negotiation, and the resources allocated through the grantto accomplish the partnership’s object are shaped by those negotiations.The partnership’s boundary zone is a fluid space comprised of a stable set of institutions in whichspecific partners change over time. It includes educational researchers with different forms of expertise (e.g.,mathematics, assessment, professional development), software engineers, curriculum developers, district leadersfrom different departments and with different kinds of authority for decision making, and teachers. It isconstituted through regular meetings whose agendas differ, depending on the composition of the group. Aleadership team meets via telephone on a weekly basis to negotiate the overall work of the partnership, and aTeacher Advisory Board (TAB) meets with that team regularly to engage in design work.The negotiation of the shared problem space is an ongoing activity within the Inquiry Hub, in partbecause of the changing needs of the district and differences in perspectives among the partners. Initially atleast, the object of the partnership was to support adaptation of varied forms of “student-centered” instructionalmaterials in mathematics and science throughout the district. However, with adoption of new standards inmathematics (Common Core State Standards), the district saw a need to focus more attention on developingunderstanding of new standards and the kinds of tasks that embodied the new standards. Teachers on the TAB,for their part, suddenly had a need for new instructional materials related to standards that had not been part ofthe curriculum before. These needs created a shared problem space related to the new standards, but it also ledto some conflict over strategies for accomplishing the object of supporting implementation of new standards.That conflict is reflected in the different perspectives on the design work of the TAB, which hasfocused on developing a new set of boundary practices related to instructional tasks in mathematics. Thepractice focuses on selecting, rating, and distributing instructional tasks in Algebra. For the researchers, thepractice is a site for sociotechnical design: creating scalable social processes for supporting the task ratingprocess and a technical (Web-based) infrastructure for distributing tasks and task ratings. For district leaders, thetask rating process is a tool for developing awareness of what constitutes cognitively demanding mathematicaltasks that can meet new standards. For teachers, the process of rating and distributing tasks is principally ameans to discover new materials they might use in the classroom.The partnership is also challenged by difficulties in crystallization of the boundary practices withinongoing routines and practices of the district. As with other boundary practices, the practices of the partnershipare “subject to political processes, having a mediating role for contrasting goals, possibly reinforcing powerstructures and occupational hierarchies” (Akkerman & Bakker, 2011, p. 150). Making other teachers aware oftasks available to them in the technology infrastructure and providing professional development in the taskrating process requires that the district partners gain and secure access to times when the district providesprofessional development to teachers. It also requires TAB members to gain access to agendas of teacher teammeetings in their own schools. These are both settings where other district leaders not part of the partnership, aswell as leaders of other initiatives and partnerships, compete for access to teachers. The partnership has yet tomake its particular boundary practices “obligatory passage points” all teachers in the district must attend to andjoin as participants (c.f., Christiansen & Varnes, 2007).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1260© ISLSIn the Inquiry Hub, attending to boundaries foregrounds the need to confront multiple perspectives onthe object of design in partnerships. All design research produces new practices that require ongoing work tosustain; however, a focus on these practices as boundary practices reveals potential sources of difference andconflict within the partnership. In addition, a focus on the challenges of crystallization of boundary practicesreveals the ways that partnerships compete for scarce time and resources with other initiatives in educationalsystems, some of which may share the same object but pursue different strategies for accomplishing that object.ReferencesAkkerman, S. F., & Bakker, A. (2011). Boundary crossing and boundary objects. Review of EducationalResearch, 81(2), 132-169.Anthony, G., Hunter, R. & Thompson, Z. (in press). Expansive learning: Lessons from one teacher’s learningjourney. ZDM – The International Journal on Mathematics Education.Barab, S., Dodge, T., Thomas, M. K., Jackson, C., & Tuzun, H. (2007). Our designs and the social agendas theycarry. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 263-305.Bronfenbrenner U. (1977). Toward an experimental ecology of human development. American Psychologist,32, 513–531.Bronkhorst, L. H., Meijer, P. C., Koster, B., Akkerman, S. F. & Vermunt, J. D. (2013). Consequential researchdesigns in research on teacher education. Teaching and Teacher Education, 33, 90-99.Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Christiansen, J. K., & Varnes, C. J. (2007). Making decisions on innovation: Meetings or networks? Creativityand Innovation Management, 16, 282-298.Cobb, P. A., & Jackson, K. (2012). Analyzing educational policies: A learning design perspective. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 21, 487-521.Coburn, C. E., Penuel, W. R., & Geil, K. (2013). Research-practice partnerships at the district level: A newstrategy for leveraging research for educational improvement. Berkeley, CA and Boulder, CO:University of California and University of Colorado.Cole, M. (1998). Can cultural psychology help us think about diversity? Mind, Culture, and Activity, 5(4), 291–304.Cole, M. & Griffin, P. (1983). A socio-historical approach to re-mediation. The Quarterly Newsletter of theLaboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, 5(4), 69-74.Cole, M. & Engeström, Y. (2006). Cultural-historical approaches to designing for development. In J. Valsiner &A. Rosa (Eds.) The Cambridge Handbook of Sociocultural Psychology. (484-507). Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science of education. In E. Scanlon & T. O’Shea (Eds.), NATO ASI Series:New Directions in Educational Technology (Vol. 96, pp. 15-22). Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3642-77750-9_2Davydov, V. V. (1990). Types of generalization in instruction: Logical and psychological problems in thestructuring of school curricula. Reston: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educationalinquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.diSessa, A. A., & Cobb, P. (2004). Ontological innovation and the role of theory in design experiments. Journalof the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 77-103.Dolle, J. R., Gomez, L. M., Russell, J. L., & Bryk, A. S. (in press). More than a network: Building professionalcommunities for educational improvement. In B. J. Fishman, W. R. Penuel, A.-R. Allen & B. H. Cheng(Eds.), Design-based implementation research: Theories, methods, and exemplars. National Society forthe Study of Education Yearbook. New York, NY: Teachers College Record.Engeström, Y. (2008). From teams to knots: Activity-theoretical studies of collaboration and learning at work.Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Engeström, Y. (2011). From design experiments to formative interventions. Theory & Psychology, 21(5), 598628.Engeström, Y., Nummijoki, J. & Sannino, A. (2012). Embodied germ cell at work: Building an expansiveconcept of physical mobility in home care. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 19(3), 287-309.Engeström, Y., Rantavuori, J. & Kerosuo, H. (2013). Expansive learning in a library: Actions, cycles anddeviations from instruction intentions. Vocations and Learning, 6(1), 81-106.Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and futurechallenges. Educational Research Review, 5, 1-24.Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2011). Discursive manifestations of contradictions in organizational changeefforts: A methodological framework. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 24(3), 368387.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1261© ISLSEngeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2013). La volition et l’agentivité transformatrice: Perspective théorique del’activité. Revue Internationale du CRIRES: Innover dans la tradition de Vygotsky, 1(1), 4-19.Engeström, Y., Virkkunen, J., Helle, M., Pihlaja, J. & Poikela, R. (1996). Change laboratory as a tool fortransforming work. Lifelong Learning in Europe, 1(2), 10-17.Eri, T. (2013). The best way to conduct intervention research: Methodological considerations. Quality andQuantity, 47(5), 2459-2472.Erickson, F. (2006). Studying side by side: Collaborative action ethnography in educational research. In G.Spindler & L. Hammond (Eds.), Innovations in educational ethnography: Theory, methods and results(pp. 235-257). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Greeno, J. G. & Engeström, Y. (in press). Learning in activity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbookof the learning sciences. 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Gutiérrez, K. D. (2011, April). Presidential Address: Designing resilient ecologies: Towards a human scienceof learning. Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association.Gutiérrez, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading Research Quarterly,43(2), 148-164.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Vossoughi, S. (2010). Lifting off the ground to return anew: Mediated praxis,transformative learning, and social design experiments. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1-2), 100117.Haapasaari, A., Engeström, Y. & Kerosuo, H. (in press). The emergence of learners´ transformative agency in aChange Laboratory intervention. Journal of Education and Work.Ilyenkov, E. V. (1982). The dialectics of the abstract and the concrete in Marx’s Capital. Moscow: Progress.Jackson, K., & Cobb, P. (in press). Coordinating professional development across contexts and role group. InM. Evans (Ed.), Teacher education and pedagogy: Theory, policy and practice. New York, NY:Cambridge University Press.Jurow, A.S., O’Connor, K., Shea, M.V., Cartun, A., & Wiley, K. (under review). Learning, as organizing, insocial movements. The Journal of the Learning Sciences.Kaptelinin, V. (2005). The object of activity: Making sense of the sense-maker. Mind, Culture, and Activity,12(1), 4-18.Kelly, A. (2004). Design research in education: Yes, but is it methodological? Journal of the Learning Sciences,13(1), 115-128.Kolodner, J. L. (2012, July). Envisioning the next generation classroom and the next generation of learningtechnologies. Paper presented at the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Sydney,Australia.McDermott, R., & Raley, J. (2011). Looking closely: Toward a natural history of human ingenuity. In E.Margolis & L. Pauwels (Eds), The SAGE handbook of visual research methods (pp. 372-391).Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Mukute, M., & Lotz-Sisitka, H. (2012). Working with cultural-historical activity theory and critical realism toinvestigate and expand farmer learning in Southern Africa. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 19, 342–367.National Research Council. (2003). Strategic education research partnership. Washington, DC: NationalResearch Council.National Research Council. (2012). Using science as evidence in policy. Washington, DC: National AcademiesPress.Penuel, W. R., Coburn, C. E., & Gallagher, D. (in press). Negotiating problems of practice in research-practicepartnerships focused on design. In B. J. Fishman, W. R. Penuel, A.-R. Allen & B. H. Cheng (Eds.),Design-based implementation research: Theories, methods, and exemplars. National Society for theStudy of Education Yearbook. New York, NY: Teachers College Record.Penuel, W. R., Falk, J. H., Dierking, L. D., Kirshner, B., Haun-Frank, J., & York, A. J. (2012). Locating thedevelopment of interest: Tools for studying the mutual constitution of persons and cultural practices inplaces. In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.), The future of learning:Proceedings of the 10th international conference of the learning sciences (ICLS 2012) – Volume 2,short papers, symposia, and abstracts (pp. 326-330). Sydney, Australia: ISLS.Sannino, A. (2011). Activity theory as an activist and interventionist theory. Theory & Psychology, 21(5), 571597.Simon, H. A. (1980). Cognitive science: The newest science of the artificial. Cognitive Science, 4(1), 33-46.Simon, H. A. (1996). The sciences of the artificial (3rd ed.). MIT Press.Spinuzzi, C. (2011). Losing by expanding: Corralling the runaway object. Journal of Business and TechnicalCommunication, 25(4), 449-486.Virkkunen, J. & Newnham, D. (2013). The Change Laboratory: A tool for collaborative development of workand education. Rotterdam: Sense.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1262© ISLSVygotsky, L. S. (1997). The history of the development of higher mental functions. In The collected works of L.S. Vygotsky. Vol. 4. The history of the development of higher mental functions. New York: Plenum.Walker, B. & Salt, D. (2006). Resilience thinking: Sustaining ecosystems and people in a changing world.Washington, D.C.: Island Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1263© ISLS