The Role of Identity Development within Tensions in Ownership ofScience LearningJason Yip, Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop, jyip@sesame.orgTamara Clegg, June Ahn, Elizabeth Bonsignore, Michael Gubbels, Emily Rhodes, Becky LewittesUniversity of Maryland – Human-Computer Interaction Lab{tclegg, juneahn, ebonsign, mgubbels, charley}@umd.edu; emily@emilyrhodes.comAbstract: Ownership of science learning is defined as learners being able to fully participatein the practicing culture of science, having greater control and possession over the ideas putforth, knowledge developed, and the science learning process. While ownership is beneficialto promoting science engagement, in this study, we show that conflicts in ownership ofscience learning manifest and can hinder learning. We document three focal learners whofaced tensions and conflicts in their ownership of science learning. Specifically, we examinehow learners’ development and conceptions of ownership at home and school influenced howownership of learning was expressed in an afterschool program called Kitchen Chemistry(KC). We argue that learners’ expressions of ownership are a reflection of their identitydevelopment in science and that conflicts are a part of this manifestation.IntroductionFor many years, educational researchers have documented that many youth find aspects of traditional schoolscience to be disengaging and irrelevant to their everyday lives (e.g., Atwater, 1996). Often in school science,teaching science is the equivalent of transferring knowledge from an authority (e.g., teacher, curriculum,software) to the students. Learners are often obligated to acquire knowledge from these credible andauthoritative sources and later reproduce this abstract knowledge as correct answers (e.g., Fusco, 2001). Fusco(2001) argues that for science to be made relevant, learners need to engage in a practicing culture of sciencelearning in which learners’ own concerns, needs, issues, and experiences are brought to the forefront oflearning. O’Neill and Barton (2005) contend that if learners were to have ownership of the science they werelearning, they would be more motivated to engage. Ownership of science learning is defined as learners beingable to fully participate in the practicing culture of science, having greater control and possession over the ideasput forth, knowledge developed, and the science learning process. Researchers argue that ownership can be apowerful way to support learners’ engagement in science inquiry (e.g., O’Neill & Barton, 2005; O’Neill, 2010).The core assumptions of these studies are that having ownership in the learning process leads to greatermotivation and participation in science learning.However, within the literature there is an overly positive assumption that if science connected tolearners’ lives or encouraged active participation in a culture of science, this would help learners developownership of the knowledge and processes of science. Only a small number of studies have started to documentthe evolution of learners’ ownership in science (e.g., O’Neill & Barton, 2005; O’Neill, 2010). Few studies haveexamined how social, personal, and cultural factors influence how a person interprets ownership and how anindividual’s own interpretation from one context (e.g., home) may change the dynamics of ownership in anothercontext (e.g., school). In particular, as a learner transitions between different contexts, he or she may encounterconflicts in ownership of science learning, depending both social interactions and identity development (e.g.,Pierce, Kostova, & Dirks, 2003). In this study, we document three focal learners who experience tensions andconflicts in ownership of science learning. Specifically, we examine how learners’ development andconceptions of ownership at home and school influenced how ownership of learning was expressed in anafterschool program called Kitchen Chemistry (KC). We argue that learners’ expressions of ownership are areflection of their identity development in science and that conflicts are a part of this manifestation. Specifically,we ask two questions: 1) what is the role of learners’ identity development as they encounter tensions andconflicts in ownership of science learning? and 2) how do we best support learners’ ownership in sciencelearning, particularly in informal, project-based learning environments?BackgroundWhile there is consensus that learners’ ownership can lead to higher engagement, researchers often examineownership from different perspectives: individual and social. First, studies of ownership can take an individualoutcome perspective; learners’ ownership is a set of feelings and emotions that evokes a sense of control andpossession within individuals and groups (e.g., Pierce et al., 2003). In their extensive review, Pierce andcolleagues (2003) conceptually define psychological ownership as the “state where an individual feels as thoughthe target of ownership or a piece of that target is theirs” (p. 5). Ownership is expressed in possessive emotionscommonly associated with ‘my’, ‘mine’ and ‘our.’ Here, individuals might “feel” as though the target ofICLS 2014 Proceedings174© ISLSownership is theirs. From an individual standpoint, learners’ experiences, beliefs, goals, and cultural influencesshape how ownership manifests. In this view, ownership is something that is achieved, and once achieved,ownership can provide a means for motivation and engagement in learning.Ownership can also be examined from a social process standpoint. From this perspective, socialcontexts influence how ownership manifests; thus, ownership varies moment-to-moment for learners in variousdomains (e.g., Bandura, 2001). Ownership depends on the interacting relationships between learners, teachers,and the context. Although support of ownership needs to take place in the community, a lack of ownership canalso be traced to power relations. Cornelius and Herrenkohl (2004) identify ownership of ideas as amanifestation of power in student-teacher relationships. Ownership of ideas implies a relation in power betweenindividuals and concepts. In the realm of education, “whomever students perceive as having ownership of anidea - either themselves, their teachers, their textbooks, or their peers - will influence the relation that the studenthas to the idea itself” (Cornelius & Herrenkohl, 2004, p. 470). Therefore, students’ expressions of ownership ofknowledge are not standalone, but are tied up with the attitudes, participation and perspectives of adults andother learners. Using O’Neill and Barton's (2005) conception, our study acknowledges this duality: “Ownershipis a dynamic and generative (social) process that exists in tension with ownership as an (individual) outcome”(p. 299). In this interpretation, there exists an acknowledgement that ownership is delicate and changing, but isstill an innate part of people; thus, ownership exists as the dialectic between process and outcome and thedialectic between individual and social.Ownership as Tensions and Conflicts in Science LearningWhile most of the literature on ownership portrays the construct as an important and vital component tomotivation and engagement (e.g., O’Neill, 2010; O’Neill & Barton, 2005), a limited number of studies inscience education acknowledge the role of conflict in ownership of learning. Ownership of science learningoften deals with power struggles between teachers and learners. O’Neill (2010) recognizes that classroomculture and structures impact learners’ ability to take on ownership. Teachers and facilitators need to give upcontrol and this is often a formidable challenge. Hay and Barab (2001) noted that learners’ ownership of sciencelearning conflicted with the actual practice of science. During their study, learners spent time working withactual scientists on an authentic investigation with real-life consequences. However, scientists needed to takecontrol of the investigation away from learners to make sure the results were viable. Hay and Barab (2001) notethe tension between ownership and authenticity that, “as authenticity increases ownership decreases” (p. 315).As the project became more authentic to a real-world community of scientists, the rules and cultural practices ofscience needed to be adhered to. Learners could not simply take control of the project and try out new practices.Another aspect of control is placing structures, guidance, and scaffolds into science, which candiminish ownership. Reiser (2004) notes that in project-based science, great care is taken to contextualize theproblem in learners’ lives to support learners’ ownership of the problem. However, project-based STEMlearning is not full open inquiry. Similar to the authenticity issue, providing scaffolds and guides to thoseproblems can take control away from the learners, thus weakening ownership. Finally, ownership of learningcan cause learners to be overprotective of arguments and ideas. Haglund and Jeppsson's (2012) study directlyexamines the concept of ownership as pre-service science teachers learn to develop analogies forthermodynamics. As learners invested in their ideas and arguments, Haglund and Jeppsson found they becameoverly protective of the analogies.Tensions in Ownership as a Reflection of Identity DevelopmentAs individuals become acculturated to the practices of science, they may encounter manifestations of power andsocial tensions that prevent them from taking full ownership. Within these documented conflicts of learnerownership in science learning, we do not yet fully understand the connection between social conflict andindividual identity development and how to support learning in these moments. Identity development has aknown strong connection to ownership. Organizational theorists Brown, Lawrence, and Robinson (2005)suggest that psychological ownership and self-identity are so correlated and tied to each other, that people markand defend their territory as an extension of themselves. When individuals form strong feelings of ownershipover physical or non-physical objects, they may attempt to mark these possessions exclusively as their own. Ifthe possibility of infringement or threat to take ownership away from those objects occurs, individuals mayengage in protective territorial behaviors that attempt to maintain levels of ownership. Pierce and colleagues(2003) call this threat, “the dark side of ownership” (p. 30). Both the processes involved in ownership and theinnate characteristics of individuals leading to ownership are inextricably tied to how learners see themselvesand are coming to see themselves. Ownership is thus tightly connected to learners’ identity, but the connectionhas been rarely studied in the context of learning. In order to understand the role of ownership in learning, weneed to not only recognize ways to promote ownership and identity development, but also remain aware of thelimitations ownership can present to learning.ICLS 2014 Proceedings175© ISLSWhile studies have begun to tie ownership to identity development, few studies of ownership makedirect connections to identity research. To better understand the role of identity development and conflicts inownership of science learning, we utilize Wenger's (1998) conception of identity development through modes ofbelonging: imagination, engagement, and alignment. Modes of belonging are the ways participants seethemselves as members of a community based on their engagement in practice, alignment in coordinatedactivities, and imagination of their world. Engagement is the process of how a member participates in thecommunity. Through engagement, people work together to build relationships and communities of practice.Alignment is the process in which members take actions to align themselves to the goals and purpose of thecommunity. Alignment is indicated through commitment, allegiance, and investment of energy. Alignmentbridges space and time; participants can coordinate their energies, actions, and practice across othercommunities. Finally imagination is how members see themselves as connected (or not connected) to a broadercommunity. Here, people imagine themselves as part of the community and gain a sense of connection withothers. Imagination is broad, connecting to an extended identity. It involves seeing ourselves within a largerpurpose and community. Using Wenger's identity framework, we shed light onto the conflicts arising inownership and how we can best begin to address them to support learners’ science ownership.MethodsWe employed the methods of a comparative case study (Yin, 2003) on a single implementation of KitchenChemistry (KC). KC is an afterschool program in which learners engage in scientific inquiry through cooking.We took on the role of participant observers; we both facilitated and observed the KC program. In the first foursessions of KC, learners engage in semi-structured activities to help prepare them to observe, reflect, and recordfood science activities. For this study, we specifically analyzed learners’ participation on Choice Days. Duringthese activities, learners are given opportunities to use what they have learned in KC to develop questions,hypotheses, and experimental procedures for their own food investigation. We observed learners makingdecisions on what recipes they want to modify, what variables they will control, what data to collect, and how tointerpret their findings (Yip et al., 2012). Integrated into Choice Day was the use of several mobile apps. In thispaper, we highlight Scientific INQuiry (SINQ), a social media app used by learners to develop and sharequestions, hypotheses, and investigation ideas (Gubbels, Yip, Kim, & Ahn, 2013). For this case study, weexamined three focal learners and the conflicts that arose in KC based on their ownership of science learning.We analyzed learners’ imagination, engagement, and alignment (Wenger, 1998) in science to investigate therole of identity development in ownership of science learning. We chose KC as a context for studying identityand ownership tensions because of the transformation in relationships of power (e.g., Cornelius & Herrenkohl,2004); learners lead the investigation while facilitators played the supporting role.Context and Data CollectionKC was implemented as a 12-week afterschool program that met once a week for roughly two hours in a localprivate school. Six learners between the ages of 8 to 11 participated in the program each week. The learners allattended the Montessori school that hosted KC. Each day we collected video recordings of all activities anddiscussions and software artifacts. We also conducted semi-structured interviews with four of the learners andtheir parents at two intervals of the program. In addition, we conducted interviews of the teachers of the focallearners and conducted classroom observations. Lead facilitators also recorded post-observational field notes oftheir experiences each day in KC. The facilitators in KC in the case studies are Beth, Emily, and Jason. We referto the learners as Arman, Freddie, and Donna (pseudonyms).Criteria for Case Selection and Data AnalysisWe used the following three questions for the selection criteria: 1) What personal views did learners have ofscience?; 2) How did learners socially collaborate with each other and with facilitators?; and 3) What are theparticipation styles of the learners? Based on these questions, we selected three focal learners and vignettes thatwere representative of the present conflicts in ownership. We began the data analysis through an initialexamination of the interview data, video recordings, software artifacts, and facilitator field notes. During thistime, we wrote analytical memos and transcribed certain key portions of the data. Using methods outlined byStrauss and Corbin (2007), we used open coding to identify instances of social tensions, which included codesfocused on learner distractions, social breakdowns, interruptions, arguments, difficulties in choice-making,frustration, and selfishness. We also coded for how learners engaged, aligned with, and imagined science. Usingour analytical memos, photographs, and videos, we triangulated the data to determine if all pieces of evidencesupported each other (Merriam, 2009). To establish validity in the coding scheme, we presented the codes totwo external reviewers not closely involved with the study for an external code audit (Creswell, 1998). To makesure the cases were representative of ownership and conflict, we presented the case to the correspondingfacilitator for validation. Finally, once the cases were thoroughly examined and developed, we conducted across-case analysis of the three cases to investigate similarities and differences in the data.ICLS 2014 Proceedings176© ISLSKey FindingsWe begin each case with a description of the Choice Day activity that the learners and facilitators engaged in. Inour analysis we then use Wenger's (1998) modes of belonging as a framework to analyze each case tounderstand the role of science identity development in ownership. Finally, we frame the conflict in each casethrough the individual and social processes perspective of ownership and its connection to identity development.Case 1: Arman and the Spreadable CookiesOn Week 10 of KC, Arman, a 5th grade boy worked with Beth (facilitator) to create an investigation onspreadable cookies. Over the course of KC, we noticed that Arman tended to be quiet and did not always pushfor his own opinions. His teacher even expressed that Arman would often defer his choice and let others lead. Inthis Choice Day investigation, Arman was given the chance to follow through on an idea that he had initiated.Using SINQ, Arman entered his question: “What affects the spread of a chocolate cookie?” Arman wanted topursue this cookie question and take control of the investigation. Beth also wanted to support his decisionmaking practices and cultivate his ownership over the spreadable cookies question.Initially, Arman thought that butter affected the spread of the cookies. Beth suggested that they do atrial experiment to see which melts first, butter or vegetable shortening. Unfortunately, the pantry did not haveany vegetable shortening to test out. Therefore, the duo needed to alter their plan. As they talked more abouthow to adjust the investigation, Arman showed Beth a website that might describe what the acid is in bakingpowder. She stated, "So without this, without the acid that is in this (baking powder), it should not rise." Armanpointed out, "So this should be flat (baking soda), flat cookies (points to baking soda) and not flat (bakingpowder)." Beth agreed and wrote down, "We should try one experiment with baking powder and one withbaking soda and compare. We predict these will be flatter (baking soda) and we predict these will be fluffier(baking powder)." Beth called the final setup a “double or nothing” arrangement, in which their predicted morespreadable cookie consisted of liquid butter and baking soda, while their predicted less spreadable cookie wasmade with solid butter and baking powder. Although this was Arman’s own investigation, he started to exhibitchallenges with self-confidence. For instance, after this decision was made of the investigation setup, theyneeded to figure out the proportions for the recipe. Beth asked Arman, “Can you do the math and I’ll type it in?”However, Arman looked hesitant and said, “You type it in, I’m not good at math.” Being supportive, Beth said,“Oh well, we’ll figure it out together.” Even though the duo appeared to be making setup decisions together,Beth became concerned about her role as a facilitator. She stated she was worried the entire time about “takingover too much” or that he was not excited about the investigation. Beth claimed that, “Arman might beopinionated, but you don't hear him voice his opinion.” Since it was difficult for Beth to interpret Arman’sexpressions of ownership, she acted cautious and did not want to overstep her bounds. Beth conveyed that shefelt a tension in leading and supporting him.Case 1: AnalysisIn examining Arman’s identity development, we must consider how his engagement and alignment tie togetherto his larger imagination of science and himself. With respect to engagement, Arman spent time working withBeth on the investigation. He was not distracted and his level of engagement with Beth did not decrease overtime. He made investments into his cookie investigation. Arman aligned the cookie investigation to the practicesof KC. The cookie investigation was not just about baking desserts. Arman spent time looking up ideas for hisinvestigation in a cooking website and wanted to test out his question through an experimental design.However, even though Arman may have engaged and aligned with the practices of the investigation, he haddifficulty taking complete charge of it. Specifically, we observed that Arman exhibited lower confidence; thismight have affected how much control of the decisions he wanted, and how much ownership he exhibited.Wenger (1998) suggests that understanding imagination allows us to develop a more full picture of alignmentand engagement. Towards the end of KC, we asked him if he could identify himself as a cook, designer,investigator, and/or scientist. He consistently reported what he called his “slow progress” with respect to theseroles. Arman imagined people in these roles as being able to explain some knowledge or information tosomeone else, but expressed his limited imagination with respect to them in stating, “like I can't explain thingsreally well.” He reported he did not even think people at home and school would care to listen, “I just think likeif I tell them and they don't really care, I don't know if they will really listen.”Arman’s difficulty in imagining himself in these roles may have influenced his reluctance to take onstronger ownership of the investigations. As an individual aspect, Arman’s outward behavior may haveindicated a learner that took on aspects of ownership of the investigation, such having control over decisions inthe food investigation and aligning his works through investments into the practices. However, in the socialprocess of ownership, Arman also took on a deferential perspective to adults in his home and school life. Thisview of himself in comparison with adults might have made the choice-making process difficult for him.Although Beth attempted to support any decision he made to cultivate ownership, Arman may have wanted the“right” decision in KC or at the least decision he thought would make the adults happy.ICLS 2014 Proceedings177© ISLSCase 2: Freddie and the GreeniesOn Week 06, Freddie, a 5th grade boy, was extremely excited to start his “Greenies” investigation. Since Week03, Freddie had been clamoring to make green brownies (Greenies) as his Choice Day investigation. He workedwith Emily as his facilitator. Upon the start of the session, Freddie immediately went to his station to begin.However, his enthusiasm soon deflated as he found out he had to fill out a goals chart, a scaffolded worksheetthat learners fill out to determine what outcomes they wanted and what tasks they needed to accomplish theirgoals. Freddie, frustrated at even the notion of slowing down, raised his hands in the air to show his irritation,“Why don’t I, I don’t get this piece, cause it says what leavener should we use for taste and stuff? Like fortexture? Seriously?” Emily, being patient, asked him, “What leavener should we use to make cakey brownies?”,“Texture?”, “Smell?” None of these were really pertinent questions to Freddie; all he wanted was to makebrownies with a green color.Instead, Emily wanted Freddie to consider how green food coloring would show up since all the otheringredients had different colors and tones. She suggested that they change something in the recipe to make surethe green food coloring shows up more. Freddie just wanted to add the green food coloring, “Let’s just add it(green food coloring), just because it’s (white chocolate) white, it will show up more.” Emily again slowed himdown, “Well hold on, that’s the thing. Not everything in the recipe is white.” Freddie argued back, “Browniesare brown because of the chocolate!” Needless to say, Freddie started to grow impatient with waiting andthinking. We observed that Freddie began to breathe heavily at this time; he wanted to go and just grab theingredients. Emily asked him, “Are you getting frustrated?” to which Freddie nodded yes. She suggested theygo get some fresh air. Emily also reminded Freddie they were a team and there was no rush to what they weredoing. Once Freddie calmed himself a bit, Emily reminded him the Greenies might not be perfectly green andthey need to consider how much white chocolate they would put in and how much green food coloring goeswith it. Freddie stated that it does not matter how green it gets, “Anything green is good.” Freddie was stillexcited, but was frustrated, “I just can’t wait to start!”Case 2: AnalysisWhile Freddie’s frustration could be easily dismissed as impulsiveness, we argue that Freddie’s identitydevelopment played a key role in his ownership and conflict. Freddie stated that he imagined that scientists andinvestigators 1) mix chemicals together in random ways; 2) serendipitously discover new substances; 3) makeclose observations; and 4) work in a lab that would be very similar to a kitchen. To Freddie, being a scientistmeant doing a lot of hands-on mixing and making close observations of the final result. Wenger (1998)describes alignment as translating imagination into coordinated action. In KC, Freddie did not want to alignwith the slower and reflective practices emphasized in KC. Freddie expressed science activities at home (e.g.,experimenting in the kitchen; determining if his cat lands on its feet) rarely had limitations, “At home you canchoose, I can choose whatever I want” and “I like doing my own thing”. In contrast, standing around andplanning an investigation was not what he imagined scientists and investigators doing, and therefore, did notwant to align to the KC practices. For engagement, Freddie wanted to take time to invest in the Greenies, butwanted to do this on his own terms. Freddie’s goal was simple; he just wanted the brownies green. He wanted tostart fast, get his hands into the cooking quickly, and not reflect on the investigation at hand. As part of hisidentity development, his reactions suggested he wanted to be known as the person that figured out how to makebrownies green, not as the person that slowly planned the investigation.In this case, science in KC and home came into conflict with Freddie’s ownership, control, andimagination of roles. From the individual standpoint of ownership, Freddie wanted to keep his home scienceperspective of full autonomy and choice in the investigation. His perception of home science was of freedom ofchoice and supported his impulsive personality and bricoleur style of learning and engagement. Clegg andKolodner (2007) describe Freddie’s style of learning as a “bricoleur”, one that investigates by manipulatingobjects and letting the product and learning emerge, often without planning. In contrast, from a social processstandpoint, Emily took on a planner role; she preferred a more reflective and rule-based perspective. In thissense, when Emily wanted him to slow down and plan, she denied him full control and ownership over hisinvestigation, even though she wanted to support his ownership. As Freddie’s identity development took on thepractices of how he conceptualized science learning, his ownership came into conflict with the more methodicaland reflective inquiry practices of KC.Case 3: Donna and the Puffy CakesDonna, a 5th grade female, wanted to make puffy cakes for her food investigation. She worked with Jason, afacilitator, for her Week 07 Choice Day. The investigation was focused on developing variations of cakes todetermine what factors influenced cake density. As part of her ownership, Donna wanted to pursue the makingof a cake. In SINQ, Donna entered the question “How do you make things (cakes) puffy?” and came up with thehypothesis that variations in eggs contribute to the puffy nature of a cake. Over the course of discussion, Jasonsuggested to Donna that they could do three egg preparations: eggs normal (yolk + egg white), egg white alone,ICLS 2014 Proceedings178© ISLSand the yolk alone. A fourth cake with just the batter alone (no eggs) would serve as the control since this waswhat the original recipe had indicated. Jason checked with Donna to see if this would work with her. She agreedwith this setup. Meanwhile, Donna showed Jason that she could now crack an egg and separate the egg whites, atechnique that she was very proud of.Once the batter was mixed with the three different types of eggs in the cake ramekins, Jason set themixtures into the oven. After the four cakes were baked, he brought them over to Donna. However, Donnastarted to become distracted by her friends. Jason tried to bring her back into the investigation by asking her tohelp him make measurements of the cakes. Donna noted that she was distracted by the noise and said she wastired of the measuring activity. In order to get her attention and reignite her ownership, Jason had her begin totaste some of the cakes. He had Donna try the control and she expressed enjoyment tasting it. However, as theycontinued with the measurements and observations, Donna appeared even more distracted. She looked tired andwanted to go play with an iPad™. Although others started to come and ask Donna questions about her cakes,Donna did not seem interested in answering them. Jason attempted to prompt her to wrap up her investigation,asking, “so which one is the most dense?” Again, she thought the egg white variation was the densest, but haddifficulties articulating why. She thought the control and egg yolk versions were “too grainey” and that the eggwhite helped to enhance the flavor After all these observations were complete, Jason asked her, “So what doyou think the egg is doing to all of these things right now that’s different than the control?” Donna licked herfingers and shrugged her shoulders, indicating she did not have anything to say.Case 3: AnalysisSimilar to other KC learners, attention was a significant personal factor that influenced Donna’s ownership oflearning. Both Donna’s mother and teacher brought up Donna’s attention difficulties in interviews. As a result,Donna’s ownership of the investigation waxed and waned as her attention shifted. However, attention alonedoes not provide the full story of what she chose to pursue in the investigation. We argue that understanding theroles of imagination, engagement, and alignment in identity development gives us stronger insight into hershifting ownership. First, Donna called herself a dreamer, someone that could come up with ideas and makethem come true. For example, when we asked her about her career choices, cooking and designing careersalways prevailed, but becoming a scientist always ended up last on her list of considerations. Like the bricoleurstyle of learning (Clegg & Kolodner, 2007) cooking and designing was meant to be free of restrictions. Donna’simagination of science was not due to lack of exposure to science; Donna’s mother worked as a researchscientist, studying allergies. During lab visits, her mother would often give Donna small experiment kits and lether play around with the equipment. She imagined that scientists constantly “make explosions” and “mix stuff”and they would inevitably “find cures and discover new things, stuff like that.” Donna negotiated herengagement in science learning the way she imagined how she enacted the roles of scientist. She wanted handson mixing and exciting explosions, not the slower reflection and planning processes or the carefulmeasurements and observations. Initially, when she was given the opportunity to come up with ideas, she tookthis task seriously. As such, Donna’s alignment towards the hands-on aspects of sciences (e.g., mixing), the ideageneration, and the end product development coordinated well between home and KC. However, when Jasonand Donna began the slower reflection and measuring processes, she began to disengage.Donna’s conflicts of ownership over certain aspects of KC are a reflection of her identity throughimagination, engagement, and alignment. From the perspective of the individual outcome, Donna chose targetsof ownership that fit into her identity, such as science as hands-on activities that are constantly filled with“fizz”, “explosions”, and “fun”. While Donna recognized that reflection and critical thinking were part of beinga scientist, she did not think of herself as engaging in these characteristics. Instead, Donna wanted control andownership over aspects she was familiar with from cooking at home and mixing in her mom’s lab. Donna, whoalready had attention issues and imagined herself as a candy maker dreamer, had difficulties latching onto theslower paced tasks. From a social process standpoint, the conflicts in ownership are also a result of alignmentbetween what Jason and Donna wanted. Wenger (1998) comments that since alignment concerns directingenergy, it also concerns the power to exercise, inspire, and demand alignment. The coordination of actionsconstitutes shifts in identity and participation. However, in Donna’s case, as her identity focused more on thefun scientist role, difficulties occurred as Jason tried support an alignment towards deeper reflection. As a result,Donna disengaged and disowned aspects of the investigation that did not fit with her identification.Discussion: Connecting Identity Development to OwnershipIn examining these three cases, we observed a variety of tensions in ownership of science learning. This studyshows that while personal factors contribute to these conflicts, learners’ existing identities and imaginations ofscience also play a significant role in how ownership is expressed. Each of these imaginations of sciencecontributed to the tensions surrounding ownership. Arman imagined his identity development in science anddesign as slow going and not up to an imagined standard in which he could be confident to take control andownership of his investigation, even with a supportive facilitator. In contrast, Freddie’s case represents a learnerICLS 2014 Proceedings179© ISLSwho wanted absolute control over his investigation. While impulsivity was a contributing factor to hisownership, for Freddie doing science meant having the ability to make any decision he wanted as long as itmeant making his Greenies. Finally, in Donna’s case, she faced challenges with attention, which illustrates herownership as strong in the beginning, but waning in the end. However, she also imagined science as “fun” andfull of explosions and color changes. When these dynamic occurrences did not happen, she chose to disown theinvestigation. Our work highlights the need to connect science learning to learners’ existing imaginations aboutscience. Learners like Freddie and Donna needed to see the fun parts of science – the explosions and the actions– to begin to align to the practices of the investigation. At points in the investigation, both Freddie and Donnaneeded to do science on their own terms for initial engagement.However, supporting ownership of science learning is a complicated balancing act of authority andfreedom. Even with their desires of engaging in the fun aspects of science, the learners needed some structure.Research has shown that reflection is powerful and necessary, both as learners are engaging (reflection inaction) and later as they reflect on their engagement (reflection on action) (Schon, 1987). Typically schoolsdesignate the role of power to adults, while authority can be more shared in informal learning environments(O’Neill, 2010). This study reveals that issues of authority that appeared similar to formal learning were still anissue in our informal learning environment. Even though opportunities for learners to take more control werepresent, the facilitators still needed to think carefully about how to balance power and structure. We wantedlearners to adhere to a culture of science, in which careful measurements and observations were paramount.However, some learners wanted to just cook and bake. Other learners wanted to do science the way theyimagined it from their experiences at home, often in a very unplanned fashion. For these learners, placingguidance caused tensions in ownership. Some may advocate that more open inquiry environments in whichlearners have more control can promote ownership in learning. However, minimal guidance during instructionhas been shown to be problematic due to cognitive load (e.g., Kirschner, Sweller, & Clark, 2006). Scaffolds andguidelines are still needed for learning, even in more open activities (e.g., Reiser, 2004). These cases reveal thatsimply giving learners a chance to control, possess, and own their activities is not enough for science learning.Without slower reflection and guidance, learners can miss important aspects of the science process.Implications for Fostering and Supporting Science OwnershipFostering learners’ ownership can lead to deeper learning and engagement (e.g., O’Neill, 2010), but this studyargues that cultivating ownership in science learning is complex due to the learners’ identity formation inscience. These cases show that one-size fits all approaches to supporting ownership did not exist since eachlearner’s own identity development differed in trajectory. Some learners needed structured guidance to helpmake decisions and build confidence to take ownership, while others found guidance stifling. Our findingssuggest that it is not enough to simply balance the amount of time and effort between fun activities andstructured reflection to promote ownership. These two aspects need to be interconnected in ways that helplearners see the necessity of both in science learning. For example, during interviews, Freddie spent timereflecting on the Greenies investigation and expressed the mistakes he made in the experimental setup. Freddiecame up with new ideas about why his Greenies did not turn out well. He even worked with his mother on amore structured investigation at home to examine the differences between dark, milk, and white chocolates.Freddie needed an opportunity to cycle back and contemplate on the process and the importance of reflection.Facilitators also need to be aware of the different needs of learners and be able to flow betweenstructure and freedom dynamically. Quiet learners like Arman needed guidance from the facilitator to helpdevelop ownership in his investigation. Arman expressed in the interviews he was overwhelmed with makingchoices in an inquiry environment. Without facilitator supports, it would have been even more difficult for himto take some aspect of ownership. For learners, like Freddie and Donna, who wanted to take stronger ownershipover their investigations, we attempted to negotiate with them. We used strategies such as allowing them one setof ingredients they could “mess around” with, while another set would be used strictly for the investigation.Another strategy was to have learners switch roles from cook to technology recorder so that they could slowdown and make closer observations. Supporting ownership was a give and take dynamic. Sometimes we neededto enforce structure so that learners could focus more. Other times, we allowed learners freedom to take risksand engage in experimental play in the ways they wanted. In all three cases, finding the right balance of controland ownership was delicate and did not always work the way the facilitators planned. Finally, this study showsthat fostering ownership over the investigations was not always an immediate process and may not be longlasting. Arman needed time to gain confidence to take on more ownership of his investigation. Donna startedstrong in taking responsibility in the cooking aspects of the investigation, but her ownership dissolved quickly atthe end, during the measuring and reflection process. For Freddie, it was only when he needed to figure out whyhis Greenies did not turn out well, he began to take on ownership of ideas and inquiry-based processes. Weargue that fostering science ownership takes time and depends on how learners’ identities and imaginations ofscience shift towards science dispositions.ICLS 2014 Proceedings180© ISLSConclusionThis work shows that conflicts in ownership are not just an indication of authoritative power, but also areflection of learners’ identity development in science. We do not simply imply that facilitators surrender theresponsibility of guiding the learning process to increase learners’ ownership (e.g., Cornelius & Herrenkohl,2004). Instead, we observed that each learner experienced science learning in diverse ways outside of KC. Fromthese experiences, the learners developed different ways of imagination, engagement, and alignment in science,which ultimately influenced how they took ownership of their investigation and how they dealt with issues ofpower and social interactions. Our findings suggest that a delicate balance power between learners andfacilitators is needed to foster engagement, imagination, and alignment, conducive to learners’ ownershipdevelopment. We make the argument that understanding the evolution of ownership of science learning alsomeans further examining how learners’ modes of engagement interact in multiple contexts.ReferencesAtwater, M. M. (1996). Social constructivism: Infusion into the multicultural science education researchagenda. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 33(8), 821–837.Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 52(1), 1–26.Brown, G., Lawrence, T. B., & Robinson, S. L. (2005). Territoriality in organizations. The Academy ofManagement Review, 30(3), 577–594.Clegg, T. L., & Kolodner, J. L. (2007). Bricoleurs and planners engaging in scientific reasoning: A tale of twogroups in one learning community. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 02(03),239–265.Cornelius, L. L., & Herrenkohl, L. R. (2004). Power in the classroom: How the classroom environment shapesstudents’ relationships with each other and with concepts. Cognition and Instruction, 22(4), 467–498.Creswell, J. W. (1998). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five traditions. ThousandOaks, CA: Sage Publications.Fusco, D. (2001). Creating relevant science through urban planning and gardening. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 38(8), 860–877.Gubbels, M., Yip, J., Kim, J., & Ahn, J. (2013). Scientific INQuiry (SINQ): Social media for everyday sciencelearning. In Proceedings of the iConference 2013 (pp. 1102 – 1105). Fort Worth, TX.Haglund, J., & Jeppsson, F. (2012). Using self-generated analogies in teaching of thermodynamics. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 49(7), 898–921.Hay, K. E., & Barab, S. A. (2001). Constructivism in practice: A comparison and contrast of apprenticeship andconstructionist learning environments. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(3), 281–322.Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work:An analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-basedteaching. Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75–86.Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. San Francisco, CA: JohnWiley and Sons.O’Neill, T. (2010). Fostering spaces of student ownership in middle school science. Equity & Excellence inEducation, 43(1), 6–20.O’Neill, T., & Barton, A. C. (2005). Uncovering student ownership in science learning: The making of a studentcreated mini-documentary. School Science and Mathematics, 105(6), 292–301.Pierce, J. L., Kostova, T., & Dirks, K. T. (2003). The state of psychological ownership: Integrating andextending a century of research. Review of General Psychology, 7(1), 84–107.Reiser, B. J. (2004). Scaffolding complex learning: The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing studentwork. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13, 273–304.Schon, D. A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. (2007). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory, 3rd ed. SAGE Publications.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge Univ Pr.Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research: Design and methods (Vol. 5). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.Yip, J. C., Clegg, T. L., Bonsignore, E., Gelderblom, H., Lewittes, B., Guha, M. L., & Druin, A. (2012). KitchenChemistry: Supporting learners’ decisions in science. In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, & P. Reimann(Eds.), Tenth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (Vol. 1, pp. 103–110). Mahwah, NJ,USA: Erlbaum.AcknowledgmentsWe want to thank the CI Fellows program for funding this work. We would like also to thank the children,teachers, parents, and staff of The Green School for their participation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings181© ISLS