Redefining Engagement and Participation:The Co-Construction of Student Learning PracticesSimona Goldin, Michaela Krug O’Neill, Shweta Naik, University of Michigan School of Education610 East University, Ann Arbor, MI 48109sgoldin@umich.edu, mkoneill@umich.edu, shwetan@umich.eduAbstract: We examine three student learning practices (SLPs) – listening, presenting, andmaking and using records – central to participation and engagement in academically ambitiousmathematics classrooms. These SLPs, enacted to learn academic content, are means tolearning outcomes and outcomes in their own right. We study these SLPs in an elementarymathematics laboratory in which SLPs are supported and developed. Grounded in practice,this analysis enriches concepts of participation and engagement and advances ourunderstanding of SLPs.PurposesStudents’ learning in classrooms is often equated with their engagement and participation in classroomactivities. Yet, engagement and participation are associated with how many students appear to be sitting quietlyand answering questions. We complicate these views, unpacking specific practices that students enact in order toparticipate and engage in learning mathematics in classrooms, and illuminate the work of teaching to support theSLPs of listening, presenting, and making and using records.We examine: listening, which encompasses the practices associated with developing an understandingof the ideas in the classroom discourse; presenting, which includes representing mathematical thinking for thepurpose of explaining to others; and making and using records, which includes keeping track of the significantmathematical ideas in the class. Analyzing the interaction of these SLPs, we identify work that both teachers andstudents do in order to build and support classroom participation and engagement.Theoretical frameworkStudents’ use of instruction – their engagement with teachers, content and each other – comprise the work oflearning and lead to learning achievement (Cohen, Raudenbush, & Ball, 2003). Researchers posit a set ofstudent practices that might be involved in the work that students do to learn – Lampert’s (2001) inquiring,discussing, thinking, reading carefully, and examining closely, Fenstermacher’s (1986) reciting, practicing,seeking assistance, reviewing, checking, and Ericson and Ellet’s “attending to instructions and explanationscarefully… practicing with an eye to proficiency, appraising carefully” (2002, p. 5). SLPs enable students to besuccessful users of classroom resources, and they support students’ abilities to be a resource for themselves andothers. Research has implied that SLPs are crucial to learning outcomes (Dewey, 1902/2001; Fenstermacher,1986), but researchers have not operationalized SLPs or the ways in which they are constructed in classrooms.MethodsWe study SLPs in the context of a two-week elementary mathematics laboratory (EML) in which these practicesare developed with fifth grade students. The nature of the laboratory, the lesson plans, and the practice of“public teaching” provide a setting that supports collective observation and analysis of teaching and learning,making it an authentic context to investigate SLPs (Ball, Mann, Shaughnessy, Suzuka, & Thames, 2013). Weask the following: What SLPs are constructed, and by whom, in the context of the EML? What is the work ofteaching to support the construction of the SLPs?We analyzed video recordings, lesson plans, student work, field notes, and memos written during theEML to identify which SLPs were being taught, for what purposes, and the ways in which they were coconstructed. We used a grounded-theory approach (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). We focus on three SLPs thatemerged from an earlier study (Goldin & O'Neill, 2013) and were also a focus of instruction in the EML (Ball &Shaughnessy, 2013).ResultsOur analysis of three SLPs provides insight into the individual and collaborative nature of the SLPs and revealsthe ways in which these practices operationalize participation and engagement. The study traces thedevelopment of these SLPs across time between the teacher and students in the context of specific mathematicalwork.Analysis of SLPs suggests that listening is used to develop an understanding of the ideas in theclassroom discourse in the EML. It is an activity to make sense of a topic or question that is the focus ofICLS 2014 Proceedings1505© ISLSclassroom inquiry for the purpose of using and evaluating other’s ideas and building understanding. Here,listening in the classroom is associated with seeing and understanding other’s thinking and noticing differentapproaches and solutions. Students’ work presenting in the EML is comprised of publicly articulating ideas forthe purpose of explaining to others. The analysis surfaces students’ work presenting, and the ways the teacherco-constructs students’ presentations by scaffolding, modeling, and doing some of the work with students.Making and using records includes the private and public efforts to record and create documents that keep trackof the significant mathematical ideas in the class. This practice includes using a record of one’s ownmathematical work, organizing the various mathematical tasks in a single notebook, and recording ideas fromthe whole class. This practice creates records that are intended to serve the learner(s) in the moment as well asprovide a resource to return to at a later date.This study also focuses on these SLPs as a group, as component parts of the work that students andteachers need to do in classrooms to learn. These are SLPs that are particularly salient in crowded classrooms,and are fundamental to learning in classrooms with others. Regarding teaching practice, we illustrate the ways inwhich there might be overlapping teacher moves that themselves have dual purposes – to scaffold what isinvolved in presenting while also facilitating listening, for example. Results highlight the ways that theseindividually and collectively held SLPs develop over time. Working on these SLPs necessitates explicit teacherattention and support as the teacher models and scaffolds the individual and collective construction of SLPs.SignificanceThis analysis brings forward the nuances present in classroom participation and engagement and is useful forhelping teachers, administrators, and researchers “see” the individual and collaborative forms of participationand engagement. Identifying teachers’ work with students to develop SLPs illuminates how instruction canleverage and equalize students’ access to and engagement with ambitious content. This work builds onscholarship that details the ways in which deliberate to teaching that supports SLPs can “be central to theattainment of equity” (Boaler, 2002, p. 239). Further, this work has direct implications for how teachers mightwork with students. Focused on practice – students’ SLPs and the practices of teaching that support them – thisstudy improves our understanding of the work that students do to learn and supports the design of instructionthat enables the successful development of these SLPs.ReferencesBall, D. L., Mann, L., Shaughnessy, M., Suzuka, K., & Thames, M. H. (2013). Designing and using a laboratoryapproach to the collective study of instruction Symposium presented at the Annual Meeting of theAmerican Educational Research Association. San Francisco, CA.Ball, D. L., & Shaughnessy, M. (2013). Elementary Mathematics Laboratory Lesson Plan: Day Nine. AnnArbor, MI: University of Michigan.Boaler, J. (2002). Learning from teaching. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 239-258.Cohen, D. K., Raudenbush, S. W., & Ball, D. L. (2003). Resources, Instruction, and Research. EducationalEvaluation and Policy Analysis, 25(2), 119-142.Dewey, J. (1902/2001). The Child and the Curriculum. Mineola: Dover Publications, Inc.Ericson, D. P., & Ellett Jr., F. S. (2002). "The Question of the Student in Educational Reform". Education PolicyAnalysis Archives, 10(31).Fenstermacher, G. (1986). Philosophy of Research on Teaching: Three Aspects. In M. C. Wittrock (Ed.),Handbook of Research on Teaching (Vol. 3, pp. 37-49). New York: Macmillan Library ReferenceUSA, Simon and Schuster Macmillan.Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory; strategies for qualitative research.Chicago: Aldine Pub. Co.Goldin, S., & O'Neill, M. K. (2013). Students' Learning Practices: Categorizing and Redefining Students' WorkLearning. Paper presented at the 2013 Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, SanFrancisco.Lampert, M. (2001). Teaching Problems and the Problems of Teaching (pp. 263-328). New Haven: YaleUniversity Press.AcknowledgmentsThe authors would like to acknowledge the continued support of the EML research group.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1506© ISLS