Detecting Iterative Cycles of Engineering Design from StudentDigital Footprints in Computer-Aided Design SoftwareZhihui Helen Zhang, Charles Xie, Saeid Nourian, Concord Consortium, Concord, MA, USAEmail: hzhang@concord.org, qxie@concord.org, snourian@concord.orgAbstract: As engineering design has been extensively incorporated in the Next GenerationScience Standards, the need for understanding student design processes has never beengreater. This paper demonstrates an innovative approach: computational process analytics(CPA) to analyze students’ fine-grained digital footprints while using a computer-aided designtool to complete a solar urban design. CPA reveals critical student design patterns such asiteration and fixation, which provides researchers and teachers with invaluable insights aboutstudent learning.IntroductionEver since the National Research Council included engineering components in the national science standardframework (National Research Council, 2011), there has been an upsurge in attention on K-12 engineeringeducation. Yet little research has investigated students’ design processes and learning trajectories (Carr,Bennnnett IV, & Strobel, 2012). In this paper we propose to analyze students’ process data when they areengaged in engineering design tasks using a novel computational process analytics (CPA) approach (Xie,Zhang, Nourian, Pallant, & Hazzard, 2014).In particular, we investigate how CPA can provide multifaceted evidence to detect design fixation anditeration. Researchers have observed design fixation- as the design becomes more detailed, designers tend todevelop inertia to revise the design (Purcell & Gero, 1996). Design fixation is detrimental because it limitsiteration, an essential process to engineering design (Kolodner et al., 2003). Identifying design fixation is ofutmost importance to researchers and teachers because a student who completes a design with no or fewiterations will learn poorly from the design. This pilot study explores using CPA to detect design fixation anditeration during students’ design of an urban area using passive solar strategies to optimize solar radiationheating in the winter and in the summer.The Solar Urban Design ChallengeThe Solar Urban Design Challenge requires students to construct at least four buildings on a square city block(100*100 square meters) surrounded by existing buildings of different heights. Students need to maximize theuse of solar energy and to achieve optimal energy efficiency of the new construction. They also need to consideralternatives and generate at least three different design solutions. Students used Energy3D, a simplifiedcomputer-aided design (CAD) tool, to design the buildings within the city block. Two features of Energy3D –the Heliodon Simulator and the Solar Heating Simulator, provide students with real-time feedback about thesolar performance of their designs (see Figure 1 for the design template and the features).Figure 1. a) the design template; b) the Heliodon Simulator shows the sun path at the given location and time;c) the Solar Heating Simulator shows the heat map of daily solar radiation on the surfaces of buildings.MethodsSixty-four high school students (9th graders) in Massachusetts, USA participated in the study. They used laptopcomputers to run Energy3D and worked individually on the Solar Urban Design Challenge for seveninstructional periods (approximately 45 minutes per period). Energy3D is capable of automatically log whatstudents do (actions), make (artifacts), and say (articulations) to provide fine-grained process data forassessments. An artifact folder typically contains 400 intermediate files and an action file typically contains3,000-5,000 lines of event data. To analyze this sheer volume of data, a visual analytics program based on CPAICLS 2014 Proceedings1517© ISLSwas written to automatically process the students’ design actions and artifacts and rapidly visualize the resultswith graphs.Finding 1: Detecting Fixation and Iteration through Analyzing Design BehaviorEnergy3D logs the timestamp, type, target, and parameters of the actions performed by each student. Wefocused on two types of iterative actions that lead to changes in solar performance of the buildings: 1) revisionaction that alters an element of the construction such as moving and resizing building; 2) time switching actionthat changes the time and date set up in the system, e.g., changing the time to Dec. 30 12pm. The CPA programcan automatically calculate the percentage of these iterative behaviors. Dependent procedures such as quartilesplit can detect students who made fewer iterative actions. As an example, student G15 completed the designchallenge with 2867 actions in total, among which 72 actions (2.51%) switched the seasons from winter tosummer or vice versa and no actions moved or resized buildings. G15 probably has experienced prematurefixation and her design likely would result in poor solar performance.Finding 2: Detecting Fixation and Iteration through Analyzing ArtifactPerformanceAnother way to detect design fixation is through examining the solar performances of students’ designs. CPAprogram automatically calculates the average daily solar energy density (ρ) over the new construction. Naturallyρ is low in the winter and high in the summer for buildings in the northern hemisphere. In solar urban design, adesign with optimal solar performance should receive maximal daily sunlight in the winter and minimal dailysunlight in the summer. Therefore, the difference between ρ in the winter and in the summer (Δρ) should besmaller in a good design than that in a bad design. Further, we consider solar performance as an indicator ofdesign iteration because it is hardly possible for a student to complete a design with small Δρ without iterations.The smaller Δρ is, the more iterative cycles the students may have gone through. To illustrate this, Figure 2shows the intermediate designs and the energy densities completed by two students, G3 and F14. As theyprogressed in the project, the Δρ of G3’s designs became smaller whereas that of F14’s designs became larger.G3 probably has completed multiple cycles of iterations during the design project whereas F14 has experienceddesign fixation.Figure 2. The intermediate designs completed by G3 and F14 and the daily energy density of the designs inwinter and summer.ConclusionBased on using CPA to analyze student process data during an engineering design project, the iterative cycles ofdesign can be studied. This allows researchers and teachers to determine the degree of iteration and fixation ofstudent design processes. Future work will explore what interventions would be effective to promote iterations.ReferencesCarr, R. L., Bennnnett IV, L. D., & Strobel, J. (2012). Engineering in the K-12 STEM Standards of the 50 U.S.States: An Analysis of Presence and Extent. Journal of Engineering Education, 101(3), 1-26.Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., . . . Ryan, M. (2003). ProblemBased Learning Meets Case-Based Reasoning in the Middle-School Science Classroom: PuttingLearning by Design(tm) Into Practice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(4), 495-547.National Research Council. (2011). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Purcell, A. T., & Gero, J. S. (1996). Design and other types of fixation. Design Studies, 17(4), 363-383.Xie, C., Zhang, Z., Nourian, S., Pallant, A., & Hazzard, E. (2014). A Time Series Analysis Method forAssessing Engineering Design Processes Using a CAD Tool. International Journal of EngineeringEducation, 30(1), 218-230.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1518© ISLS