Make to Relate: Narratives Of, and As, Community PracticeColin Dixon and Lee Martin, University of California, Davis, One Shields Ave., Davis, CAcghdixon@ucdavis.edu, leemartin@ucdavis.eduAbstract: As young people design, build, and problem-solve within maker spaces and clubs,they talk about making. We analyze short interviews with youth makers, conducted duringpresentations of their products, and hypothesize a progression through frames of participation.Moving from exploration, to exchange, and on to deliberate engagement, these frames reflectchanges in the nature of participation, appropriation of community practices and dispositions,and adoption of making as a tool for identity work and interest development.Learning in MakingInterest in making and the maker movement is on the rise, driven both by the increasing visibility of theseactivities in the public sphere, and a broader shift in educational research toward informal and interest-drivenlearning environments in STEM education (e.g., NRC, 2009). Efforts to graft the goals of STEM educators ontoexisting maker practices and communities must grapple with the values, identities, and “mindset” alreadyassociated with the maker movement. In particular, researchers and educators hoping to design for learningthrough making can benefit from greater understanding of how youth appropriate the dispositions, discourses,problem-solving approaches, technical knowledge base, and identity of the maker community (Herrenkohl &Mertl, 2011). Further, maker clubs’ encouragement of creativity and the open-ended nature of projects lendthemselves to an inquiry into how and why youth re-craft their environments and what resources they draw fromto do so (Bell, et al, 2013)In this paper, we report on how young people’s ways of doing and telling reflect paths toward knowingand being as makers and learners. We analyze nine short interviews with youth makers conducted as theypresented at Maker Faire, a large regional exposition. These interviews constitute narratives of practice,describing challenges, goals, and resources. They also represent a cultural activity central to the makermovement: sharing what you made. Given this dual lens, we treat these data as interpersonal narratives andfocus on the narrow question: how do young people participate in and talk about the practice of exhibiting theirwork at the Maker Faire?MethodsAs part of a larger study of young people participating in makers clubs, we interviewed eleven youth during, orshortly after, they presented a project at Maker Faire. Questions asked youth about their experiences as makers,allowing them to surface the most relevant experiences (Ching & Kafai, 2008). Three young women and eightyoung men, aged 11 to 15, participated. Following a grounded theory approach we made an initial pass throughthe transcribed interview data, during which we documented observations and potential codes. In subsequentpasses we consolidated, refined, and illuminated our understanding of categories and patterns in the data.Framing ParticipationIn our analysis, we noticed that youth differed in the ways they exhibited their work, and in particular how theyengaged with their audience. Mapping these differences onto the young people’s level of experience at MakerFaire (based on their reported number of times visiting and presenting), we constructed a progression of framesfor participation in making (see Figure 1).Experience with makingExchangeExploration◦ Have fun◦ Learn (in general)◦ Gain sense of accomplishment◦ Project specific application ofexperience & skills◦ Making as a generalizedpractice◦ Serendipitous project selection+ Share project+ Get feedback+ Ask questions+ Domain-specific applicationof experience & skills+ Increased specialization+ Projects related to outsideinterestsDeliberate Engagement+ Teach and inspire+ Collaborate as peer+ Develop tools for+ Make contactsuse by others+ Raise money+ Life-wide application of experience, skillsand dispositions+ Discipline specific practice of making+ Projects core to long-term interests and linkedto values and attitudesIndividual interests & preferencesFigure 1. Hypothesized progression of frames for participationICLS 2014 Proceedings1591© ISLSGiven the descriptive nature of our work, we see this as a hypothesized trajectory of participation, rather than adefinitive learning sequence. Although we see these frames unfolding over time, we do not assume a linear,unidirectional trajectory, nor do we assume that these ways of participating and performing necessarily crossdomains. Each frame represents a cluster of related elements.With the space remaining, we provide illustrative examples of this progression, which moves frommore egocentric frames for participation toward other-oriented and shared frames. Poster presentation of datawill allow us to provide more complete portraits of the young people making, telling, and developing in thisspace.On the left of Figure 1 is the exploration pattern. Asked what was valuable about being a part of MakerFaire, the least experienced makers emphasized the benefits of seeing and absorbing the experience: having fun,learning (generally, not a specific skill or topic), and gaining a sense of accomplishment. Asked what theywould do next with what they learned in making, these young people talked about doing additional projects thatwere similar to their current work. They represented their project choices as somewhat serendipitous or trivial:they had happened to see an interesting project, or wanted to make something that was “loud and annoying.”In the exchange pattern, youth with more Maker Faire experience connected their choices to longerterm interests. In one maker’s words: “I was inspired – I’d already been working on it for a long time before Idecided to bring it to Maker Faire…. mostly I wanted [my project] as toys, things I could actually use.” Twoyoung women used their project to link a long-term focus of imaginative play to a current hobby. These makersemphasized the importance of showing people what you did, either to get feedback or to display particular traitsor skills (e.g., “creativity” or coding). They valued their enjoyment of the process, but began including others –specific mentors as well as a broader public audience – more centrally in their narratives.In the third pattern, deliberate engagement, youth not only placed others within their narratives, butbegan to consider specific roles or outcomes for these people. They linked development of skills within makingactivities to future work and enduring commitments. For example, the three most experienced makers discussedthe role that Maker Faire played in developing resources – material, human, or emotional – to support long-termaspirations. They also tended to think of next steps in terms of building skills (e.g., coding, metalsmithingtoexpand their potential as makers, rather than focusing on the next thing they could build. Most important,experienced presenters wanted to prompt action or create experiences for others. Examples ranged fromenlisting knowledgeable partners and financial supporters, to creating tools or instruction that others can use, toinspiring others and “show[ing] other kids that they can make things too and they don’t have to wait untilthey’re older.” (Jaimie, age 14)ConclusionThough drawn from a small sample, the hypothesized trajectory of participation we describe illustrates animportant aspect of what it means to become a maker and a fuller participant in the maker movement. As wecontinue to analyze in-depth case studies of maker clubs, we will be able to refine this hypothesis to betterunderstand the relationship of these narratives to participation in other making activities. The narratives likelyreflect both variation in observable experience and in appropriation of the discourse and ideologies of the makermovement.Understanding the ways in which youth position themselves through narratives and performance inmaking, and how these align with positions and practices of the larger maker community has implications forresearch and design. Shifts in how young people and the adults around them frame their participation areintegral to learning processes and outcomes. Connecting with the conference theme, becoming a maker isintegrally tied up with how participation is framed in practice. This analysis shows that young peopleunderstand their participation not only in terms of interaction with technologies and materials, but also withfriends, mentors, and a larger community of makers (and potential makers). With extended participation, theymay be using making to strengthen and expand identities and relationships, along with maker-specific skills ofcrafting and coding.ReferencesBell, P., Bricker, L., Reeve, S., Zimmerman, H. T., & Tzou, C. (2013). Discovering and Supporting SuccessfulLearning pathways of Youth In and Out of School. In B. Bevan, P. Bell, R. Stevens & A. Razdar(Eds.), LOST Opportunities: Learning in Out-of-School Time (pp. 119-140). London: Springer.Ching, C. C., & Kafai, Y. B. (2008). Peer pedagogy: Student collaboration and reflection in a learning throughdesign project. Teachers College Record, 12, 2601-2362.Herrenkohl, L. R., & Mertl, V. (2011). How students come to be, know, and do: A case for a broad view oflearning. New York City, NY: Cambridge University Press.National Research Council (2009). Learning science in informal environments: People, places, and pursuits.Bell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A. W., and Feder, M. A., Editors. Washington: National AcademiesPress.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1592© ISLS