The Role of Stated Relationships in Detecting ContradictionsBetween Multiple Representations in ScienceCandice Burkett, Susan R. Goldman, University of Illinois Chicago, 1240 W. Harrison St., Chicago, IL 60607E-mail: cburke20@uic.edu, sgoldman@uic.eduM. Anne Britt, Northern Illinois University, 231 N. Annie Glidden Rd., DeKalb, IL 60115, britt@niu.eduAbstract: The interpretation and evaluation of data presented in multiple sources is vital tothe investigation of scientific phenomena in disciplinary authentic ways. This studyinvestigated 8th graders (N=119) notice of contradictions between multiple representations(text and graph) when the relationship between variables was stated or inferred. Resultssuggest stating the relationship is related to identification of contradictions betweenrepresentations. Results are discussed as they relate to the development of science disciplinarypractices.IntroductionThe ability to read and understand multiple representations is increasingly emphasized in educational research.This is especially true in the domain of science where being able to critically evaluate and compare multiplerepresentations (e.g., text, table, graph, diagrams) is vital in order to investigate scientific phenomena in waysthat are authentic to the practices of the domain (Ainsworth, 2008; Roth & Bowen, 2003; Wu & Krajcik, 2006).Accordingly, both science education professionals and educational standards emphasize the need for students tobe able read and interpret data in different forms and use that information to be able to support and evaluateclaims (Glazer, 2011; NGA & CCSSO, 2010). In order for students to critically evaluate a claim, it is importantthat they recognize discrepancies between the claim and the supporting data. However, research about the waysin which students interpret, evaluate and make decisions based on data presented in multiple forms is oftendisjointed and focuses primarily on texts. For example, there is evidence that students notice inconsistencieswhen reading totally verbal science texts and this is impacted by proximity of relevant information, sourceexpertise and whether information is presented in single vs. multiple texts (Singer & Gagnon, 1999; Stadtler,Scharrer, Brummernhenrich & Bromme, 2013; Wiley & Myers, 2003). The degree to which students are capableof doing so when information is presented in visual versus verbal form is less clear. Accordingly, the currentstudy investigated students’ judgments of consistency between information presented in a verbal text and agraphic representation of that information. Specifically, we were interested in students’ skills at recognizingwhether a graph depicting a relationship provided in the verbal text did or did not match what was in the verbaltext. We also manipulated whether this relationship was explicitly stated in the verbal text or had to be inferredby connecting information presented in the verbal text. We predicted that (a) students would be more likely tocorrectly identify a discrepancy between the graph and the text when the predicted relationship was explicitlystated than when it had to be inferred; and (b) descriptions of parts of the verbal text used to make the judgmentwould involve more parts of the verbal text when the relationship had to be inferred.MethodParticipants in the study included 8th graders (N = 119) attending 4 schools in the urban mid-west. Wemanipulated two variables within subjects: explicit versus inferred relationship and agreement between thegraph and the verbal text (agrees vs. disagrees). Each participant saw 12 text/graph pairs (average number ofwords = 149.06), 4 of which were fillers and 8 of which were science topics (e.g., natural selection, thegreenhouse effect, antibiotic resistance) Four sets of materials counterbalanced assignment of topic to the 4explicitness x agreement conditions (2 topics per condition), and defined a between-subjects variable.Participants were asked to read each text, inspect the associated graph and answer two questions: 1) Using theinformation in the text, decide if this graph represents what we might expect to happen to [a variable in thespecific topic] (response format: forced choice yes/no, and 2) What in the text did you use to make yourdecision? (response format: open-ended).ResultsForced choice yes/no responses were scored to indicate correct identification of text/graph contradiction oragreement. For example, if the graph contradicted the text and the participant indicated the graph contradictedthe text they received a score of 1, yielding a maximum score of 2 per condition. Scores were analyzed using a3-way mixed ANOVA with text explicitness and graph relationship as within-subjects factors andcounterbalancing condition as a between subjects factor. Results show a main effect for text explicitness, F(1,115) = 17.15, p < .01, partial η 2 = .13, such that scores were higher when the predicted relationship was stated(M = .74, SD = .43) than when the predicted relationship had to be inferred (M = .61, SD = .48). There was alsoICLS 2014 Proceedings1541© ISLSa main effect for graph relationship, F(1, 115) = 98.11, p < .01, partial η2 = .46, such that the scores were higherwhen the graph agreed with the text (M = .82, SD = .38) than when the graph disagreed with the text (M = .53SD = .49). There was no main effect for counterbalancing condition. There was a significant interaction betweentext explicitness and graph relationship, F(1, 115) = 4.49, p < .05, partial η 2 = .04. When the graph contradictedthe text there was a difference between text explicitness, F(1, 118) = 16.62, p < .01, partial η2 = .12 such that thescore was higher when the predicted relationship was stated (M = .63, SD = .39) than when the predictedrelationship had to be inferred (M = .43, SD = .37). However, when the graph was consistent with the text therewas no effect of text explicitness. Additionally, although there was a three-way interaction among explicitness,relationship and counterbalancing condition (F(3, 115) = 2.71, p =.05, partial η 2 = .07), follow-up analysesindicated that the basic pattern of results was consistent for three of the four topic assignments to within-subjectscondition. Open-ended responses to “what in the text did you use to make your decision?” were coded fornumber of different sentences indicated. Number of sentences cited was analyzed using a 2-way repeatedmeasures ANOVA with text explicitness and graph agreement as within-subjects factors. Results indicated nomain effects nor interactions, F’s (1, 118) < 1. Additionally, for texts where the relationship was explicitlystated, a paired samples t-test indicated no difference in participants’ use of the stated relationship when thegraph disagreed versus agreed with the verbal text, t (118) = 1.71, NS.Discussion and Future WorkThe purpose of this study was to investiage students’ consistency judgments between information presented in averbal text and a graphic representation when the relationship between variables was explicitly stated or had tobe inferred using multiple pieces of information in the text. Results indicate that 8th graders can identifycontradictions between verbal text and graph, but are more likely to do so when the predicted relationship isexplicitly stated. The lower detection rate for contradictions when the relationship is not stated may indicate thatstudents do not always generate the inferences most appropriate to identify a mis-match between claims andsupporting graphical representations of data. Furthermore, the lack of differences for the number of sentencescited may indicate that students are not recognizing which parts of the text are most relevant to evaluate dataabout scientific claims. On the other hand, we are currently examining whether there are differences related tocondition in which information is selected. These deeper analyses will inform efforts to build learning contextsin which students generate inferences from stated information about relationships among variables. Ultimatelythe goal is to develop supports for students to be able to engage in critical evaluation of data in a way that isauthentic to the disciplinary practice. Plans for future work include further investigation of the influence oftopic, prior knowledge and grade level.ReferencesAinsworth, S. (2008). The educational value of multiple-representations when learning complex scientificconcepts. In J.K. Gilbert, M. Reiner, & M. Nakhleh (Eds.), Visualization: An emergent field of practiceand enquiry in science education (191-208). Dordrecht: Springer.Glazer, N. (2011). Challenges with graph interpretation: A review of the literature, Studies in Science Education47(2), 183-210.National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School Officers. (2010).Common Core State Standards for English language arts and literacy in history/social studies, science,and technical subjects. Washington, DC: Authors.Roth, W., & Bowen, G. M. (2003). Are graphs worth ten thousand words? An expert-expert study. Cognitionand Instruction, 21(4), 429-473.Singer, M., & Gagnon, N. (1999). Detecting causal inconsistencies in scientific text. In S. R. Goldman, A.Graesser, & P. van den Broek (Eds.), Narrative comprehension, causality, and coherence: Essays inhonor of Tom Trabasso (pp. 179–194). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.Stadtler, M., Scharrer, L., Brummernhenrich, B., & Bromme, R. (2013). Cognition and Instruction, 31(2), 130150.Wiley, J., & Myers, J. L. (2003). Availability and accessibility of information and causal inferences fromscientific texts, Discourse Processes, 36(2), 109-129.Wu, H. & Krajcik, J. S. (2006). Inscriptional practices in two inquiry-based classrooms: A cases study ofseventh graders’ use of data tables and graphs, Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 43(1), 63-95.AcknowledgmentsThe research reported here was supported, in part, by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department ofEducation, through Grant R305F100007 to University of Illinois at Chicago. The opinions expressed are thoseof the authors and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1542© ISLS