Learning and Becoming in an After School Program:The Relationship as a Tool for Equity within the Practices of Makingand TinkeringDaniela K. DiGiacomo and Kris D. Gutiérrez, CU Boulder, 249 UCB, Boulder, CO 80309-0249daniela.digiacomo@colorado.edu, kris.gutierrez@colorado.eduAbstract: El Pueblo Mágico is a social design experiment (Gutierrez & Vossoughi, 2010) inwhich youth and adults are developing deep and meaningful relationships which facilitatelearning that is inclusive, participatory, and robust. This paper focuses on ‘Making andTinkering’ practices to examine the relationship that develops as both adults and childrenengage in the joint activity of making, re-making, and designing artifacts such as ‘SquishyCircuits’. Grounded in sociocultural theory, and situated within Nasir’s (2012) work, thisstudy draws on a corpus of data that includes weekly observations and interviews over oneyear, to examine how the M & T activities are socially organized to increase room forfeedback, one of the four important aspects of expansive learning contexts (Nasir, 2012).Specifically, I analyze interactions to understand how relationships facilitated by the socialorganization of the practice of tinkering can be tools in the design of inclusive, equitablelearning spaces.IntroductionRe-Designing for Equity: The Potential of Making and TinkeringMaking & Tinkering (M & T) practices have shown to be a powerful means for engaging and exciting childrenaround Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) learning (Resnick and Rosenbaum, 2013;New York Hall of Science, 2010). Because of the playful, imaginative nature of many M & T activities, thetraditional notion that ‘science is for scientists’ begins to dismantle, as children discover that they too canengage in scientific pursuits. M & T environments have recently been lauded not only for their ability to engagechildren in STEM learning, such as figuring out what materials conduct electricity or how to create a circuit, butalso for their reimagining of what learning can look like. M & T practices can open up new spaces for studentsto develop a sustained engagement with learning processes (Washor and Mojkowski, 2010; Resnick andRosenbaum, 2013). However, though the idea of ‘diverse learners’ is invoked in recent M & T publications, theresearch around what potential M & T practices can have on environments and relationships aimed at creatingequity remains lacking. Toward this end, I explore what role M & T can have in one learning context designedfor a racially and economically diverse student body and their predominantly White, middle class teacherfigures.The relationship between teachers and students in classrooms has historically been one of teacher-asknower and student-as-receiver (Rogoff, 1990). Complicating this hierarchical relationship is the fact that mostteachers in the United States are White, middle class women, many of whom have had few, if any, meaningfulrelationships with students of color before they enter the classroom (Matias, 2013). Alongside these realities isoften a ‘managerial-like’ approach to classroom organization, where teachers see their teaching identities asbeing heavily intertwined with their ability to control the classroom and transfer their own content knowledge totheir students. Considering the grave inequities that continue to pervade the US educational system in whatmany term as the ‘opportunity gap’, there is a continued imperative to reconsider this traditional teacher-studentrelationship and the participation structures of learning environments, especially in light of the changingdemographics and the increasing disparity between them (Carter and Welner, 2013).To address the need for more robust and equitable learning environments, it seems fruitful to reimagine how classrooms could be organized differently and what design principles could alter the traditionalteacher-student power dynamic. The ways in which a learning space is organized is known to have arelationship with one’s ability to access and be a participant in that space (Rogoff, 1990). As such, a socialpractice designed to re-organize the space of learning in ways that encourage everyone to be a valued and activeparticipant seems smart. M & T is an emergent framework for designing learning activity systems that attemptsto do just that. Its design principles are governed by the idea that children should be the designers, rather thanconsumers, of the artifacts with which they interact. M & T practices encourage students to engage in aninterest-driven collaborative process of (re)design, (re)production, reflection, and remixing. In the particularactivity system for this study, undergraduate students and youth are brought together to engage in new mediaand tinkering practices that promote learning. The focus on children as designers, complimented by theimmediate feedback nature of the activity of Squishy Circuits, is helping the undergrads to foster productive andICLS 2014 Proceedings729	  © ISLSmore symmetrical partnerships with the youth, often undercutting their initial ideas about how the relationshipof adults and children in educational spaces is supposed to look.Relationships as Tools for More Inclusive Practices of Teaching and LearningWhile we know that relationships matter in overcoming normative stereotypes and discrimination (Nasir, 2012),I was curious as to if the ‘partner-like’ approach of M & T could have the ability to breakdown the power andauthority which characterizes traditional teacher-student relations. I argue that the instantiation of M & Tpractices in educational environments has the potential to engender relationships and identities that arecharacterized less by the traditional teacher/student power dynamic to which we have become accustomed, andmore akin to the valued partnerships known to be crucial to equity oriented social practice (Gutierrez andVossoughi, 2010). Accordingly, I explore how the social organization of the M & T practice affords four tenetsof learning (yet focus specifically on the first): consistent feedback, room for personal contribution, a sense ofsocial belonging, and the availability of multiple roles; all of which combine to produce room for thedevelopment of meaningful, alternative relationships.	  Theoretical and Methodological ApproachesConceptualizing Learning and Relationship Processes through Analysis of the SocialOrganization of Making and Tinkering PracticesRecent interest in notions of connected learning (Ito, et al., 2013) have highlighted the importance of engagingyouth in practices that are both interest-driven and expand youths’ repertoires of practice across settings andinstitutions, particularly for youth from non-dominant communities. M & T activities provide a context forconnecting youths’ everyday interest and practices with new forms of activity and participation. Given thesignificant disconnect between youths’ out-of-school and in-school practices, the design of such activitiesbecomes more salient. Within this framework, I analyze how the social organization of M & T affords newforms of engagement and participation between youth and adults working in joint activity.In M& T, students take ownership over their own learning processes, and the design of the activityfacilitates immediate feedback, open exploration, and fluid experimentation (Resnick and Rosenbaum, 2013).M & T activities encourage people to embody the ‘maker’ spirit and identity during learning-centered activitiesand to develop a sense of ownership and sustained participation. Furthermore, the “maker movement nurturescommunities of practice that bring adults and young people together around common interests” (Washor andMojkowski, 2010: 1), invoking Nasir’s (2012) notion that common interests aid in the development ofmeaningful joint activity and positive relationships between students and teachers.Because M & T practices have been conceptualized as tools for fostering increased and sustainedengagement among diverse types of youth (Washor and Majkowski, 2010), it seems fruitful to examine how itspractices could engender and support greater equity in environments, such as schools, that are producingunequal outcomes. Because we know that teaching and learning are relational, and learning is a social practicethat is organized in its context of development (Rogoff, 1990), it is important to investigate the relation betweenthe organization of a learning environment and its effect on relationship building central to learning. To do this,I draw on insights and methods from Nasir (2012) as well as Gutierrez & Vossoughi (2010) to better understandhow we can design for equity in learning environments.Nasir (2012) analyzed how the social organization of the practice in alternative learning spaces such asdominoes and track and field afforded four key tenets that she identified as crucial to the creation of equityoriented learning environments: consistent feedback, availability of multiple roles, a sense of social belonging,and room for personal contribution. She found these fours tenets of a practice to be especially salient forchildren from non-dominant backgrounds in spaces dominated by Whiteness, such as in schools. For thepurposes of this paper, I emphasis and explore the tenet of ‘consistent feedback’, as it reflects, albeit slightlydifferently, the M & T notion of how ‘immediate feedback’ from process and product in activity facilitatesincreased levels of inquiry and engagement in practice.Taken together, Nasir argued that when spaces are organized in ways that engender these elements,students can develop social and academic identities that build on rather than oppose each other. In looking at thesocial organization of an activity, she found feedback to be a critical aspect of the practice. Consistent feedbackspeaks to the availability of critical and supportive feedback from adults in moment-to-moment activity,guidance/assistance when needed, opportunities for observation and modeling, and multiple chances to tryagain.The activity of Squishy Circuits, in particular, merits further exploration as the central activity ofanalysis in this discussion. “Squishy Circuits, developed by AnnMarie Thomas, consist of two kinds of playdoh; one is conductive, the other not. By layering conductive and non-conductive play-doh in differentconfigurations, simple, tangible, ‘squishy’ circuits can be made and hooked into simple electronics” (LeDuc-ICLS 2014 Proceedings730	  © ISLSMills, et al., 2013:618). There are multiple elements of this specific medium of play-doh that lend itself toplayful exploration and playful learning without needing certain levels of prerequisite knowledge, bothimportant elements of learning from a sociocultural perspective. Johnson and Thomas note that “thesecompounds have extremely low entry barriers; anyone can learn from, and enjoy them. The procedures forimplementing basic circuits are very simple as well…one can almost immediately start building circuits…Thislearning tool was especially effective [for improving knowledge about circuits and electricity] among studentsthat, judging from the preliminary test, had almost no pre-existing knowledge of these subjects” (2010:4103).These qualities of the Squish Circuit allow both youth and adults to “jump into the practice”, a central designprinciple of M & T at large and one especially helpful for facilitating co-learning by doing amongintergenerational ensembles such as those at EPM.Johnson and Thomas, in their discussion of Squishy Circuits and Science Education, also point tobenefits of Squishy Circuits that are in line with Nasir’s social conditions for learning, namely ‘personalcontribution’ and ‘social belonging’. “Playful learning and tangible mediums have been shown providemotivation to learn. Students are most involved in learning a topic when it intrigues their own personal interests.When students care about their work, they develop a profound understanding of their subject matter…Buildingcircuits with the conductive and non-conductive dough, as well as various electronics components, givesstudents a personal experience, because they are designing their own implementations” (Johnson and Thomas,2010: 4102-4103, emphasis mine). These localized learning experiences with the circuits should moreover beconsidered as tools to be taken up within the larger issue of lack of representation of diversity in STEM fields.“Research has shown a disconnect, between scientific direction presented in classrooms and students’ pursuit ofscience on their own. By late elementary school many students do not see their efforts outside of the classroomas “science” at all. Playful learning through tangible mediums [e.g., Squishy Circuits] bridges this gap bycombining what students learn, and what they do for fun…Using squishy circuits has the potential to bringplayful learning methodologies to electronics education” (Johnson and Thomas, 2010: 4102). Johnson andThomas illustrate the potential power that this particular M & T activity has for engaging students in a practice(and ultimately field) to which they may otherwise have not readily entered, through designing for play andleveraging student interests.So how do Squishy Circuits serve to help dismantle inequities between traditionally hierarchicalrelationships in learning activity? My argument is that the social organization of the practice of M & Tfacilitates room for the transformation of participation structures and the building of meaningfulintergenerational relationships in educational settings. From this perspective, instead of receiving knowledgefrom adults, the children jump right into the practice of creating and re-making, and in doing so, there is morecollaboration and less stratification of power among participants (Washor and Mojkowski, 2011; Resnick andRosenbaum, 2013). Because the child may find a way to light up his circuit before the adult, traditional roles ofexpert and novice may shift. These elements of the practice produce an alternative type of relationship betweenthe adult and child, one in which all participants become doers and learners, alongside each other. Thisalternative relationship, I argue, may have the potential to re-mediate traditional teacher-student relations inpractice, as well as re-mediate some of the deficit ideologies that teachers from dominant communities maybring to their classrooms of color (Gutierrez, et al., 2009).MethodsThere are many ways to organize learning environments that invite increased participation and positiverelationships among teachers and students. However, in my research in this particular historically indexed,equity-oriented social design experiment, I noted particularly interesting practices and processes of relationshipbuilding that emerged from the Making and Tinkering activities. I began this research with an emergent interestin relationships and was oriented to the following types of research questions:1.What are the affordances of the social organization of the activities of Making and Tinkering at ElPueblo Magico?2.In what ways is relationship development between youth and adults shaped by the social organizationof the Making and Tinkering activities?These questions are aligned with my guiding curiosities about what power this practice could have on designingfor equity. In dismantling the deficit frameworks that novice teachers often bring into the classroom, thereseemed to be the potential to facilitate a more partnership-like relationship between adult and child.Because my research questions are focused on the social practices around learning and becomingwithin an activity system, I situate my central constructs of learning and becoming within a sociocultural theoryof learning that views learning and becoming processes as socially constituted and relationally based. Iunderstand learning and becoming in practice as illustrated by instances of shifts in participation, often signaledICLS 2014 Proceedings731	  © ISLSby discourse that reflects a sense of value and identity in the practice. For instance, when the children said thingslike “Look, I got it to light up, I’m a scientist!” I understood them to be engaging in some form of learning andbecoming in practice. In order to get at how relationships are engendered in the M & T activities andenvironment, my unit of analysis was the social organization of the practice.The research context for my project was a designed based intervention—an afterschool program ElPueblo Mágico (EPM), located in a predominantly Latino suburb of Denver, Colorado. EPM wasconceptualized and directed by Professor Kris Gutiérrez, who designed EPM based on the principles of the LosAngeles 5th Dimension antecedent, Las Redes. Las Redes, like EPM, involves participants from both theelementary school and the University, to participate in a ‘change laboratory’ where transformative learning forboth the student and the undergraduate is privileged (Gutierrez and Vossoughi, 2010). On each day, there wereabout thirty children from low income and Latino backgrounds who attended EPM. The CU undergraduates, aspart of their Educational Psychology requirement, worked within ensembles of two to six children. Thesemester’s target population of undergrads was primarily female and Caucasian.I conducted a qualitative study drawing on principles of ethnography, to capture the social practices,specifically within the spaces of Making and Tinkering. I focused my eight field notes on the interactions anddiscourse among groups who demonstrated engagement over time with two primary M & T activities of‘Squishy Circuits’, and in fewer cases, ‘Scribbling Machines’. Scribbling Machines activity involves creating amoving drawing machine out of batteries and art materials, employing similar guiding tenets for design as thosein Squishy Circuits. These activities served as ideal practices in which to study the affordances of “alternativelearning spaces” (Nasir, 2012) supporting relationship development that involve processes of learning andbecoming through doing, albeit disguised more informally as collaborative art/game design and play.In order to investigate the affordances of the social organization of the practice, I focused my notetaking on capturing the four tenets of Nasir’s framework (social belonging, personal contribution, availability ofroles, consistent feedback), as well as the discourse and social interactions among the participants and materials.To capture discourse around identity and relationship development in situ, I worked side by side in creating playdough within groups doing Squishy Circuits. After I analyzed and categorized the instances of affordances ofsocial practices of M & T into the four categories, I began to understand the ways in which the M & Tenvironment was lending itself to certain patterns of identity and relationship development. I added anotherlayer of coding to my data based on the M & T design principles framework of Resnick and Rosenbaum (2013),such as ‘easy to connect,’ ‘open exploration,’ and ‘fluid experimentation,’ to examine their relation with Nasir’saffordances of alternative learning spaces. I looked for disconfirming evidence as well, of which there were afew instances when the M & T practices engendered the traditional ‘teacher as all knower’ pedagogical practicesand relationships. However, to a greater degree, the learning affordances between how Nasir (2012)conceptualized the practice of dominoes mirrored the learning affordances in Resnick and Rosenbaum’s (2013)‘Scratch’ Tinkering practice, overlapping in such a way as to confirm the reasoning behind deductively codingthe second pass in this way. These analyses suggested that my constructs were appropriate and viable inaddressing my topic of interest.Major Findings, Conclusions, and ImplicationsPresentation of FindingsIn my role as participant observer and interviewer, I documented the ways undergraduate participantsdiscursively framed students. I noted a regularity in the use of phrases like “But this child is a problem, I don’tknow how else to describe it” or “It’s hard for me to imagine what it must be like not to have support at home”,or “Things went well today, all the children listened and did what they were supposed to.” This seeminglydeficit view of the children at El Pueblo Mágico was part of the everyday language I noted in this educationalsetting. As aspiring teachers, many of the undergrads initially talked about children, most of whom arepredominantly low income children of color, in ways that positioned themselves as the sole source ofknowledge, without an understanding of how children’s repertoires of practices were essential to learning(Gutierrez & Rogoff, 2003). However, the organization of designed Squishy Circuits activities of which theywere a part afforded new pedagogical and social relations in which undergraduates assumed ‘partner-like’approach to teaching and mentorship.The participation structures of the ecology of El Pueblo and M & T activity generated a range of waysfor the undergraduates to mediate children’s learning and participation. Specifically, I documented three primaryforms of feedback: 1) verbal feedback from the undergraduates in activity; 2) the feedback from the constructionand design of the SC; and 3) feedback arising from the joint activity and collaboration with peers. For example,when the children’s attempt to make a circuit failed, the undergrads were able to provide feedback to thechildren in ways that were markedly different from their discourse outside the activity. Their feedback wassupplemented by the consistent and immediate feedback nature of the actual Squishy Circuit. Ultimately, theforms of feedback helped to create an environment where the undergraduates could reframe their notions, inICLS 2014 Proceedings732	  © ISLSways that challenged pre-existing views of children from nondominant communities. As a result, new socialrelations between the undergraduates and the children developed into more collaborative and positivepartnerships.Drawing on Nasir’s analytical framework of the four social conditions for learning, I coded the datadeductively, seeking instances and examples of feedback, availability of multiple roles, social belonging, andpersonal contribution (Nasir, 2012). The results are shown below in Table 1. These analyses allowed me to seehow the social organization of the practice of M & T was creating an environment in which the youth andadults, as co-learners, co-constructed relationships with the process, products, and participants that led toincreased and sustained participation in the learning activities.Table 1. Instances of the 4 social conditions for learning (Nasir, 2012) in m & t practices across 8 observationsand 6 interviewsFeedback- 22 instances of‘consistentfeedback’- 13 instances of ‘seethe result’- 19 instances of ‘seethe process’Availability of Multiple Roles-35 instancesSocial Belonging-33 instancesPersonal Contribution- 22 instancesHowever, as the table reveals, the emergence of consistent and immediate feedback (invoking both Nasir andResnick and Rosenbaum’s notion of the potential of feedback) seemed to be especially important to theparticular practices of Squishy Circuits (and Scribbling Machines, despite their less prevalent use). To that end,I focused my analysis for this paper on the role that feedback played in helping to transform participationstructures in this social design context.I use the following representative example to illustrate the shift from discourse to practice.Undergraduate Miley described Ericka, a Latina 2nd grader as a really “sweet, obedient girl” (Interview 3,3.20.13). When asked about what role race and socioeconomic status played in education, she said “they dictatethe type of relationship you have with education…because like if your parents didn’t go to college you may notbe as inclined to go.” At one level, Miley’s words were reflective of a deficit framework commonly used to talkabout allow income non-dominant students. Her discourse also suggests that she may not have viewed Ericka asa likely candidate for college, on the basis of her parents’ education. Interestingly, I had specifically sought outMiley for an interview towards the end of the semester because her relationship and practice with Ericka duringM & T activities stood out as an exemplary of the affordances of the practice, and highlighted the relationshipbetween activity and mediation. When working together to make Squishy Circuits, as we see below, Mileycontinually asked Ericka (the child) for guidance in creating the perfect conducting dough, as well as questionedher about how to say things in Spanish.Field Note 5, 3.5.13: I positioned myself close to Miley, a blonde undergraduate, and her twoLatino youth: Jennifer and Ericka, who were seated on the floor together making insulatingplay dough. Miley asked: “What do you want to be when you grow up?” to which Ericka says“a princess.” Miley tells her that she had also wanted to be a princess. They continue to talkabout the princess life, and Miley asks Ericka for help in adding the right amount of water toher dough as hers is too dry. The group next to them is talking about Spanish words foranimals. I then hear Miley say, “What Spanish words can you teach me”, and Ericka says “Pe-r-r-o”…It was particularly noteworthy that Miley’s discourse shifted significantly in the M & T practices. Thecollaborative activity of making a Squishy Circuit requires all participants to sit together on the floor,coordinating their activity in ways that positioned them physically at the same level with each other. Thesepractices also invite participants to work in close proximity, distributing their expertise and shared ideas in waysthat were more intimate and reflective of a partnership. Moreover, Squishy Circuits is an activity that appearedto foster conversation-in-process in which the participants were able to move from task-based conversation topersonal conversation in a fluid and integrated way, allowing for increased potential for relationship building.Lastly, the use of play dough afforded different ways of designing the artifact, providing opportunities tocontinually repair both discourse and practices. I argue that these elements of the activity helped to created anICLS 2014 Proceedings733	  © ISLSenvironment in which Miley could be expert and novice—a space in which she felt comfortable to ask questionsand seek assistance from her youth.Specifically, the consistent and immediate feedback provided throughout the development of theartifact allow for the learners to engage in “fluid experimentation” (Resnick and Rosenbaum, 2013). This fluidexperimentation has been identified as important for youth learning and becoming in practice. Even in the caseof a student who had struggled with behavior at EPM (Jose), we see how participation in the M & T activityengendered immediate feedback practices that helped transform one’s identity in the practice, and thus one’sidentity as learner. The below excerpt is illustrative of how children’s ability to ‘succeed’, even briefly, isimportant for their sense of becoming in the practice.Field Note 1, 1.29.13: Jose, a Latino boy who I had worked with last semester, stands close toLisa as she explains Making and Tinkering activities. He seems uninterested and reticent, asevidenced by the fact that he says “I’d rather be playing video games” while Lisa was givingthe two minute introduction speech. After about thirty minutes playing with the SquishyCircuits, however, he says “I’m a genius” when he was able to conduct electricity through anew manipulation of his pepperoni pizza play dough. Many others in his group seem excitedand engaged based on their continual touching of the materials and talking with each other andthe undergraduates, and their laughing, smiling, and saying things like “See, I’m a genius!”This example demonstrates a shifting participation in practice (Rogoff, 1990). From a sociocultural theoreticalperspective, one’s connection and identity in a learning environment are central to one’s ability to engage inexpansive learning. Jose, I argue, shifts his understanding and engagement in the activity after recognizing hisability to be a valued participant in the practice; aided by the immediate, iterative, and localized feedback natureof the Squishy Circuit. Jose, similar to Jacqueline in the example below, seemed to display a sense of ownershipin the activity, thereby increasing his/her proclivity to continue to engage in the learning process (Nasir, 2012).From field note 8, 4.5.13: I sit close to Jacqueline, who is creating a butterfly out of the dough.She says that she hopes to light up its eyes. When I get up to see what she is doing and shecan’t make it light up, she tries various ways to plug in the wires and the batteries. She thensays “I’ll call you back when it’s ready.” Jacqueline’s undergraduate says to her: “How do youthink you made it work the first time?” Paige and Devon, two other kids who are working tolight their designs up next to Jacqueline, are also struggling initially either because of battery,LED, or wire issues. A few minutes pass of them talking about previous successful or failedattempts, and then Paige (youth) says “Devon it’s so cool-it’s so bright because I’m touchingit!” Jacqueline then chimes in: “Wait I got it- It’s working! It’s working, and it’s so bright!”Instead of asking for help, Jacqueline chose to continue to re-make her circuit through repeatedinstances of trial of error. This room for repair is a necessary social condition for learning (Nasir, 2012), and inthis case not only does Jacqueline have the time and space to repair, but she seemed to value this feature of theactivity, as she wanted to take charge of this process. When she is finally able to make it light up, she took pridein her success so much so that she called the attention of others to her learning accomplishment.The opportunity for consistent feedback from peers and mentors, as well as the availability of multipleroles, increased participants’ connections to the learning activity. The interaction with Rossdy below highlightshow both the actual activity as well as the environment in which it was embedded allowed Rossdy room tonegotiate her understanding of the science reasoning behind the functioning of the ‘Scribbling Machine’.Field Note 4, 2.27.13: When I asked Rossdy what she was thinking about when she wasdesigning her scribbling machine, she said “I was thinking about what was going to work.”When she tries out her machine on paper, the propeller spins vigorously but the cup doesn’tmove on the paper like it is supposed to. She and Jordan talk about why this could be thecase, such as because the propeller is too heavy or the pen is bad. I signal to Andrew, a boyseated nearby at the computers with more experience in making Scribbling Machines, to comeover and help. He says that we need to change pens before going back to his station. I offer togo get thicker pens and bring them back to Rossdy. The scribbling machine now scribblesaround the page in a circular fashion. When I ask Rossdy if she knew that the machine wouldgo in circles when she was making it, she said no. A few moments later, she says, “Maybe it’sbecause it is a circular cup.” Another pause… “Or because the propeller spins in a circle”.Without being asked to do, Rossdy proffers a number of possible explanations to why her machine wasworking better or worse during our exchange. The social organization of the practice was such that she was ableICLS 2014 Proceedings734	  © ISLSnot only have the ready assistance and ‘repair’ opportunities (Stone and Gutierrez, 2007) of her undergraduate,Jordan, but she was also able to talk through her thinking with Andrew and me, both more ‘experiencedTinkerers’. This immediate and localized feedback and room for repair is important for the development herown identity as a learner, in that she had the time and space to learn from others through modeling and to situateherself as competent within the practice. If the experiment had ended with Rossdy’s first attempt at making herScribbling Machine draw, her understanding of motion and battery propelled energy (or simply her enthusiasmfor exploration) may have been left wanting.Because different designs produce different results in the activity of Squishy Circuits, it is difficult forthere to be an expert in the practice. There are often unpredictable results, again dismantling the moretraditional, recipe-like instruction so common in classrooms. The activity operated in a way that allowed forparticipants to play different roles at different times. This meant that undergraduates and youth became colearners in this activity, as they both needed to try out different designs in order to create the brightest or biggestcircuits. As the below excerpt from my interview with Miley demonstrates, she herself acknowledges how shedid not know the science behind the functioning of the activity..Interview with Miley, 3.20.13:Me:What do you believe to be the affordances/constraints or benefits/obstacles within Tinkering?Miley: Um, to get them to actually do the projects instead of just making the dough and playing withthe dough, cause I think that the appeal of it is that it feels cool on their hands and stuff likethat and they like making it because it's like cooking with their families. Ericka has started tolike doing that lighting it up even though it was hard, but like when she figured it out andstuff, she liked it.Me:And what would be like the benefits within that exercise, or the activity?Miley: Um, if you can get them to give you responses to why the light bulb is lighting up, andunderstanding the insulating dough and everything like that. I mean remember you asked meyesterday why our circuit was lighting up a certain way, and I was like I don't even know theanswer to that!Miley’s responses in regard to the affordances of M & T reflected Nasir’s tenets of learning: “to get them toactually do the project” invoked Nasir’s ‘room for personal contribution’, “they like making it because it’s likecooking with their families” mirrored Nasir’s ‘sense of social belong’, and “like doing that lighting it up...whenshe figured it out” demonstrated its ability to provide consistent feedback. These aspects of the Squishy Circuitpractice facilitated an environment which had the necessary social conditions for learning (Nasir, 2012).Moreover, the fact that Miley herself is actually unable to position herself as an expert, despite her status as anadult and mentor in the learning activity, highlights the potential power this M & T practice has in transformingparticipation and engagement structures in classroom-like settings.Conclusions and ImplicationsThrough Nasir’s conceptualization of how the social organization of alternative learning spaces helped toprovide necessary social conditions for learning, I found the Squishy Circuits activity to similarly afford fourcrucial elements for inclusive, participatory learning: consistent feedback and room for repair, the availability ofmultiple roles, the valuing of personal contribution, and a sense of social belonging among the students.Students’ connection to the M & T practice was further facilitated by the expanded opportunities for learningand becoming in practice, and this affected their sustained engagement in the learning activities. Specifically, Iargue that the availability of consistent and immediate feedback engendered space for the development ofalternative and meaningful connections between the dominant undergraduates and their non-dominant studentsof color.The undergraduate’s relations with students during M & T activities more closely resembledpartnerships, rather than the typical power dynamics often seen in educational environments. In their discourse,the undergraduates demonstrated a managerial, one-sided approach to teaching. Yet during M & T activities,their practice looked very different: they often positioned themselves as novices, engaged in question-askingteaching practices, and easily enacted a mentor/partner-like role with the children. I argue that these differenttypes of relationships were facilitated by the social made available by the instantiation of M & T.These findings of new learning practices merit further investigation. I argue that alternativerelationships are important not only for practices of good teaching and learning, but for designing for learningspaces that embody an equity-oriented lens and the abandonment of racialized identities and deficit pedagogies.Historically marginalized communities may benefit even more from the instantiation of M & T practices, asstudents from these communities are typically not given access equal amounts of access to higher order material,relational, and ideational resources (Nasir, 2012). The need for more opportunity to engage in meaningfulpractices should direct us to continue to focus on how to design robust and equitable spaces. The present studyICLS 2014 Proceedings735	  © ISLSsuggests that M & T practices have the potential to foster alternative and positive relationships in educationalspaces, with the opportunity to engender new types of participation structures where students and teachers canlearn and become in practice, together.ReferencesBrown, J., Collins, A. and Duguid, P. (2012). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18 (1), 32-42.Carter, P.L. and Welner, K. G. (Eds.) (2013). Closing the opportunity gap: What America must do to give everychild an even chance. Oxford.: Oxford University Press.Cole, M. and Engestrom, Y. (1993). A cultural-historical approach to situated cognition. In G. Salomon (Ed.),Distributed Cognitions: Ecological and Educational Considerations (pp. 1-46). New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Cooper, C. (2011). Bridging multiple worlds: Cultures, identities, and pathways to college. New York: OxfordUniversity Press,Engestrom, Y. (2004). From design experiments to formal interventions. University of Helsinki, Finland, 1-29.Gutierrez, K. and Vossoughi, S. (2010). Lifting off the ground to return anew: Mediated praxis, transformativelearning, and social design experiments.” Journal on Teacher Education, 61 (102), 110-117.Gutierrez, K. Morales, P. and Martinez, D. (2009). Re-mediating literacy: Culture, difference, and learning forstudents from nondominant communities. Review of Research in Education, 33 (1), 212-245.	  Gutierrez, K. and Rogoff, Barbara (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires ofpractice. Educational Researcher, 32 (5), 19-25.Ito, M. et al. Hanging Out, Messing Around, and Geeking Out. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2010.Johnson, S. and Thomas, A. Squishy circuits: A tangible medium for electronics education. CHI 2010, Work-inprogress. Atlanta, GA, 4099-4104.	  LeDuc-Mills, B., Dec, J., and Schimmel, J. (2013). Evaluating accessibility in fabrication tools for children.Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children - IDC '13, NewYork.Matias, Cheryl. Keynote Speech at Teachers of Colors and Allies Summit, CU Boulder, October 22, 2013.Nasir, N. (2012). Racialized identities: Race and achievement among African American youth. Stanford:Stanford University Press,New York Hall of Science. (2010). Proceedings from the “Innovation, Education, and the Maker Movement”Workshop. Accessed through http://www.nysci.org/media/file/MakerFaireReportFinal122310.pdfResnick, M. and Rosenbaum, E. (2013). Designing for tinkerability. In Honey, M., & Kanter, D. (eds.), Design,Make, Play: Growing the Next Generation of STEM Innovators, pp. 163-181. Routledge.Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in Thinking: Cognitive Development in Social Context. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press, 1990.Stone, L. and Gutierrez, K. (2007). Problem articulation and the processes of assistance: An activity theoreticview of mediation in game play. International Journal of Educational Research, 46 (1-2), 43-56.Washor, E. and Mojkowski, C. Making their way: Creating a new generation of “Thinkerers”. Accessed throughhttp://www.handoc.com/documents/makersymposium.pdfICLS 2014 Proceedings736	  © ISLS