Advancing Epistemological Frame Analysis to Refine OurUnderstanding of Inquiry Frames in Early Elementary InterviewsAlejandro Andrade-Lotero and Joshua A. Danish, Indiana University,laandrad@indiana.edu, jdanish@indiana.eduAbstract: The present study contributes to our understanding, and the methods for measuring,students’ epistemological framing in the context of thirty first- and second-graders learningabout complex systems. Our goal was to automate the process of identifying frames by codingbehaviors and then determining whether they cluster around specific researcher identifiedframes. We developed a dual-layered coding scheme of the video recordings from semistructured interviews and a Bayesian model to provide validity warrants to our analyses.	  Research has shown that the way students interpret an activity such as a cognitive interview will shape howthey will respond, explore, and learn within the activity (Russ, Lee, & Sherin, 2012). Of particular importanceare the expectations that students develop for how they are to engage with knowledge in a given situation.These expectations, called “epistemological frames” (Scherr & Hammer, 2009) have, for example, beenshown to influence whether students who are asked about something they don’t know will simply state thatthey don’t know or actively attempt to explore and identify a valid answer. Traditionally, students’epistemologies are measured through self-report, and as a result do not always provide accurate informationabout their epistemological stance as it relates to the contexts in which they are learning (Scherr & Hammer,2009). Therefore, epistemological frame analysis has been developed to analyze this contextualdependency of students’ expectations with respect to knowledge. This method studies the interactionbetween students’ framing, behavior, and the content of their speech and has been used to describe therelationship between students’ frames and the way they engage with learning activities at the middle schoolthrough college level.In this paper we aim to build upon this work in two key ways. First, we will explore the associationbetween students’ framing, behaviors, and the substance of their thinking with early elementarystudents learning about complex systems concepts such as emergence (Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006), in thecontext of a semi-structured interview about bees collecting nectar (Danish, Saleh & Andrade-Lotero, 2014).Exploring the utility of frame analysis in this new context will provide insight into how to evaluate interviewdata with younger children, and any unique challenges that working with young children introduces willfurther refine the theory and practice of using frames to answer questions about student knowledge andlearning. Second, we are attempting to refine the methodological toolkit used to identify frames in an effortto develop a more consistent measurement approach. Specifically, we explore the potential for using aBayesian analysis to identify whether clusters of observable behaviors can be used to predict researcherinterpreted frames in rich video data of student interviews.	  Conceptual FrameworkLearning scientists have increasingly paid more attention to how students understand what kind oflearning activity they think they are in (Greeno, 2009). For instance, researchers focus their attention onstudents’ expectations of what knowledge, reasoning, and learning in a particular discipline entails(Hammer, Elby, Scherr, & Redish, 2005). Frames have been defined as a pragmatic meta-message of‘what is going on’ in people’s moment-by-moment interactions (Bateson, 1955). These context-basedepistemic units organize our behaviors with respect to the way we interpret the world as well as other’sbehaviors. When students engage in a new activity, their prior expectations would guide their framingdifferently, and in such a way it may be more or less productive for the instructional goals of the learningactivity (Hutchison & Hammer, 2010). In this particular study, we want to see how students’ framing of theinterview context influences their engagement with the content (complex systems concepts) being discussed.Specifically, building on Russ (Russ et al., 2012), we believe that an inquiry frame will involve students reexamining their assumptions and thus reaching new conclusions whereas an examination frame will lead toterse answers and little additional learning.	  Research DesignThe analysis that follows is based on a secondary analysis of data collected in the spring of 2012 (Danish et al.,2014). Thirty first- and second-graders (6-7 years old) took part in this study. The purpose was to supportstudents’ learning of complex systems by scaffolding a computer simulation about bees with inquiry prompts.Individual semi-structured interviews were conducted as a post-test to obtain evidence for the students’ levelICLS 2014 Proceedings1637© ISLSof understanding of complex systems. During the interview, students were asked questions about the behaviorof bees as a measure of direct learning. For instance, children saw the picture of a beehive and a flower withnectar and explained what they thought the bees would do. Video recordings were obtained from both theintervention and the interview. In the present study we focused our analysis on the video-recordings ofthe interviews. We divided each video excerpt in a sequence of 10sec	   segments. We consider a 10secsegment long enough to include sufficient information about the behavior, yet short enough to providesufficient discrete data points for our statistical analysis.Prior examinations of students’ frames have involved having multiple researchers code all ofthe student behaviors and then attempt to interpret students’ frames through repeated watching of the videodata. Our goal was to extend this approach in a manner that would more consistently map easily observedbehaviors to frames, and potentially find shifts in frame at a finer-grained level of detail while adding theability to report the statistical validity of the approach. Generally speaking, our approach involves using a subset of researcher- identified frames to establish a statistical model for which behaviors identify which frame,and then to vet whether we can use the behaviors to predict frames and frame transitions in the remainder ofthe data corpus. Therefore, we developed what we called a dual-layered coding scheme. The first layercomprises a series of lines of codes, one per observable feature. Grounding our codes on Russ et al. (2012)study, we coded five different features: a) body leaning, b) gaze, c) hand gesturing, d) hedging, e) volume andclarity of speech. For the second layer, we coded 25% of the video to identify researchers’ interpretationof how students were framing the activity. We regard this interpretative set of codes as the ‘training’ set,from which the proportion and particular combination of observable features provide the basis for theautomatized coding for the rest of the video. The algorithm employed was a Bayesian multilevel multinomiallogistic regression to account for the nested structure of the data. We propose that discrepancies betweeninterpreted and predicted clusters would provide empirical validity evidence for the inferences we make aboutstudents’ epistemological framing. We also include evidence of external relations between our data andperformance measures of student presentation of complex systems concepts on the interview questions.	  Findings and ConclusionsOur results indicate that we were able to use body, gaze, hand gesture, hedging behaviors, volume andclarity of speech to make predictions about whether students were engaging in specific frames as definedby Russ et al. (2012). This project aims to extend prior approaches to the analysis of epistemologicalframing and further refine our understanding of inquiry frames during interviews. Results can supportresearchers in intentionally designing to support those frames, such as inquiry, which support children’s activeexploration for answers. Our approach to using statistical models also provides new ways to include validitywarrants in researchers’ selection of observable features which guide their interpretations, and to increasereliability of characterizing students’ frames.	  ReferencesBateson, Gregory. (1955). A theory of play and fantasy. Psychiatric research reports, 2(39), 39-51.Danish, J. A., Saleh, A., & Andrade-Lotero, L. A. (2014). Software Scaffolds for Supporting Teacher-LedInquiry into Complex Systems Concepts. Paper presented at the AERA annual meeting, Philadelphia,PA.Greeno, James G. (2009). A theory bite on contextualizing, framing, and positioning: A companion to Son andGoldstone. Cognition and Instruction, 27(3), 269-275.Hammer, David, Elby, Andrew, Scherr, Rachel E, & Redish, Edward F. (2005). Resources, framing, andtransfer. Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective, 89-120.Hutchison, Paul, & Hammer, David. (2010). Attending to student epistemological framing in a scienceclassroom. Science Education, 94(3), 506-524.Jacobson, Michael J, & Wilensky, Uri. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educationalimportance and implications for the learning sciences. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 1134.Kruschke, John. (2010). Doing Bayesian Data Analysis: A Tutorial Introduction with R: Academic Press.Russ, R.S., Lee, Victor R, & Sherin, Bruce L. (2012). Framing in cognitive clinical interviews about intuitivescience knowledge: Dynamic student understandings of the discourse interaction. ScienceEducation,96(4), 573-599.Scherr, R.E., & Hammer, D. (2009). Student behavior and epistemological framing: Examples fromcollaborative active-learning activities in physics. Cognition and Instruction, 27(2), 147-174.AcknowledgmentsWe are grateful to Ginette Delandshere for her help in sharpening our ideas and to Asmalina Saleh forcollaborating with us on the design and implementation of this study.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1638© ISLS