Exploring Group-Level Epistemic Cognitions within a KnowledgeCommunity and Inquiry Curriculum for Secondary ScienceAlisa Acosta, Michelle Lui and James D. SlottaOntario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto252 Bloor Street West, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1V6 Canadaalisa.acosta@utoronto.ca, michelle.lui@utoronto.ca, jslotta@oise.utoronto.caAbstract: This paper explores Epistemic Cognition (EC) at the collective level within thecontext of an inquiry curriculum for high school biology. The “EvoRoom” curriculum was 10weeks in duration, with two major units in evolution and biodiversity as well as a rich media“immersive simulation” activity and a field trip to a local zoo. All activities were designedaccording to the Knowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI) model, which guides the design ofcollective inquiry curricula where students make progress as a knowledge community withexplicit connections to learning expectations. The paper applies Chinn’s EC framework to thedesign and enactment of EvoRoom and, by extension, to the KCI model. Findings reveal ashift in students’ perceptions of “sources of knowledge,” however students’ “justification ofknowledge” was seen to be compromised in cases where students satisficed their originalepistemic stance in favor of group consensus.IntroductionSubstantial research has investigated the use of technology enhanced learning environments to supportcollective inquiry – a form of learning in which students work together as an entire class to create and advanceknowledge. For example, Scardamalia and Bereiter (2006) have advanced a theoretical perspective ofknowledge building, employing an innovative technology environment called “Knowledge Forum” wherestudents contribute and edit inquiry notes. Other researchers have explored various forms of online discussiontools (e.g. Hmelo Silver, 2010), wiki-based environments (e.g. Peters & Slotta, 2010; Najafi, Zhao & Slotta,2011) and handheld data collection activities (e.g. Metcalf et al., 2010) in exploring different aspects ofstudents’ learning and engagement in collective inquiry.One aspect of collective inquiry that has not yet received much study is that concerned with students’epistemological knowledge – their beliefs about knowledge and learning, and how those beliefs influence theirparticipation in the curriculum activities. Substantial research has addressed this topic for student inquiry in thewider area of computer supported collaborative learning, where small groups or individuals engage in structuredinquiry tasks. For example, several lines of work have examined students’ beliefs about the nature of science,and science learning (Lin et al, 2013) or the students’ understanding of collaboration (Najafi & Slotta, 2010).However not much attention has been given to the collective aspects of epistemology. It is important to studyhow students’ epistemic cognition influences collective inquiry. For example, if students have little experiencelearning as a community, or if their understandings about learning are not aligned with those of the designedcurriculum (e.g. if they are expecting to learn content with the aim of individual achievement), then the outcomeof the enacted curriculum may diverge widely from what was intended. Thus, an understanding of epistemiccognition in relation to collective inquiry is vital to our theoretical models, as well as to our design ofcurriculum and technology environmentsDrawing upon the theoretical framework for epistemic cognition, developed by Chinn et al. (2011), thepresent study is guided by the following research questions:1.2.How does the design of collaborative inquiry activities affect the ways in which knowledge is justifiedand shared within a knowledge community?How are students’ epistemic stances influenced by the nature of the collective inquiry design?Theoretical Foundations“Epistemic cognition” (EC) is a term used to describe any explicit or tacit cognitions that pertain toepistemological matters, such as knowledge, beliefs, truth, sources, justification, evidence, understanding, andexplanation (Chinn et al, 2011). A number of studies have shown that students’ epistemic beliefs are animportant predictor of achievement in a variety of learning domains, including information processing (Garnerand Alexander, 1994), reading comprehension (Rukavina & Daneman, 1996), test performance (Schommer etal, 1992), argumentation (Kuhn, 1991), and the ability to synthesize information from multiple sources (Strømsøand Bråten, 2009). Other studies have revealed the role of epistemic beliefs in affecting chosen learningstrategies (Ryan, 1984; Schommer et al, 1992), motivation and behaviour (Pintrich et al, 1993), and attitudessuch as learned helplessness (Qian and Alvermann, 1995). In the domain of school science, Windschitl andICLS 2014 Proceedings673© ISLSAndre (1998) demonstrated that students with more sophisticated epistemic beliefs (e.g. the belief thatknowledge is complex, cumulative, and context-dependent) exhibited greater learning gains when engaged withconstructivist pedagogies compared to individuals with less sophisticated beliefs (e.g. the belief that knowledgeis simple, quick, and certain). Kardash And Scholes (1996) revealed that students’ beliefs about the certainty ofknowledge affected the ways they handled and presented contradictory evidence in scientific research, and Qianand Alvernann (1995) further showed that students’ beliefs about the simplicity and certainty of knowledgeimpacted the levels of conceptual change they experienced in school science. It is therefore important toconsider students’ epistemic beliefs and their interaction with learning when developing theoretical models oflearning or specific curricular interventions.Several scholars have attempted to identify specific dimensions of epistemic cognition to providegeneral models or frameworks (see, for example, Perry, 1970; Schommer, 1990, 1993; Hofer and Pintrich,1997). In 2011, Chinn, Buckland and Samarapungavan extended the work of Hofer and Pintrich (1997) bydeveloping an expanded framework for epistemic cognition. Their model included the addition of several newcomponents and subcomponents of EC, as well as the specification of a finer grain size of cognitions withineach of these dimensions in order to account for contextual and situational differences in learning processes.The five dimensions of Chinn et al.’s 2011 EC framework are:1.2.3.4.5.Epistemic aims and epistemic valueStructure of knowledge and other epistemic achievementsSources and justification of knowledge and related epistemic stancesEpistemic virtues and vicesReliable and unreliable processes for achieving epistemic aimsChinn et al. (2011) recognize that their description of this EC framework maintains a focus on individualcognitions, and the authors further suggest that an opportunity exists for future research to explore thesecognitions at the level of groups, which would include students engaged in collective inquiry within aconstructivist learning environment. To this end, this paper explores one of the above dimensions, “sources andjustification of knowledge and related epistemic stances,” in relation to an innovative pedagogical model forcollaborative learning in secondary science called “Knowledge Community and Inquiry” (KCI).As defined by Slotta and Najafi (2010), a knowledge community is one where members (a) collectivelydevelop a shared knowledge base (b) establish characteristic practices for knowledge creation or advancement,and (c) share in discourse for idea sharing, critique and improvement. From an epistemological perspective, theknowledge community approach represents a key shift from the notion of self-as-learner, where an individual ispotentially in competition with peers, to one of collaboration and cooperation in which shared knowledgeadvancement is favored over individual gains. In the context of K-12 classrooms, two widely researchedexamples of the knowledge community approach are Fostering Communities of Learners (FCL) (Brown &Campione, 1996), and Knowledge Building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). Although both of these exampleshave been implemented in K-12 contexts, current school structures and content-heavy curriculum demands canoften make these approaches inaccessible to course instructors – particularly at the secondary level, andparticularly in content-heavy domains like science. Knowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI) was developedfor secondary science as a means of blending the core philosophies of the knowledge building approach with thestructural and scripted affordances of scaffolded inquiry (Slotta & Peters, 2008; Slotta & Najafi, 2012). TheKCI model includes five major principles, each including a set of epistemological commitments, pedagogicalaffordances, and technology elements. Together, these guide the creation of inquiry activities, peer interactionsand exchange, and cooperative knowledge construction (Slotta et al, 2013).Until the present study, the epistemic elements of KCI had not been explicitly tested or evaluated. Toassess students’ epistemic cognitions within KCI, we first evaluated the design of a KCI biology curriculum unitin terms of its epistemic elements, which was done by evaluating the design in terms of the stated epistemiccommitments of KCI. We then then evaluated the enactment of the curriculum in terms of actual epistemiccognitions observed in student interactions. The curriculum was a ten-week Grade 11 Biology unit that met theOntario Ministry requirements for evolution and biodiversity and included activities that were situated in partwithin a unique immersive environment called “EvoRoom” (Lui & Slotta, 2012). It should be noted that whilethe KCI model served as an important referent and guide for design decisions, the design of the EvoRoomcurriculum was not explicitly concerned with the role of epistemic cognition within KCI. While such elementsare essential to the KCI model, they were not at the forefront of concern for the EvoRoom research project,which was focused on designing activity sequences that engaged students with the relevant biology content, aswell as a collective immersive simulation environment (Lui & Slotta, 2013). The present research examines therole of epistemic cognition within the EvoRoom curriculum design by taking an ‘epistemological pass’ at themost recent design iteration. As noted above, this paper presents the findings for one of Chinn et al’s (2011)dimensions of EC, “sources and justification of knowledge and related epistemic stances.”ICLS 2014 Proceedings674© ISLSMethodologyResearch Setting and Design ConsiderationsThe term ‘EvoRoom’ refers to a 10-week multi-locational curriculum, but also to an actual room that wasconstructed using smart classroom technologies to provide an immersive simulated rainforest environment.Students’ movements and interactions within this smart classroom environment – where they go in the room,and with whom – are carefully orchestrated and dependent upon real-time observations that students make usingtablet computers. The broader 10-week curriculum was designed to fulfill the requirements for evolution andbiodiversity in Grade 11 Biology. At the time of this study, the EvoRoom curriculum was undergoing itssecond design iteration. The curriculum design included activities across a number of different contexts,including at home, within the students’ regular classroom, the smart classroom, and on a field trip to the localzoo. The main components of the EvoRoom curriculum were organized around the iterative use of an onlineportal that served as a knowledge base for the community. Periodic inquiry and knowledge constructionactivities were blended with traditional classroom lectures in the following sequence:1.2.3.4.5.Pre-Activity: Epistemic Orientation (Week 0)Online Learning Portfolio/Knowledge construction (Ongoing)EvoRoom Evolution Activity (Week 2)Zoo Field Trip Activity (Week 8)EvoRoom Biodiversity Activity (Week 10)This paper will focus on the Zoo Field Trip Activity and the EvoRoom Biodiversity Activity. Thesetwo activities were chosen as the focus of this study because they employed the same technology platform,Zydeco, to support student inquiry (Kuhn et al., 2010). However these two activities were quite distinct, interms of their epistemic nature (i.e. their purpose within the knowledge community) and use of collaborations.In regard to the Chinn et al’s (2011) “justification of knowledge” dimension, these affordances were directlylinked to the design of the Zydeco environment, which was developed by another research team with the aim ofsupporting evidence-based justifications (Zhang & Quintana, 2012). Hence, KCI might not, on the basis of itsown principles, have emphasized such justificatory elements, but its choice of Zydeco as an observational datacollection environment enabled this form of EC to be prominent within the enactment.Figure 1. Top-left: Students using Zydeco to collect data within the EvoRoom smart classroom; Bottom-left:Zydeco data collection screen used by students to collect and tag multimodal data artifacts (e.g. text notes,photos, video notes, audio notes) and contribute them to a shared evidence base; Right: Zydeco explanationscreen where students generated knowledge claims and supported them using both evidential justification (i.e.artifacts from the shared evidence base) and non-evidential justification (i.e. reasoning).Co-Design TeamIn order to ensure that the curriculum design (i.e., all activities, tools, materials and interactions) was suitable forhigh school biology, a co-design approach was used (Roschelle, Penuel & Shechtman, 2006). The co-designteam consisted of three researchers (two graduate students and one faculty member), three programmers, and theclassroom teacher. Throughout the EvoRoom design process, the teacher was highly involved in thedevelopment of the orchestrational scripts and technology elements that went into the design. The teacher metweekly with two researchers over a two-year period, providing valuable feedback with regards to tooldevelopment and the overall curricular goals for the evolution and biodiversity units.ICLS 2014 Proceedings675© ISLSParticipantsThe participants for the current design iteration consisted of two sections of Grade 11 Biology (n=56) from ahigh-achieving secondary school within a large and ethnically diverse urban setting.Data SourcesData sources for both the Zoo Field Trip Activity and the EvoRoom Biodiversity Activity included students’digital learning artifacts contributed through the Zydeco platform, as well as researcher observations and fieldnotes from both activities. Additionally, an open-ended survey was administered to students both before andafter the full 10-week EvoRoom curriculum unit, with two items pertaining to sources and justification ofknowledge.Zoo Field Trip Activity SequenceThe zoo field trip was situated between the two immersive experiences in the EvoRoom smart classroom. Priorto the actual field trip, students were given a full period of training on how to use the mobile app Zydeco (Cahillet al., 2010; Kuhn et al., 2010), which was used to collect evidence and observations whilst in the field at thezoo. On the day of the zoo field trip, students were divided into groups of three or four, and each group wasgiven two mobile devices: an iPod touch and an iPad or iPad mini. It should be noted that all sections of Grade11 Biology – including course sections outside of the sample group – participated in this mobile activity andused Zydeco to contribute evidence to the shared knowledge base.At the zoo, groups were assigned to a particular species group (e.g. birds, fish, primates, reptiles andamphibians, plants and insects, and other mammals), as well as a designated geographic region of the zoo (e.g.African rainforest, African savanna, Australasia, Indomalaya, Eurasia, and Americas). Their task was to collectevidence, using a variety of multimodal formats (e.g. text notes, audio notes, video notes, photographs), in orderto take a position on three issues: 1) the unifying principles underlying biodiversity; 2) human impacts onbiodiversity, and 3) what makes an effective educational exhibit. The data from all groups was pooled into ashared evidence base. Students returned to school for the final period and worked in the computer lab using theZydeco web platform. Using a ‘claim–evidence–reasoning’ structure, students had the opportunity to drawupon the full set of evidence gathered by their peers from the zoo in order to generate and support theirknowledge claims. Students were given one week to complete this individual, summative assignment.EvoRoom Biodiversity Activity SequenceDuring the final week of the EvoRoom curriculum, students participated in a second activity within the smartclassroom. Students were assigned to one of four sessions (A to D) in the EvoRoom, and each session consistedof four groups of approximately three or four students. Leading up to this activity, students had learned aboutbiodiversity throughout their regular classroom activities, and groups were asked to make predictions on theonline learning portfolio as to how their assigned climatic ‘scenario’ would impact biodiversity (e.g. hightemperature, low temperature, earthquake, tsunami, high rainfall, low rainfall, high temperature, lowtemperature). When students entered the smart classroom, the screens around the room depicted the present-dayBorneo-Sumatran rainforest. After making some initial observations, each of the four walls was transformed torepresent one of the climatic scenarios that had been assigned. Within their groups, students used the mobileapp Zydeco to collect evidence from each of the four walls in order to identify which rainforest best representedtheir assigned scenario. The multimodal evidence collected using Zydeco was tagged and aggregated in realtime on the front IWB. The resulting aggregate of evidence served as a reference for a full-class discussion,facilitated by the teacher, and provided visual clues as to which scenario was depicted by which station.Following the evidence-gathering stage, students worked in their groups to generate claims as to whichof the four walls most likely represented their climatic scenario. Using the claims–evidence–reasoning structurewithin Zydeco, groups took turns presenting their findings to their classmates. After all four scenario solutionswere revealed, the teacher facilitated a deeper whole-class discussion related to human impacts on biodiversity.Analytic ApproachFor the purposes of this analysis, Chinn et al’s third dimension was broken into three constituent parts: “Sourcesof knowledge,” “justification of knowledge” and “epistemic stance.” “Sources of knowledge” was evaluatedusing the EvoRoom pre/post survey, in which students were asked to identify their main sources of knowledgein school science. Responses were open-ended, and the frequency of each response was recorded using a tallysystem, with students often reporting multiple sources of knowledge within a single answer. “Justification ofknowledge” for both the Zoo Field Trip Activity and the Biodiversity Activity was examined using a qualitative,descriptive analysis of students’ Zydeco contributions, with researcher field notes facilitating a comparison ofthe way knowledge was justified in each of these contexts. Additionally, a post-survey item asked students toidentify the knowledge negotiation strategies that were used throughout the Biodiversity Activity.ICLS 2014 Proceedings676© ISLSAn analysis of epistemic stance at the group level was conducted for the Biodiversity Activity only,since knowledge claims for the Zoo Activity were submitted individually. Students responded to a post-surveyitem asking whether their group reached a consensus on their final claim statement. Responses to this surveyitem were then cross-referenced with the “solutions” to the Biodiversity Activity, indicating whether or not theirfinal claim statement was actually correct. In cases where there was consensus within the group and the claimstatement was correct, responses were coded as “true certainty.” In cases where there was consensus within thegroup but the claim statement was incorrect, responses were coded as “false certainty.” Finally, in cases wherea group consensus was not reached, responses were coded as “uncertain.”Analysis and FindingsSources of KnowledgeThe sources of knowledge students identified in this pre-survey (n=43) mainly consisted of authoritative sources(89%) such as the course textbook (34%), the teacher (32%) and other authoritative sources such as onlineresources or publications (23%). Only a small percentage of students identified themselves (3%) or their peers(8%) as sources of knowledge. Throughout the EvoRoom curriculum activities, students were asked to drawfrom a variety of knowledge sources in order to make contributions to the shared knowledge base, and also toregard the shared knowledge base as their community resource, representing the pooled ideas and knowledgeartifacts contributed by their peers. In the EvoRoom Post-Survey, students were asked to identify the sources ofknowledge they used throughout the EvoRoom curriculum unit. Here, there was a dramatic shift in the sourcesof knowledge that students identified. Results indicated that 33% of responses included authoritative sources(e.g. textbook, teacher, other external sources), 28% of responses identified their peers and/or the knowledgecommunity as a source of knowledge (e.g. peer discussion, shared knowledge base, aggregate displays), and38% of students identified themselves as sources of knowledge (e.g. through primary observations, priorlearning/memory, reasoning/logic) (see Figure 2).Figure 2. Pre and post survey results showing students’ sources of knowledge in ‘traditional’ school science(pre) and in the EvoRoom curriculum (post). Pre-survey results indicate a heavy reliance on authoritativesources of knowledge (89%), whereas post-survey results show a more even distribution between authority(33%), peers (28%) and the self (38%) as sources of knowledge.Justification of KnowledgeFor both the Zoo Field Trip and the Biodiversity Activity, justification of knowledge was built into the design ofthe Zydeco app, as students had to provide both evidence and reasoning to support their claims statements.However, the way that this justification was enacted was quite different between these two contexts. For theZoo Field Trip, although students collaborated to collect data, pool their evidence, and draw from this sharedevidence base, students’ final knowledge claims were ultimately completed individually. Questions were openended, and students had to be conscientious about their choice of evidence and reasoning in order to performICLS 2014 Proceedings677© ISLSwell on this summative assignment. The Biodiversity Activity, however, had three key differences: (1) studentscompleted their knowledge claims in groups, (2) there was a “right” and “wrong” answer, and (3) this activitywas not explicitly for marks. In contrast to the Zoo activity, field observations revealed that use of evidenceartifacts to support claims statements in the Biodiversity Activity was almost an afterthought, with groupconsensus taking priority over evidential justification. Here, the majority of knowledge negotiations amonggroup members occurred verbally, with Zydeco claim statements reflecting the product of these negotiations.The EvoRoom post-survey revealed that the negotiation strategies students described as occurring throughoutthis activity included taking turns “reasoning out loud” (41%), using the process of elimination (18%),collecting additional evidence (11%), using argumentation/debate (11%), listening in to other groups’ decisions(9%), and bringing the decision to a group vote (9%).An additional finding for the Biodiversity Activity was related to the quantity of evidence that studentsused in their claims statements compared to their ability to correctly identify their climatic scenario. As shownin Figure 3 below, Session C used the highest percentage of the data artifacts that they collected as supportingevidence in their claims statements (93%). At the same time, Session C was the only session for which all fourgroups correctly identified their climatic scenario. In Session A, which had the second highest percentage ofevidence artifacts used towards claims statements (57%), one of the four groups correctly identified theirclimatic scenario. However in Sessions B and D, which used 38% and 29% of evidence artifacts, respectively,none of the groups were able to correctly identify their climatic scenario. These findings highlight theimportance of evidentiary justification in supporting collective knowledge negotiations.Figure 3. The percentage of data artifacts within each Biodiversity Activity session that were used as supportingevidence throughout the generation of group knowledge claims.Epistemic StanceEpistemic stance refers to the position one takes with respect to a knowledge claim (e.g. certainty, uncertainty,entertaining an idea, utilizing an idea as a working hypothesis, withholding judgment on an idea, etc.). Foractivities in which students collaboratively negotiate knowledge, such as in the generation of knowledge claimswithin the Biodiversity Activity, there are opportunities for students to take a variety of epistemic stances withregards to shared ideas or decisions. In each of these cases, it is possible that a student may be engaged incollaboratively generating a knowledge contribution, however he/she may have an epistemic stance that is incontrast or conflict with that of her collaborating peers. Satisficing one’s true epistemic stance in order toappease group members (e.g. by establishing consensus within the group by means of a “vote”) would detractfrom the justificatory rigor of the inquiry.The Zydeco Biodiversity claims were analyzed in order to identify possible instances of satisficingwithin group responses. Following the Biodiversity Activity, students were given a survey in which they wereasked to report whether or not their group reached a consensus about which rainforest depicted their scenario.39% of respondents indicated that their group had consensus throughout the duration of the activity, 45%indicated that they came to a consensus after engaging in some knowledge negotiations, 11% indicated that theycame to a consensus by “voting” or satisficing their response, and 5% did not reach a consensus. Theseresponses were then cross-referenced with the group claims statements that were submitted through Zydeco.Responses were coded for group Epistemic Stance using the following categories:1.2.3.True certainty – there was consensus in the group and the claim was correctFalse certainty – there was consensus in the group but the claim was incorrectUncertainty – there was no consensus in the groupICLS 2014 Proceedings678© ISLSResults indicated that “False certainty” occurred in 58% of cases and “True certainty” occurred in 37% of cases.As noted above, only 5% of students reported that they did not reach consensus and their claim statements weretherefore uncertain. Within the sub-set of students that reported satisficing their responses, only 25% of thesegroups were successful in correctly identifying their climatic scenario.DiscussionFindings for “sources of knowledge” demonstrated that engaging students in activities where they rely on theideas of their peers, as well as their own observations, can result in a noticeable shift in their epistemiccognitions within this dimension. However, the analysis for “justification of knowledge” revealed a distinctcontrast between the way knowledge justifications occurred for individual knowledge claims (i.e. the Zoo FieldTrip Activity) versus group knowledge claims (i.e. the Biodiversity Activity). Although the technologicalscaffolds within Zydeco were identical in both cases, these two activities were pedagogically quite distinct. The“claims statements” that students generated for the Zoo Field Trip Activity were in response to open-endedquestions related to a driving question about the unity of biodiversity. Conversely, the claims statements withinthe Biodiversity activity were in response to a closed-ended, right-or-wrong question (asking which of the fourwalls of the EvoRoom depicted a particular climatic scenario). Here, group consensus was favored overjustificatory rigor, and the addition of supporting evidence to claims statements commonly occurred after agroup decision had already been reached. As a result, 58% of students were “falsely certain” that their claimwas correct (i.e. their group had reached a consensus, however their claim statement was ultimately incorrect).This lack of evidentiary justification to support group claims statements is indicative of the satisficing ofepistemic stances within the group. However, as indicated in Figure 2, groups who used more evidence tosupport their claims statement were more likely to reach “true certainty” (i.e. where their group had reached aconsensus and their claim statement was correct).In light of these findings, the following design priorities are recommended with respect to“justification” and “epistemic stance”:1.2.3.Although technological scaffolds to support evidentiary and non-evidentiary justification werebuilt into the design of the shared knowledge base, the technology environment should also captureknowledge negotiations amongst members of the knowledge community. This would not onlyassist in preventing student satisficing, but would also to provide a history of the idea-growthprocess within the knowledge community.To support the justification of knowledge in collaborative contexts, inquiry questions should beopen-ended and should promote explanatory coherence over ‘correctness.’From a pedagogical perspective, activities should be designed that help students to understand theimportance of justificatory rigor and how the satisficing of their epistemic stance in group learningactivities might compromise the integrity of the inquiry.ReferencesBrown, A. L. (1997). Transforming schools into communities of thinking and learning about serious matters.American Psychologist, 52(4), 399–413.Cahill, C., Kuhn, A., Schmill, S., Pompe, A., and Quintana, C. (2010). Zydeco: Using mobile and webtechnologies to support seamless inquiry between museum and school contexts. Proceedings of the 9thInternational Conference on Interaction Design and Children (pp. 174-177). June 9-12. Barcelona,Spain. Association for Computing Machinery Inc.Chinn, C. A., Buckland, L. A., & Samarapungavan, A. (2011). Expanding the dimensions of epistemiccognition: arguments from philosophy and psychology. Educational Psychologist, 46, 141–167.Garner, R., and Alexander, P A. (eds.). (1994). Beliefs About Text and Instruction With Text, Erlbaum, Hillsdale,NJ.Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2006). Design principles for scaffolding technology- based inquiry. In A. M. O’Donnell,C. E. Hmelo-Silver, & G. Erkens (Eds.), Collaborative reasoning, learning and technology (pp. 147–170). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Hofer, B. K., and Pintrich, P. R. (1997). The development of epistemological theories: Beliefs about knowledgeand knowing and their relation to learning. Review of Educational Research, 67, 88–140.Kardash, C. A. M., and Scholes, R. J. (1996). Effects of preexisting beliefs, epistemological beliefs, and needfor cognition on interpretation of controversial issues. Journal of Educational Psychology 88: 260–271.Kuhn, A., Cahill, C., Quintana, C., and Soloway, E. (2010). Scaffolding science inquiry in museums withZydeco. Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems(pp. 3373-3378). April 10-15. Atlanta, USA. Association for Computing Machinery Inc.Kuhn, D. (1991). The skills of argument. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings679© ISLSLin, T.J., Chai, C.S., and Tsai, C.C. (2013). High school students’ scientific epistemological beliefs, motivationin learning science, and their relationships: A comparative study within the Chinese culture.International Journal of Educational Development. 33, 37-47.Lui, M., and Slotta, J.D. (2012). Designing immersive environments for collective inquiry. Proceedings of theTenth International Conference of the Learning Sciences – Volume 2 (pp. 12-14). July 2-6. Sydney,Australia: International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.Lui, M., & Slotta, J. D. (2013). Immersive simulations for smart classrooms: exploring evolutionary concepts insecondary science. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, (ahead-of-print), 1-24.Metcalf, S., Dede, C., Grotzer, T., and Kamarainen, A., (2010, May). EcoMUVE: Design of virtualenvironments to address science learning goals. Paper presented at the American Educational ResearchAssociation (AERA) Conference, Denver, CO.Najafi, H, & Slotta JD. (2010). Analyzing equality of participation in collaborative inquiry: toward aknowledge community. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences,Chicago. Volume 1. 960–967. International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS).Najafi, H., Zhao, N. & Slotta, J.D. (2011). Facilitating Knowledge Communities in Science Classrooms throughScripted Collaboration. Proceedings of the Ninth International Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning Conference, Hong Kong. Volume 1. 996-997. International Society of the Learning Sciences(ISLS).Perry, W. G. (1970). Forms of intellectual and ethical development in the college years: A scheme. New York:Holt, Rinehart and Winston.Pintrich, P. R., Marx, R. W., and Boyle, R. A. (1993). Beyond cold conceptual change: The role of motivationalbeliefs and classroom contextual factors in the process of conceptual change. Review of EducationalResearch 63: 167–199.Qian, G., and Alvermann, D. (1995). Role of epistemological beliefs and learned helplessness in secondaryschool students’ learning science concepts from text. Journal of Educational Psychology 87: 282–292.Rukavina, I., and Daneman, M. (1996). Integration and its effect on acquiring knowledge about competingscientific theories from text. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 272–287.Roschelle, J., Penuel, W. R., & Shechtman, N. (2006). Co-design of innovations with teachers: Definition anddynamics. Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 606-612).Bloomington, IN.Ryan, M. P. (1984). Monitoring text comprehension: Individual differences in epistemological standards.Journal of Educational Psychology 76: 248–258.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. TheCambridgehandbookofthelearningsciences,97–115.Retrievedfrom http://ikit.org/fulltext/2006_KBTheory.pdfSchommer, M. (1990). Effects of beliefs about the nature of knowledge on comprehension. Journal ofEducational Psychology 82: 498–504.Schommer, M. (1993). Epistemological development and academic performance among secondary students.Journal of Educational Psychology 82: 498–504.Schommer, M., Crouse, A., and Rhodes, N. (1992). Epistemological beliefs and math text comprehension:Believing it is simple does not make it so. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84: 435–443.Slotta, J.D., and Najafi, H. (2010). Knowledge communities in the classroom. International encyclopedia ofeducation, 8, 189-196.Slotta, J.D. and Najafi, H. (2012). Supporting Collaborative Knowledge Construction with Web 2.0Technologies. In N. Lavigne (Ed.), Emerging Technologies for the Classroom: A Learning SciencesPerspective (pp. 93-112). Springer.Slotta, J.D., and Peters, V. L. (2008). A blended model for knowledge communities: Embedding scaffoldedinquiry. International Perspectives in the Learning Sciences: Cre8ing a learning world. Proceedings ofthe Eighth International Conference for the Learning Sciences Utrecht. pp. 343-350. InternationalSociety of the Learning Sciences (ISLS).Slotta, J. D., Tissenbaum, M., & Lui, M. (2013, April). Orchestrating of complex inquiry: three roles forlearning analytics in a smart classroom infrastructure. In Proceedings of the Third InternationalConference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge (pp. 270-274). ACM.Strømsø, H. I., and Bråten, I. (2009). Beliefs about knowledge and knowing and multiple-text comprehensionamong upper secondary students. Educational Psychology, 29, 425–445.Windschitl, M., and Andre, T. (1998). Using computer simulations to enhance conceptual change: The roles ofconstructivist instruction and student epistemological beliefs. Journal of research in science teaching,35(2), 145–160.Zhang, M. and Quintana, C. (2012). Scaffolding strategies for supporting middle school students’ onlineinquiry processes. Computers in Education. 58(1), 181-196.ICLS 2014 Proceedings680© ISLS