“It’s Not as Bad as Using the Toaster All of the Time”: Trade-offs ina Scratch Game about Energy UseGillian Puttick, TERC, 2067 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge MA 02140, gilly_puttick@terc.eduAmanda Strawhacker, Tufts University, Medford MADebra Bernstein, TERC, Cambridge MAElisabeth Sylvan, The Tech Museum of Innovation, San Jose CAAbstract: Young people can represent and understand complex systems by designing games.The work we report is from a Scratch workshop focused on understanding trade-offsassociated with energy use in relation to climate change. One participant’s work illustrates thepotential for game design to support understanding of complexity and, in particular, themutually constitutive nature of conceptual understanding and the contextualized activity ofgame design.IntroductionMany informal programs, resources, and games are devoted to solving problems related to energy conservationand climate change. However, climate change is hard to learn, particularly understanding its systemic causesand implications. Agency is critical to how we develop our initial notions of causality (Carey, 2009). Throughearly agency-related experiences, we learn that we can have an impact on the world in direct and centralizedways. However, our impacts upon nature are often decentralized – the outcomes of collective actions areemergent (Grotzer, 2012). Being in the role of game designer can provide a powerful context for young peopleto engage with understanding complex systems in science (Kafai & Ching, 2001).This paper explores how girls designed games in the visual programming environment, Scratch, toteach others about energy conservation, focusing especially on trade-offs associated with energy conservation.We define girls’ understanding of ‘trade-offs’ as how many places in their lives they make trade-offs, whatvalues are implied when they choose, what alternatives are available, and how to make reasoned decisions.Given this definition, we attempt to capture the mutually constitutive nature of conceptual understanding andcontextualized activity (Barab et al., 2010). Because trade-offs are integral to decisions related to conservation,and hence to the impacts of climate change, the concept is key in advancing understanding. Specifically, thisstudy sought to address the question: What particulars of the workshop learning environment supportparticipant understanding of the human, social and environmental trade-offs associated with energy use?Methods: Participants, Design and ProcedureSix girls, aged 11 and 12, participated in a 3-day workshop where they created an initial Scratch sketch onclimate change, brainstormed game design ideas, learned about trade-offs, built games, tested peers’ games, andpresented to their families. All participants had programming experience ranging from one week to over twoyears. Researchers as participant-observers led the workshop, using a design research approach, providing justin-time support related to procedural, conceptual and consequential content (Barab, Gresalfi & Arici, 2009).Data were collected in the form of audio-recorded think-alouds, user tests and presentations, Silverbackrecordings of game creation, storyboards, notes and photographs. Recordings were transcribed and coded usinga grounded theory approach (Glaser & Strauss, 1967).ResultsOf the six participants, Amelia’s story most clearly illustrates how grappling with trade-offs in the context ofgame design can lead to a deeper understanding of the complexities of energy conservation, as well as anopportunity to realize that understanding in a multi-faceted design. Amelia originally framed the choice hergame player would make as a simple one involving saving energy. The consequentiality of trade-offs becameevident when Amelia grasped (via another girl’s insight) that trade-offs necessitated “multiple right answers”and took the insight much further as a design challenge. Amelia now understood that conservation requiresweighing and prioritizing different outcomes. Equally important, it involved developing additional game movesand a more complex game structure overall. Amelia’s story illustrates the mutually constitutive nature of herconceptual understanding of trade-offs and the contextualized activity of design to incorporate those trade-offs.In this sense, the concept materially transformed Amelia’s design, and grappling with the programmingdeepened her understanding.By Day 3, Amelia’s game presented the player with a simple choice related to which appliance (toasteroven, microwave, stove, solar oven) was the most “environmentally friendly” (i.e., used the least amount ofenergy). Julie, an instructor, asked her to think about trade-offs, and she explicitly restated that the trade-offwould be convenience:ICLS 2014 Proceedings1485© ISLSAmelia: Um, well I just said the one that’s most environmentally friendly. So I think thatwould be correct. Definitely it’s not the most- [Julie: - most convenient -]Amelia: -yeah, way to do it. But it’s definitely the best for the environment.Julie: So are you still sharing that information about how long it takes?Amelia: Yeah […] If you click on the objects it pops up, and it says like, “I will take 2 to 4hours to cook your toast but I use no energy. And then so like the toaster pops up andit takes 2 minutes but uses a lot more energy. So each of them has it, so like 7minutes, and then the stove 3 minutes.Julie: […] Will the player know, thinking about the learning goal for a minute, will theylearn about trade-offs or will they just learn about the energy? What will they learnfrom those times?Amelia: Probably that if something’s environmentally friendly, it’s not always the mostconvenient.Later Amelia was urged to think about energy use choices in terms of trade-offs. She did so byexplaining that the flower - which she kept as a visual metaphor for environmental health – would indicatescore: ‘So like if your flower is drooping, it means you did really bad.’ Amelia began to think about constructivemessages that people can take away from a game about trade-offs. Instead of the ‘correct answer/positivemessage’ design she was using before, she began to incorporate trade-offs, some related to time/convenienceand some to the health of the environment:Well, I mean it really, it really depends on how much you use them [a toaster versus a solaroven.] Maybe if you have. I know like I wouldn’t do this, but you could if you wanted to. Soif you took a solar, if you used a solar oven, and maybe you could get up early in the morningand put your toast in and then go back to sleep - […] but like if you use the solar oven some ofthe time, and then the toaster like a little, it’s not as bad as using the toaster all of the time.In the end, Amelia implemented her idea about balancing the trade-offs by incorporating it into a scriptthat provided advice to the player before s/he begins to play the game: ‘If you use a toaster some of the time anda solar oven some of the time, you don’t have to give up electricity altogether but you could still make adifference…’ This suggests that the player can choose to have their cake and eat it too! In constructing playerchoices among “conditions, actions and outcomes,” Amelia “narratized the to-be-learned content” (Barab et al.,2010, p. 19).ConclusionsAmelia demonstrated imagination, persistence and engagement in negotiating both conceptual and proceduralcontent that produced complex game play (Barab, Gresalfi & Arici, 2009). For her, design functioned as inquiryusing model building. Game design and model building share the virtues of requiring explicitness and iterativedesign-analysis-revision, incorporating input and output elements, and involving causality. A critical trade-offthat arises in this connection is the learner's fluency with the modeling language and its metaphors. Ameliashows that representation of ideas about a system can be developed so that the focus remains on the system andits hypothesized behaviors, the questions and answers rather than the tool.ReferencesBarab, S., Gresalfi, M., Dodge, T. & Ingram-Goble, A. (2010). Narratizing disciplines and disciplinizingnarratives: Games as 21st century curriculum. International Journal of Gaming and Computer-MediatedSimulations, 2.Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Glaser, B. and Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago: Aldine.Grotzer, T. (2012). Learning Causality in a Complex World. Lanham MD: Rowman.Kafai, Y. & Ching, C. (2001) Affordances of collaborative software design planning for elementary students’science talk. The Journal of the Learning Sciences 10, 323-363.AcknowledgmentsThis project was funded by the NSF (DRL-0813434). Opinions, findings and conclusions are those of theauthors and do not necessarily reflect those of the NSF. We thank Brian Drayton for comments on a draft, andour Scratch girls.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1486© ISLS