Colors Of Nature: Connecting Science and Arts Education toPromote STEM-Related Identity Work in Middle School GirlsCarrie Tzou, University of Washington Bothell, tzouct@uw.eduLaura Conner, University of Alaska Fairbanks, ldconner@alaska.eduStephen Pompea, National Optical Astronomy Observatory, spompea@noao.eduMareca Guthrie, University of Alaska Fairbanks, mrguthrie@alaska.eduAbstract: Art and science share many overlaps in terms of both common practices and habitsof mind. In this study, we focus on middle school girls who strongly identify with art and askthe following questions: (1) how does an art-focused approach to science instruction(STEAM) support engagement in scientific practices such as experimentation, observation,and communication of scientific information? and (2) how does a STEAM approach supportSTEM-related identity shifts in middle school girls?IntroductionArt and science share many overlaps in terms of common practices and habits of mind. Visual-spatial thinking iskey to understanding the structure of molecules, the actions of enzymes, and the 3-D structure of galaxies(Ramadas, 2009). Visual-spatial thinking is heavily used to model abstract scientific concepts (Walker et al,2011) and is also widely recognized as a central aspect of creating art (Wai et al, 2009). However, much is yet tobe learned about how teaching science through art, or connecting art and science teaching, affects sciencelearning. In particular, more empirical work needs to be done on how youth with art-related identities connect toscience learning and form science-related identities.Research suggests that girls who gravitate towards art may have strong visual-spatial abilities thatwould also serve them well in science careers. However, in contrast to boys, most girls with such ability do notgo on to enter STEM careers (Wai, et al, 2009). In formal education settings, little room is often made forexplicit instruction on how visual-spatial reasoning and other artistic practices can overlap with science insignificant ways. Furthermore, research has found time and again how girls lose interest in science starting inmiddle school, (Baram-Tsabari & Yarden, 2010). Therefore, the connection between art, science learning andengagement, and identity formation is an important area of research to document empirically. In this study, wefocus on middle school girls who strongly identify with art and ask the following questions: (1) how does an artfocused approach to teaching science support (STEAM) engagement in scientific practices such asexperimentation, observation, and communication of scientific information? and (2) how does a STEAMapproach support STEM-related identity shifts in middle school girls?MethodologyTheoretical FramingThe building of a science identity, or the sense of oneself becoming a person that does science and iscomfortable with science, has been identified by the National Research Council (Bell, at al, 2009) as a centralcomponent to successful lifelong science learning and participation. We are particularly interested in the ways inwhich art-based science learning can lead to shifts in participation in communities of practice. Therefore, we seelearning and identity formation as closely interrelated--as youth participate in practices and gain a measure ofcompetence or mastery, those skills may become core parts of a youth’s identity at the same time that they getpublicly recognized for those skills (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Arts-based science education, in particular thatwhich culminates in public display of some learning product—can lead to such public recognition and identityformation.However, we also recognize that studying and identifying identity as a construct is empirically difficultas identities are constantly shifting, being formed and re-formed as individuals encounter new practices andresources in communities of practice they engage in (Calabrese Barton et al, 2013). Therefore, in this poster wewill focus on and document shifts in identity work (Calabrese Barton, et al, 2013), or the ways in which youthengage in science- and art-related practices or the same practices more deeply as a result of a STEAM-basedapproach to science instruction.Study ContextThe context for this study was a two-week summer academy for middle school girls (N = 64) that ran in thesummer of 2013. The academy ran for two sessions for two weeks each, once in a large urban city in theSouthwestern United States and once in a small city in the far Northwestern United States. The focus of theacademy was “the colors of nature”, focusing on the functions of color in biology and art, how color is producedICLS 2014 Proceedings1555© ISLS(optical science and art), and how the practices of science overlap with the practices of artists (observation,experimentation, recording procedures, taking notes, publicly presenting scientific/artistic results).Researchers assumed the role of participant-observers, sometimes teaching parts of the academy,conducting interviews with participants, videotaping sessions, and taking field notes. Data sources for this studyinclude pre/post interviews, daily videotaped observations of each day of the academy, pre/post STEM and artattitude surveys and content assessments, and analysis of the girls’ science and art notebooks that they keptthroughout the academy. This project follows a design-based research (DBR) research paradigm (diSessa &Cobb 2004), with cyclical iterations of design, enactment, analysis, and re-design. Therefore, researchers wereinvolved in all aspects of the design process before the academy as well as daily discussions after each day ofthe academy to talk about learning and refining the design of learning activities.Findings and AnalysisPreliminary analysis of data from both summer academies suggest the following findings:(1) When a STEAM approach to science instruction is taken with girls who are already stronglyidentified with art, many opportunities open up for connection to emerging identities and everyday practices.For example, art opens up space for mistakes and multiples possibilities in a way that is often challenging fortraditional science teaching. Girls, in post-interviews, mentioned that they saw new areas of overlap betweenscience and art, especially in the realm of experimentation, making mistakes, and persisting through science andart projects. One girl said, “Scientists and artists both experiment and make mistakes. The important thing is tokeep trying.”(2) We also found that the STEAM approach opened up strong connections to scientific practicesemphasized in the Next Generation Science Standards (NRC, 2012), such as observation and experimentation.In post-interviews, girls talked about how having accurate artistic drawings of their observations helps to conveyaccurate scientific information to other scientists who are not able to observe the same thing as them. Theymentioned that both artists and scientists needed to look at problems from multiple perspectives, and thatobservation through drawing was one way to do that. This also represented a strong connection to everydaypractices, as for almost all of these girls, drawing was something that was an important part of their everydaylives and, in fact, helped them think and learn in school. Finally, an unexpected finding was that the STEAMapproach to instruction offered another way to look at and appreciate art.SignificanceStudies have suggested that the formation of STEM-related identities is a significant factor in whether or notyouth pursue STEM-related undergraduate degrees (Tai, et al, 2006). This study suggests one way to supportSTEM-related identity formation in middle school girls by connecting to their already emerging art identities. Inthis way, this study fits squarely into exploring the conference theme, as we explore who the middle school girlssee themselves becoming as they engage in learning science through art-focused practices.ReferencesBaram-Tsabari, A. & Yarden, A. (2010). Quantifying the gender gap in science interests. International Journalof Science and Mathematics Education 9(3): 523-550.Bell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A. W., & Feder, M. A. (Eds.). (2009). Learning science in informalenvironments: People, places, and pursuits. National Academies Press.Calabrese Barton, A., Kang, H., Tan, E., O’Neill, T.B., Bautista-Guerra, J., & Brecklin, C., (2013). Crafting afuture in science: Tracing middle school girls’ identity work over time and space. AmericanEducational Research Journal, 50(1), 37-75.DiSessa, A. A., & Cobb, P. (2004). Ontological innovation and the role of theory in design experiments. Thejournal of the learning sciences, 13(1), 77-103.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge universitypress.National Research Council (2012). Framework for K-12 Science Education. Washington, DC: NationalAcademies Press.Ramadas, J. (2009). Visual and spatial modes in science learning. International Journal of Science Education31(3): 301-318.Tai, R. H., Liu, C.Q., Maltese, A.V., & Fan, X. (2006). Planning early for careers in science. Science, 312:1143-1144.Wai, J., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C.P. (2009). Spatial ability for STEM domains: aligning over 50 years ofcumulative psychological knowledge solidifies its importance. Journal of Educational Psychology101(4): 817-835.Walker, C.M., Winner, E., Hetland, L., Simmons, S., & Goldsmith, L. (2011). Visual thinking: art students havean advantage in geometric reasoning. Creative Education, 2(1): 22-26.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1556© ISLS