Supporting Computational Algorithmic Thinking (SCAT): Exploringthe Development of Computational Algorithmic ThinkingCapabilities in African-American Middle-School GirlsJakita O. Thomas, Spelman College, jthoma41@spelman.eduAbstract: Computational algorithmic thinking (CAT) is the ability to design, implement, andassess the implementation of algorithms to solve a range of problems. It involves identifyingand understanding a problem, articulating an algorithm or set of algorithms in the form of asolution to the problem, implementing that solution in such a way that it solves the problem,and evaluating the solution based on some set of criteria. This report introduces and describesCAT as explored through the Supporting Computational Algorithmic Thinking (SCAT)project, an on-going longitudinal between-subjects research project and enrichment programthat guides African-American middle school girls through the iterative game design cycleresulting in a set of complex games around broad themes.IntroductionJeanette Wing (2006) defines computational thinking as “a way humans solve problems…”. This researchmakes explicit a critical aspect of computational thinking through its focus: the design, development, andimplementation of algorithms to solve problems. An algorithm is defined as a well-ordered collection ofunambiguous and effectively computable operations that, when executed, produces a result and halts in a finiteamount of time (Schnieder & Gersting, 2010).Computational algorithmic thinking (CAT) is the ability to design, implement, and assess theimplementation of algorithms to solve a range of problems. It involves identifying and understanding aproblem, articulating an algorithm or set of algorithms in the form of a solution to the problem, implementingthat solution in such a way that it solves the problem, and evaluating the solution based on some set of criteria.CAT has roots in Mathematics (Polya, 1973), through problem solving and algorithmic thinking (Kramer,2002). CAT lies at the heart of Computer Science, which is defined as the study of algorithms (Schneider &Gersting, 2010). CAT embodies the ability to think critically and creatively to solve problems and hasapplicability in a range of areas from Computer Science to cooking to music (ISTE NETS.S, #4, 2007; Polya,1973; Wing, 2010).Supporting Computational Algorithmic Thinking (SCAT) is a longitudinal between-subjects researchproject exploring how African-American middle-school girls develop CAT capabilities over time in the contextof game design. SCAT is also a free enrichment program designed to expose middle school girls to gamedesign. The goals are: 1) to explore the development of computational algorithmic thinking over three years inAfrican-American middle-school girls as they engage in iterative game design, and 2) to increase the awarenessof participants to the broad applicability of computational algorithmic thinking across a number of industriesand career paths. Spanning three years, participants, called SCAT Scholars, develop CAT capabilities as theydesign more and more complex games. SCAT Scholars begin the program the summer prior to their 6th gradeyear and continue through their 8th grade year. They engage in 3 types of activities each year: 1) a two-weekintensive game design summer camp; 2) Two (2) six-week technical workshops where Scholars implement thegames they have designed using visual and programming languages in preparation for submission to nationalgame design competitions; and 3) field trips where Scholars learn about applications of CAT in differentindustries and careers. This work aims to explore the following research questions:1.2.3.4.How do individual and small-group computational algorithmic thinking capabilities of AfricanAmerican middle school girls develop over time?What difficulties do learners face as they engage in computational algorithmic thinking?What do those difficulties suggest about supporting learners as they engage in computationalalgorithmic thinking?How does participating in SCAT impact participants’ perspectives of computational algorithmicthinking as well as their perceptions of themselves as problem solvers and game designers?Game design has been chosen as the domain for a number of reasons. First, game design is a domainwith which middle-schoolers have a great deal of familiarity as consumers (Kafai, 2006; Irvine, 2010). The PewInternet & American Life Project’s survey revealed that among young people, ages 12 – 17, 97% of respondentsplay video games (Lenhart, Kahne, Middaugh, Macgill, Evans & Vitak, 2008). As such, this domain canprovide motivation as learners “look under the hood” of their favorite games to understand how they aredesigned and implemented. Second, game design is centered around the iterative design, representation, andimplementation of algorithms, which makes it an ideal domain to understand and describe the development ofICLS 2014 Proceedings1092© ISLSCAT over time (Crawford, 2010). Third, based upon industry practices, game designers iteratively move fromgame conceptualization to production and release over time (Fullerton, et. al., 2004), making game design anideal domain for conducting longitudinal studies. Lastly, game design is a domain in which African-Americanwomen are grossly under-represented (Brathwaite, 2009). Despite the fact that, of the 97% of young people whostated they played games in the Pew Institute’s survey, over 94% of girls play video games with little differencein the percentages by race, ethnic group, or socio-economic status (Lenhart, Kahne, Middaugh, Macgill, Evans& Vitak, 2008), women represent only about 10 – 12% of the game design workforce, and Latinos and AfricanAmericans comprise less than 5% combined (Plutzik, 2010).While there is a great deal of research that examines how to engage students in computational thinkingand learning in Computer Science (CS) or that focuses on how game design improves IT fluency, algorithmicthinking, collaboration, programming capability, and broader participation from under-represented groups, thereis a scarcity of research that focuses on understanding and describing how the development of CAT happensover time as a complex cognitive capability (Repenning & Ioannidou, 2008; Owensby, 2006; Thomas, 2008;Werner, Campe & Denner, 2005; Maloney, Burd, Kafai, Rusk, Silverman & Resnick, 2004; DiSalvo, Guzdial,Mcklin, Meadows, Perry, Steward & Bruckman, 2009; Barnes, Richter, Chaffin, Godwin, Powell & Ralph,2007; Kafai, 2006; Koschmann, et. al., 1996; Papert, 1993). Furthermore, there is less research that focuses onunderstanding how the development of these kinds of complex cognitive capabilities can impact not only howwe leverage game design to teach and support students as they develop these capabilities, but also how wedefine and measure the learning that happens during that development.This report describes the SCAT project, which is in the first of three years of data collection. The nextsection of this report will provide the background context that grounds the research. Then, the SCAT learningenvironment, including the scaffolds that support Scholars as they engage in game design, is described. As thiswork is in its first year, this report does not currently have any findings or results to share. Instead, this report isdesigned to introduce computational algorithmic thinking as a complex cognitive capability and SCAT as aproject and program designed to develop CAT within this population, similar to Maloney, et. al (2004).BackgroundThe National Research Council (NRC, 2011), in their report entitled A Framework for K-12 Science Education:Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas, outlines eight practices as being “essential elements of theK-12 science and engineering curriculum”. Among them are: defining problems, developing and using models(physical or mathematical models and prototypes), planning and carrying out investigations, analyzing andinterpreting data, using mathematics, information & computer technology, and computational thinking,designing solutions, engaging in argument from evidence, and obtaining, evaluating, and communicatinginformation. While the major competencies that students should have by the 12th grade and sketches regardinghow that competence should progress are described, the NRC identifies that those sketches are based on TheCommittee on a Conceptual Framework for New Science Education Standards’ judgment as “there is very littleresearch evidence as yet on the developmental trajectory of each of these practices” (p. 3-6).As a domain, engaging in game design aligns with the eight practices outlined by the NRC (2011). Theiterative game design lifecycle involves several phases, which are also iterative (Fullerton, et. al., 2004). Duringbrainstorming, game designers generate many ideas for games and present those ideas. Once an idea is selected,paper-and-pencil drawings are created, called storyboards, that include demo artwork. Playtesting is next, whichinvolves bringing actual players from the target user group in and observing them as they play the game (orengage with the storyboard) in real time, getting feedback about the game experience to inform the design of thegame (Fullerton, et. al., 2010; DiSalvo, Guzdial, Mcklin, Meadows, Perry, Steward & Bruckman, 2009). Next,game designers create a playable physical prototype using paper-and-pencil and/or craft materials. Then, arough software prototype is created which models some aspect(s) of core gameplay. Then follows moreplaytesting. Next comes creating the design document, which outlines every aspect of the game and how it willfunction. This is followed by implementing the game with playtesting throughout implementation. Finally,quality assurance testing is done with continued playtesting.The acquisition and development of skills, capabilities, and practices involves the changing ofdeclarative knowledge, or independent pieces of factual knowledge, to procedural knowledge, or connectedknowledge that forms a process for carrying out a skill (Anderson, Kline, Greeno & Neves, 1981; Anderson,2000). Applied in context and/or among a community, a process evolves into a practice (Nersessian, 2008;Lave & Wenger, 1991). While skills, or abilities refer to what one can do in the present, capabilities refer towhat one can learn to do with instruction and support, or scaffolding (Bandura, 1994; Bandura,http://des.emory.edu/mfp/self-efficacy.html#bandura, Vygotsky, 1978; Bransford, Brown & Cocking, 1999,Tabak, 2004). However, moving learners from capability to ability requires several things (Bransford, Brown &Cocking, 1999; Owensby, 2006; Thomas, 2008). First, learners need opportunities to make connectionsbetween their experiences and the knowledge or skills they are learning. Second, learners need enough time tolearn and develop skills and capabilities so that they can use them flexibly in appropriate situations. Third,ICLS 2014 Proceedings1093© ISLSlearners should be supported as they attempt to represent problems at higher levels of abstraction. Finally,learners should be encouraged to monitor their learning and should be supported as they learn metacognitivestrategies.SCAT Learning EnvironmentThe facilitator plays a major role in the development of Scholars’ CAT capabilities in the SCATlearning environment, as she serves first as the primary modeler and then as a just-in-time coach (Collins,Brown & Newman, 1989). In addition, the facilitator leads and supports discussions that help Scholars as theythink through their designs, helps them make connections across dyad experiences and problems, and modelsthe kinds of questions Scholars should be asking themselves and their peers as they develop algorithms for theirgame designs, move through the iterative game design cycle, and reflect on their use of CAT (Koschmann, et.al., 1996). As dyads work on their game designs, she walks from group to group asking them questions abouttheir designs, helping them identify problems and issues, illustrating for them how to use the Design Notebookand other tools and resources provided to them to help them design their games, and serves as a sounding boardfor dyads as they design. Although the facilitator is a critical component to the SCAT learning environment,she cannot be with every group or individual all the time. To help overcome that limitation and to help Scholarsdevelop more expert CAT capabilities, the Design Notebook has been created to coach Scholars as they engagein CAT through game design. The Design Notebook has been integrated into SCAT activities, affordingScholars multiple opportunities to develop CAT capabilities while working individually and collaboratively indyads.The Design Notebook contains paper-and-pencil based tools that coach groups and individuals in theways cognitive apprenticeship suggests (Collins, Brown & Newman, 1989; Puntembekar & Kolodner, 1998) byusing a system of scaffolds (Owensby, 2006; Thomas, 2008). Each scaffold in the system supports groups andindividuals in a particular way and addresses a particular difficulty that learners may face when engaging incomplex cognitive skills, processes, and capabilities like designing an experiment, interpreting and applying theexperiences of experts, or engaging in CAT. The system of scaffolds has 5 parts (Owensby, 2006; Thomas,2008). First, tool sequences make process sequence visible. This scaffold addresses the structuring of tools tosuggest a high-level process that learners are engaging in. Second, within each tool, structured questioning orstatements make the task sequence clear. This scaffold addresses prompts, which are questions or statementsused to focus learners’ attention as they are carrying out or reflecting on a task. Third, for each prompt in thesequence, hints are provided. Hints are task-specific/domain-specific questions or statements used to refine atask. Fourth, for each prompt in the sequence, examples are provided. Examples are exemplars that can be usedto model a process or a specific step of a process. Fifth, for some tasks in the sequencing, a template or chart tohelp with lining up one’s reasoning is provided.Given that Scholars will be able to move through the iterative game design cycle at their own pace, it islikely that those Scholars or dyads who are further along in the game design cycle will be able to scaffold dyadswho are not as far along (Vygotsky, 1978; Roschelle, 1996; Owensby, 2006; Thomas, 2008, Palinscar, 1984).In addition, different Scholars will bring different perspectives to the dyad, which will contribute to greaterunderstanding by the dyad. The literature shows that small group collaboration and discussion has manybenefits (Feltovich, Spiro, Coulson & Feltovich, 1996; Koschmann, Kelson, Feltovich & Barrows, 1996;Roschelle, 1996; Bayer, 1990; Wells & Chang-Wells, 1992; Barron, et. al, 1998, Barron, 2003).Current Project Status and Next StepsWe are currently working with 20 African-American sixth grade girls who attend various schools across themetro-Atlanta area. The SCAT project kicked off its first year of data collection this past summer (July 2013)beginning with a two-week summer camp. During the camp, Scholars were introduced to the game design cycleand engaged in brainstorming, storyboarding, and physical prototyping. They designed games for social changethat address a range of topics from environmental sustainability to bullying. Scholars used the full range ofscaffolds, including asking questions of the facilitator, using the Design Notebook, and each other as they notonly engaged in whole class discussions, but also as they participated in gallery walks (Kolodner, et. al, 2003),where Scholars interacted one-on-one, playtested each other’s games, and gave feedback to inform the nextiteration of design. On the last day of camp, Scholars visited the Aware Home on the campus of Georgia Tech,which is an “intelligent” home as well as a research project aimed at exploring various technical, design, andsocial issues that people face in a home setting. Scholars toured the home, learned about the differentalgorithms that were designed and implemented to run the home, and interacted with undergraduate/graduatestudents who design, implement, integrate, and maintain those algorithms.During the Fall 2013 semester, Scholars participated in monthly SCRATCH workshops, learning aboutthe SCRATCH environment and programming common game functionality using SCRATCH (e.g., moving theplayer from one level to the next; creating the look and behavior of a sprite; and creating a scrolling scene).Beginning in February, Scholars will engage in two 6-week workshops where they will develop designICLS 2014 Proceedings1094© ISLSdocuments, implement their games using SCRATCH, and submit their games to two different national gamedesign competitions. The 2014 STEM Video Game Challenge aims to motivate interest in STEM learningamong America’s youth by tapping into students’ natural passions for playing and making video games. It wasinitiated in response to President Obama’s initiative to promote a renewed focus on STEM education, theEducate to Innovate Campaign. Scholars can either submit written design documents or playable gameprototypes. Scholars will submit both design documents and playable game prototypes to the Future GameDesigners Competition.As Scholars engage in SCAT activities, we have and will continue to collect video observations (bothwhole class and dyads as they work together), artifacts they create, survey data (pre- and post), and interviewdata (from both the facilitator as well as the Scholars) as data. Video observations allow us to have a visualrecord of the enactment, see Scholars struggle with CAT through game design, and reveal the discussions theyare engaging in as they work, providing a link between what students talk about and what they write about intheir Design Notebooks (Owensby, 2006; Thomas 2008). Observations also uncover the effects of the DesignNotebook on both individual and dyad CAT development. Scholar artifacts (e.g., Design Notebook, physicalprototypes, software prototypes, etc.) uncover how CAT capabilities develop over time. Pre-suveys assesScholars’ awareness of careers and opportunities related to CAT prior to SCAT. Post-surveys assess SCAT’simpact on career and opportunity awareness related to CAT. Interview data will uncover both Scholars’understanding of what CAT is, how they have enacted it in the course of their activities, and their perceptions ofthemselves as problem solvers and game designers as well as facilitators’ perceptions of Scholars’ CATcapability development, their experience facilitating SCAT activities, and feedback to inform those activities.ReferencesAnderson, J. R. (2000). Cognitive Psychology and Its Implications: Fifth Edition. New York: Worth Publishing.Anderson, J. R., Greeno, J. G., Kline, P.J. & Neves, D.M. (1981). Acquisition of problem-solving skills. In J. R.Anderson(Ed.), Cognitive skills and their acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Bandura, A. (1994). Self-efficacy. In R. J. Corsini (Ed.), Encyclopedia of psychology (2nd ed., Vol. 3, pp. 368369). New York: Wiley.Bandurablogentry.AbilityandCapability.DownloadedfromBandura’sblog,http://des.emory.edu/mfp/AbilityCapability.html.Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 307-359.Barnes, T., Richter, H., Chaffin, A., Godwin, A., Powell, E., Ralph, T., Matthews, P. & Jordan, H. (2007).Game2Learn: A study of games as tools for learning introductory programming. In Proceedings ofSIGCSE2007.Barron, B., Schwartz, D.L., Vye, N.J., Moore, A., Petrosino, A., Zech, L., Bransford, J. D. & The Cognition andTechnology Group at Vanderbilt (1998). Doing with understanding: Lessons from research onproblem- and project-based learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7(3&4), 271-311.Bayer, A. (1990). Collaborative-apprenticeship learning: Language and thinking across the curriculum, K-12.Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.Bransford, J. D., Brown, A.L., & Cocking, R. R. (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind,experience, and school.Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Brathwaite (2009). Interview on Women, Games and Design. Downloaded from Applied Game Design blog,http://bbrathwaite.wordpress.com/2009/01/07/interview-on-womengames-and-design/.Collins, A., Brown, J.S., & Newman, S.E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading,writing, and mathematics. In L.B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: essays in honorof Robert Glaser, 453-494. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Crawford, C. (2010) How to Think: Algorithmic Thinking, In the Journal of Computer Game Design v.7.DiSalvo, B. J., Guzdial, M., Mcklin, T., Meadows, C., Perry, K., Steward, C. & Bruckman, A. (2009). GlitchGame Testers: African American Med Breaking Open the Console. In Proceedings of DiGRA 2009.Feltovich, P.J., Spiro, R.J., Coulson, R.L., & Feltovich, J. (1996). Collaboration within and among minds:Mastering complexity, individually and in groups. In T. Koschmann (Ed), Computer systems forcollaborative learning, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 25-44.Fullerton, T., Swain, C., and Hoffman, S. (2004). Game Design Workshop: designing, prototyping andplaytesting games. San Francisco, CA: CMP Books.International Society for Technology in Education – National Education Technology Standards (2007). NETSfor Students 2007, downloaded from http://www.iste.org/standards/netsfor-students/nets-studentstandards-2007.aspx.Irvine, M. (2008). “Survey: 97 Percent of Children Play Video Games”. Downloaded from The Huffington Post,http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2008/09/16/survey-97-percent-ofchil_n_126948.html.Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Playing and Making Games for Learning: Instructionist and Constructionist Perspectivesfor Game Studies. In Games and Culture, 1(1), pp. 36-39.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1095© ISLSKolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B. B., Gray, J., Holdbrook, J., & Ryan, M. (2003). PromotingDeep Science Learning Through Case-based Reasoning: Rituals and Practices in Learning By DesignClassrooms. In Seel, N. M. (Ed), Instructional Design: International Perspectives, Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates: Mahwah, NJ.Koschmann, T., Kelson, A.C., Feltovich, P.J., & Barrows, H.S. (1996). Computer-supported problem-basedlearning: A principled approach to the use of computers in collaborative learning. In T.D. Koschmann(Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 83—124). Hillsdale, NJ: LawrenceErlbaum.Kramer, Kramer, D. (2002). Algorithms Should Mind Your Business, downloaded from http://www.outsourcingrussia.com/docs/?doc=680.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Lenhart, A., Kahne, J., Macgill, A. R., Evans, C. & Vitak, J. (2008). Teens’ gaming experiences are diverse andincluded significant social interaction and civic engagement. Report 202-415-4500 for the Pew Internet& American Life Project: Washington, D.C.Maloney, J., Burd, L., Kafai, Y., Rusk, N., Silverman, B., and Resnick, M. (2004). Scratch: A Sneak Preview.Second International Conference on Creating, Connecting, and Collaborating through Computing.Kyoto, Japan, pp. 104-109.Owensby, J.N. (2006). Exploring the Development and Transfer of Case Use Skills in Middle-School ProjectBased Inquiry Classrooms. Completed Dissertation, Georgia Institute of Technology. Proquest(1115125971).National Research Council (2011). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Nersessian, N.J. (2008) Creating Scientific Concepts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Polya, G. (1973). How to Solve It: A New Aspect of Mathematical Method, 2nd Edition. Princeton, NJ:Princeton University Press.Palincsar, A. & Brown, A. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehensionmonitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117 – 175.Papert, S. (1993). The children’s machine: Rethinking school in the age of the computer. New York: BasicBooks.Puntembekar, S., & Kolodner, J. L. (1998). The Design Diary: Development of a Tool to Support StudentsLearning Science By Design. Proceedings of the Interational Conference of the Learning Sciences ’98,230-236.Plutzik, N. (2010). “So, Only White Men Can Be Game Designers?” Downloaded from the NPR All TechConsideredblog,http://www.npr.org/blogs/alltechconsidered/2010/03/if_youre_not_white_and_male_yo.html.Repenning, A. and Ioannidou (2008). Broadening Participation through Scalable Game Design, ACM SpecialInterest Group on Computer Science Education Conference, (SIGCSE 2008), (Portland, Oregon USA),ACM Press.Repenning, A., Webb, D., & Ioannidou, A. (2010). Scalable Game Design and the Development of a Checklistfor Getting Computational Thinking into Public Schools. Paper presented at the 2010 ACM SpecialInterest Group on Computer Science Education (SIGCSE) Conference, Milwaukee, WI.Roschelle, J. (1996). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. In T. Koschmann (Ed.). CSCL:Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 209-248.Schneider, G. M. & Gersting, J. L. (2010). Invitation to Computer Science, 5th Edition. Boston, MA: CourseTechnology, Cengage Learning, 4-16.Thomas, J.O. (2008). Scaffolding Complex Cognitive Skill Development: Exploring the Development andTransfer of Case Use Skills In Middle-School Project-Based Inquiry Classrooms. VDM Publishing.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978) Mind and society: The development of higher mental processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Wells, G. & Chang-Wells, G. L. (1992). Constructing knowledge together. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.Werner, L., Campe, S., & Denner, J. (2005). Middle school girls + games programming = Informationtechnology fluency. ACM special interest group in information technology education (SIGITE).Newark, NJ.Wing, J.M. (2006). Computational Thinking. In CACM Viewpoint, March 2006, pp. 33-35. Wing, J.M. (2010).“Computational Thinking”. Presented at the Centre for Computational Systems and Biology, Trento,Italy, December 2010.AcknowledgmentsWe are grateful for the generous support of the National Science Foundation (DRK-12 1150098).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1096© ISLS