Klauer’s Inductive Reasoning Training as aCognitive Apprenticeship Approach for Special-Needs StudentsAntonia E. E. Baumeister & Heiner RindermannDepartment of Psychology, Technische Universität Chemnitz, GermanyEmail: antonia.baumeister@psychologie.tu-chemnitz.de, heiner.rindermann@psychologie.tu-chemnitz.deAbstract: The inductive reasoning trainings by K. J. Klauer are characterized as a Germancognitive apprenticeship approach for all age groups. The effects of program I were comparedacross two field studies with special-needs students. The paper-pencil-based training version(N1 = 34 students; M = 8;9 years) resulted in no improvement of the students’ cognitive(CFT 1: dmean = -0.17; βmeanTrain Int = -.08) and verbal abilities (HSET: dmean = -0.02,βmeanTrain Verb = .04). However, the PC version (N2 = 27; M = 7;8 years) resulted in a smallpositive effect on intelligence (CFT 1: dmean = 0.28; βmeanTrain Int = .13) and verbal performance(HSET: dmean = 0.25, βmeanTrain Verb = .12). Compared to childhood cognitive development, eventhe small training effects observed in Study 2 are practically meaningful because theycorrespond to more than half a year of schooling and maturation. Integrating cognitivetrainings in preschool to lifelong learning programs is recommended.→→→→Impact of Cognitive TrainingsCognitive competence is the ability to think, to possess relevant and accurate knowledge and to apply thisknowledge intelligently. This competence is required in order to solve complex problems successfully whichcan range from language learning to other academic or professional and everyday tasks (e.g., Rindermann,Flores-Mendoza, & Mansur-Alves, 2010; Rindermann, Michou, & Thompson, 2011). One aspect of cognitivecompetence is reasoning, that is, identifying rules and transferring these rules to new problems. According toKlauer and Phye (2008), inductive reasoning consists of detecting regularities and irregularities by finding outsimilarities and differences of attributes and relations with differently coded contents (e.g., verbal, pictorial,numerical).Thinking abilities can be improved by different kinds of interventions, for example, by means ofeducational methods like trainings (e.g., Irwing, Hamza, Khaleefa & Lynn, 2008; Jaeggi, Buschkuehl, Jonides &Shah, 2011; Schmiedek, Lövdén, & Lindenberger, 2010), early education and preschool (e.g., Campbell &Ramey, 1994) or schooling in general (Ceci, 1991). Especially Klauer has developed cognitive trainings forseveral age groups (e.g. Klauer, 1989, 1991, 2008), and he has empirically investigated their effectiveness. Innumerous studies applying individual, dyadic or small group settings to whole classes, positive effects of thetraining programs were found on academic learning, concentration and intelligence (e.g. Marx, 2005; Sonntag,2004). The effectiveness of the programs for children and teenagers across 78 evaluation studies was on averaged = 0.52 regarding intelligence gains, and d = 0.69 on average across 38 studies regarding academic learning(corrected for dependencies within samples, respectively; Klauer & Phye, 2008). For example, for children withspecial needs, positive effects were found which were beyond coaching effects and which turned out to be stablein the long-term (e.g., Marx, 2005).Assuming that positive effects can spread, even a relatively short training could result in positive longterm effects (cf. Klauer & Phye, 2008). Previous studies on the cognitive training with children and teenagerswith special needs showed that the positive effects transfer to further areas, for example, language acquisition,reading literacy or academic learning (e.g., Marx, 2006; Sonntag, 2006).Although previous studies from different groups of researchers have illustrated the effectiveness ofKlauer’s cognitive trainings with special-needs students, these studies have researched quite homogeneoussamples, for example, regarding competence level or regarding clinical pictures (e.g., senior classes of a specialschool; Sonntag, 2004). However, children attending special education centers mostly have rather differentneeds. Therefore, studies are needed for answering the research question whether a cognitive training haspositive effects with a quite heterogeneous group of special-needs students.Klauer’s Inductive Reasoning Training as a Cognitive Apprenticeship ApproachCognitive apprenticeship is an instructional approach which aims at fostering not only domain-specific priorknowledge but also general and transferable problem solving strategies such as learning strategies, controlstrategies, and heuristics as well as the positive experience of intrinsically motivating, cooperative learning tasks(Collins, Brown, & Newman, 1989). The role of teachers is to demonstrate how tasks can be solved, to explaintheir solution steps and express their thoughts as experts in this process, to structure suitable exercises for theirlearners, to help them by providing feedback or further information in case of problems, and to reduce guidancegradually in the course of learners becoming more experienced and independent. These processes can beICLS 2014 Proceedings38© ISLSsummarized by the often-cited keywords of modeling – coaching – scaffolding – fading (Collins et al., 1989).The role of learners is to discuss about their knowledge (articulation), to compare their approach with otherlearners’ approach (reflection), and to explore new problems and strategies (exploration; Collins et al., 1989).This approach has proven to be highly effective for improving students’ reading comprehension(Palincsar & Brown, 1984), for acquiring mathematical problem solving strategies (Schoenfeld, 1985), forteaching causal reasoning (Hendricks, 2001), for developing writing skills (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987), andfor knowledge building in general (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). On a conceptual level, as teaching ofinductive reasoning, and on the methodological level, Karl Josef Klauer’s cognitive trainings can also becharacterized as a cognitive apprenticeship approach. The following steps are common to all of his trainingprograms developed for all age groups from preschool till seniority (e.g. Klauer, 1989):(1) Exposition: This is the starting point of each cognitive training program. Klauer (1989)recommends to present authentic tasks in order to illustrate the relevance of inductive reasoningfor everyday life. In this phase, the first tasks are solved by analyzing the initial variables,formulating an aim and a plan how to reach it, testing one’s hypotheses, and self-reflecting uponthe results.(2) Development: The function of this stage is to understand the general structure of inductivereasoning tasks which is to identify similarities or differences between features, to develop and testrules, to describe and compare task categories, to articulate their features, to learn to use theconcepts correctly (e.g. ‘features’, ‘relations’, ‘sameness’, ‘differentness’ etc.), and to link the taskcategories with solution strategies.(3) Application: This stage serves four functions. First, through practicing to solve many tasks, theskills and strategies are deepened. Second, learners practice to identify task categories upon beingconfronted with new tasks. Third, a transfer of prior knowledge to new tasks is achieved. Fourth,all skills should be automatized so that tasks can be solved quickly and effortlessly.Klauer (1989) recommends the following training methods which can, like the abovementionedtraining steps, clearly be classified into a cognitive apprenticeship approach:Guided discovery. The learners mainly work in a self-regulated manner during exploring the taskclasses with their specific features. Only in case of problems, the trainer gives hints by asking helpful questionsand correcting errors. Special-needs students may need more guidance than other learners. The aim is to makethe learners think aloud or explain to the trainer as much as possible. Core aspects should be summarized andrepeated, for example, solution procedures and control strategies. Klauer (1989) emphasizes the importance ofdeveloping and using a common language (O’Donnell & O‘Kelly, 1994; Rogoff et al., 2003; Vygotsky, 1978)which supports memorization of the learned strategies.Verbalization and self-reflection. The aim of this training method is that learners should think aloudand justify their task solutions. This should induce a more analytic strategy (than mere guessing), activate andstrengthen control strategies, and reduce cognitive load. Self-reflection can be supported by asking the learnerwhy he or she made a specific step etc. This method is more effective in dyadic compared to individual settingsbecause peers can learn from each other by mutually adopting the partner’s strategies (Lou, Abrami, &d’Apollonia, 2001).Verbal self-instructions. This method is especially recommended with special-needs students (Klauer,1989, p. 99) and has proven to be highly effective (e.g. Masendorf & Klauer, 1987). The trainer first models thetask solution by making his or her thinking visible. Further, the trainer shows how he or she reacts to own errorsand corrects them. For example, he or she can compliment himself or herself for working accurately. In thesecond step, the learner should instruct the trainer to solve a task by using the directions he or she has heardbefore. In the third step, the learner uses self-instructions by verbalizing them aloud, then whispery, and finally,by means of inner speech (Vygotsky, 1978).Thus, external regulation decreases and self-regulation increases in the order of the training methods:verbal self-instructions – verbalization and self-reflection – guided discovery (Klauer, 1989). Depending on theage of the target group, Klauer recommends different forms of a social training. For example, in kindergartenage, he prefers individual trainings with a maximum duration of 20 minutes (Klauer, 1989, p. 111). Dyadictraining settings can be applied from the age of primary school; however, the trainer needs to ensure that thelearners alternate during task solution so that both learners receive enough practice. Reciprocal teaching(Palincsar & Brown, 1984) can be used by letting one learner self-comment on his or her strategies and the otherlearner check and question the strategies applied. After each phase, the roles are changed. This is also possiblein small groups of 3-4 learners. Klauer recommends learning in homogeneous groups because this supportsachievement motivation and prevents competence threats by more knowledgable learners (Butera, Caverni, &Rossi, 2005). Further, a suitable procedure could be to use direct instruction in groups during the expositionphase, small groups during the development phase, and individual training during the application phase (Klauer,1989).ICLS 2014 Proceedings39© ISLSFurther commonalities of all training programs are the six task categories of inductive reasoning (e.g.Klauer, 1989; Lenhard, Lenhard, & Klauer, 2012):(1) Generalization: These tasks require identifying that different objects share at least one commonfeature (e.g. what is the commonality of a butterfly, a kite, and a helicopter?).(2) Discrimination: The differences between features need to be found out (e.g. pick the odd one out:spade – watering can – telephone – garden hose).(3) Cross-classification: In these cases, at least two features are crossed, and their commonalities anddifferences need to be identified (e.g. where does the banana fit best: to an apple, a pear, a ball ofwool or a bucket?).(4) Relationship identification: These tasks require that commonalities between relationships, forexample, commonalities of sequences, are identified (e.g. arrange pictures of a comic strip story inthe correct order).(5) Relationship differentiation: In contrast to the previous category, differences between relationshipsneed to be found out (e.g. disturbed sequence: objects are ordered according to increasing sizeexcept one object which does not follow this rule and which has to be sorted out).(6) System composition: Both the commonalities and the differences of relations need to be identified(e.g. complete a matrix in which two features of objects need to be crossed).Since the graphics of the paper-pencil-based training program I for preschool, primary school andspecial-needs students became out-dated displaying objects unknown to today’s children (e.g. picture of atypewriter), Lenhard and colleagues (2012) developed a modern computer-based version. A further differencebetween the former paper-pencil-based version and the new computer-based version is that in the PC version,the training is embedded in a fantasy story: The learners are asked to help two elves to search for the “bluediamond of wisdom” (Lenhard et al., 2012).In the following, two field studies are presented investigating the effectiveness of two forms ofKlauer’s cognitive training program I with special-needs students on cognitive and verbal development. In thefirst field study, a paper-pencil version of program I was applied in an Austrian sample, whereas in the secondstudy, the computer-based version of program I was applied in a German sample. Within each study, it wasassumed that:1) the inductive reasoning training enhances fluid intelligence and results in increased intelligencetest scores (Hypothesis 1);2) due to the large amount of verbal activity, the training program should also result in improvementsof verbal performance (Hypothesis 2);3) the effects should be similar in an experimental group (first training group) and a waiting controlgroup (second training group), that is, the increase in intelligence and verbal performance shouldbe similar. This similarity of effects should ideally result in a ‘rhomb pattern’ of results(Hypothesis 3; cf. Figure 1). This is important in order show that the training results in an effectwhich is universal for all participants and rather independent of aptitude-treatment interactions(Cronbach & Snow, 1977);4) the effects should be stable across a time period of six weeks (Hypothesis 4).Comparing both studies, it was postulated that the computer-based version in which the cognitivetraining is embedded in a fantasy story (Lenhard et al., 2012) should be more effective than the paper-pencilversion (Hypothesis 5) because the computer-based version should be more motivating and the objects should beeasier to identify for the students.Figure 1. Hypothetical ‘Rhomb Pattern’ of Results of the Raw Scores.MethodAcross both studies, different trainers were used. However, within each study, the trainers also administered thetests.ICLS 2014 Proceedings40© ISLSStudy 1The study was conducted at three special-needs centers in Graz (Austria). The participants were nine girls and25 boys at the age of 7;0 to 10;5 years (M = 8;9 years, SD = 1;1 years) visiting the first to fourth class of primaryschool. The parents and/or the teachers reported at least one of the following diagnoses (DSM-V) for eachstudent, respectively: Autism spectrum disorder (e.g. Asperger syndrome); specific developmental disorder;expressive language disorder; reading disorder; disorder of written expression; mathematics disorder; conductdisorder; attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.The children were matched to the first and second training group according to their pretest scores onthe CFT 1 (Fiechtl, 2010). Cognitive ability was assessed in group settings by means of the three subtestsClassifications, Similarities, and Matrices of the ‘Culture Fair Test’ CFT 1 (duration: 30-40 minutes; Cattell,Weiß, & Osterland, 1997), and verbal development was assessed by means of the four subtests Imitation ofGrammatical Structure Forms, Generation of Morphemes, Sentence Generation, and Word Finding of the‘Heidelberger Sprachentwicklungstest’ HSET (Grimm & Schöler, 1991), a German-speaking test which weadapted slightly to Austrian terms. Both tests were administered three times, as a pretest and as a first andsecond posttest. Due to several participants being ill in winter, less data were collected for the HSET. After thepretest, dyads of children of the first training group (n1 = 17 children) took part in the cognitive training forchildren I by Klauer (1989). The training phase lasted for four weeks, with 2 sessions per week (each 30-40minutes) and 15 tasks, respectively. Four weeks after the pretest, the first posttest was conducted. Only after thisfirst posttest did the cognitive training start in the waiting control group (i.e., the second training group: n2 = 17children) for four weeks. After the waiting control group had finished the training, the second posttest wasadministered to all participants, twelve weeks after the pretest.Results of Study 1The effect size ‘dcorr’ in former evaluation studies on K. J. Klauer’s cognitive training programs (e.g. Klauer &Phye, 2008) is corrected for pre-training differences (i.e., differences of the first post test are corrected fordifferences of the pretest, and differences of the second post test are corrected for differences of the firstposttest; Cohen, 1988) and uses the pooled standard deviation. In addition, regression analyses are reportedusing the results of the previous test, respectively, and the experimental group (first training group vs. secondtraining group) as predictors (see Table 1 for means and standard deviations).On the first posttest, a small negative effect of the training on cognitive ability was found showing asuperior performance of the waiting control group who did not train in this phase over the first training group(dcorr = -0.21, βTrain Int = -.17; see Figure 2). On the second posttest, the waiting control group who had receivedthe training now, again scored slightly higher than the first training group who did not train in this phase, but thetraining effect also turned out to be slightly negative (dcorr = -0.13, βTrain Int = .02). The mean effect averagedacross both training groups was dmean = -0.17 (βmeanTrain Int = -.08).A more inconsistent finding emerged for verbal development: On the first posttest, the waiting controlgroup scored higher than the first training group (see Figure 3); thus, a small negative effect of the training onverbal ability was found (dcorr = -0.19, βTrain Verb = -.05); however, on the second posttest, the effect of thecognitive training on the second training group (i.e. the former waiting control group) was small but positive,(dcorr = 0.15, βTrain Verb = .13). This resulted in a mean effect of dmean = -0.02, βmeanTrain Verb = .04).→→→→→→Table 1: Means (and standard deviations) of the CFT 1 and the HSET scores used in Study 1.First TrainingGroupSecondTraining GroupPretestCFT 1HSET22.41 (5.28)31.24 (19.83)(n = 17)(n = 17)24.81 (7.38)31.33 (20.60)(n = 16)(n = 15)Posttest 1CFT 1HSET24.59 (6.19)40.56 (22.42)(n = 17)(n = 16)28.24 (4.68)44.71 (23.59)(n = 17)(n = 14)Figure 2. Raw Scores of the Intelligence TestAcross Three Times of Measurement.ICLS 2014 ProceedingsPosttest 2CFT 1HSET25.76 (5.50)39.47 (21.86)(n = 17)(n = 17)28.71 (5.30)47.00 (19.61)(n = 17)(n = 17)Figure 3. Raw Scores of the Verbal CompetenceTest Across Three Times of Measurement.41© ISLSThus, in contrast to Hypotheses 1 and 2, the paper-pencil-based version did neither support theinductive reasoning processes of special-needs students nor their verbal development. Consequently, no ‘rhombpattern’ of results emerged, rejecting Hypothesis 3. Instead, the slight and relatively stable increases in cognitiveand verbal ability (Hypothesis 4) can be traced back to (1) naturally occurring developmental effects and (2) are-test or practice effect (i.e. getting used to work on the performance tests; Hasselhorn, 1995; Colom et al.,2010). In order to find out whether the modernized PC version (Lenhard et al., 2012) is more effective than thepaper-pencil version (Hypothesis 5) of training program I (Klauer, 1989), Study 2 was also conducted withspecial-needs students.Study 2This study was conducted at a kindergarten with remedial education and at a special-needs school in Chemnitz(Germany). Seven girls and twenty boys participated who were about 5;2 to 9;7 years old (M = 7;8 years,SD = 1;5 years). As in Study 1, the parents and/or the teachers reported at least one of the following diagnoses(DSM-V) for each student, respectively: Autism spectrum disorder (e.g. Asperger syndrome); specificdevelopmental disorder; expressive language disorder; reading disorder; disorder of written expression;mathematics disorder; conduct disorder; attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; learning difficulties.The same tests as in Study 1 were used, that is, the CFT 1 measuring cognitive ability and the HSETassessing verbal development, as pretest and first and second posttest. The modernized, computer-based versionof the cognitive training for children I (Lenhard et al., 2012) was conducted mostly in dyads (first traininggroup: n1 = 13; waiting control / second training group: n2 = 14) with three units per week and ten tasks per unit(duration: 30 minutes, respectively). As in Study 1, the children were matched to the first and second traininggroup according to their pretest scores on the CFT 1 (Jung, 2012; Voigt, 2012).Results of Study 2Again, the effect size ‘dcorr’ was used corrected for pre-training differences (i.e., differences of the first post testare corrected for differences of the pretest, and differences of the second post test are corrected for differencesof the first posttest; Cohen, 1988), respectively, using the pooled standard deviation. Similarly, the regressionanalyses used the results of the previous test, respectively, and the experimental group (first training group vs.second training group) as predictors (see Table 2 for means and standard deviations).On the first posttest, the first training group showed a superior performance than the waiting controlgroup; thus, a small positive effect of the training on cognitive ability was found (dcorr = 0.20, βTrain Int = .10; seeFigure 4). Similarly, in the second training group, a small positive effect of the training on cognitive ability wasfound on the second posttest (dcorr = 0.36, βTrain Int = .15). The mean effect, averaged across both training groupswas dmean =0.28 (βmeanTrain Int = .13) and equals to +4.2 IQ points.In addition, a small positive effect of the training on verbal development was found in the first traininggroup (dcorr = 0.12, βTrain Verb = .06), and also a small positive effect was found in the second training group (dcorr= 0.37, βTrain Verb = .18). This resulted in a mean effect of dmean = 0.25, βmeanTrain Verb = .12).→→→→→→Table 2: Means (and standard deviations) of the CFT 1 and the HSET scores used in Study 2.First TrainingGroupSecondTraining GroupPretestCFT 1HSET19.46 (7.09)38.87 (11.19)(n = 13)(n = 13)19.93 (7.07)38.88 (9.10)(n = 14)(n = 14)Posttest 1CFT 1HSET22.38 (5.77)41.26 (10.81)(n = 13)(n = 13)21.50 (7.35)40.14 (8.06)(n = 14)(n = 14)Figure 4. Raw Scores of the Intelligence Test AcrossThree Times of Measurement.ICLS 2014 ProceedingsPosttest 2CFT 1HSET21.85 (7.21)42.28 (11.85)(n = 13)(n = 13)23.29 (5.31)44.69 (7.52)(n = 14)(n = 14)Figure 5. Raw Scores of the Verbal Competence TestAcross Three Times of Measurement.42© ISLSThe PC version slightly improved the cognitive and verbal abilities of the special-needs students,supporting Hypotheses 1 and 2. Further, although the effects are not very pronounced, a slight ‘rhomb pattern’of results was observable (see Figures 4 & 5); thus, the PC version should work relatively independently fromfurther characteristics of the participants, supporting Hypothesis 3. The effects seem to be stable (Hypothesis 4);however, studies with more prolonged follow-up phases are needed in order to corroborate this assumption.Finally, comparing the paper-pencil-based (Study 1) and the PC version (Study 2) of the training, the latterversion was more effective, confirming Hypothesis 5.DiscussionInductive reasoning is the ability to identify similarities and differences of attributes and relations (Klauer &Phye, 2008), and it is a core feature of human intelligence (Klauer & Phye, 2008; Lenhard & Lenhard, 2011;Rindermann & Baumeister, 2013). Inductive reasoning trainings for all age groups have been developed andtested by K. J. Klauer. His training programs can be characterized as a German approach to cognitiveapprenticeship (e.g. Collins et al., 1989) because the classical methods of modeling, coaching, scaffolding,fading, articulation, reflection, and exploration are applied.In two field studies, we tested the effectiveness of the paper-pencil-based version of program I andcompared it to the effectiveness of the PC version with regard to improving the cognitive and verbal abilities ofspecial-needs students. The first field study (N1 = 34; paper-pencil version) was conducted in Austria, thesecond field study (N2 = 27; PC version) in Germany.In the first field study, no positive effect of the training on intelligence and verbal development wasfound. Instead, all students improved their cognitive and verbal abilities across the three times of measurementindependently of the cognitive training. One reason why no positive training effect was found could be that thetasks were not motivating enough for the students. In addition, the training tasks were similar to the tasks of theintelligence test (CFT 1) which resulted in boredom and decreased motivation during the test phase. That is,although the training and performance test tasks seemed to be too easy for the students, no ceiling effect of theircognitive and verbal performance was observable. Therefore, further studies should use broader intelligencetests (e.g. the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children; Wechsler, 2004) which offer farther transfer betweentraining tasks and test tasks.In the second field study, a PC version of the training program I was used (Lenhard et al., 2012). In thisPC version, out-dated graphics of the paper-pencil version had been exchanged, and a motivating fantasy storyhad been built around the cognitive training tasks. Thus, this PC version is even more typical of a cognitiveapprenticeship approach than the previous version because situated learning is more strongly applied when thestudents participate in the fantasy story. The PC version had a small and positive impact on the students’cognitive and verbal abilities, over and above the developmental gains which were also observable for allparticipating students. Although only a small effect of the cognitive training was found on the students’intelligence, this small effect is still practically meaningful because an increase of four IQ points corresponds tomore than half a year of schooling and maturation combined (Rindermann, 2011)!Since our small training effects are in contrast to those reported by Klauer and Phye (2008), it isimportant to identify moderating variables (e.g. type of developmental disorder, IQ levels, motivation etc.)which support or hinder training gains. In addition, it is important to include studies like our two in future metaanalyses in order to reduce publication biases. Different assumptions exist regarding the question for whichtarget groups such cognitive trainings would be especially effective: According to Klauer and Phye (2008),students with learning disabilities should profit more than students without learning disabilities (w.r.t.intelligence: d = 0.54 vs. d = 0.52; w.r.t. academic performance: d = 0.94 vs. d = 0.69; Klauer & Phye, 2008).Similarly, large effects of cognitive trainings were shown in developmental countries (e.g. Irwing et al., 2008:Sudan, d = 0.47, this equals to 7 IQ points). In further own studies, however, we found larger effects of Klauer’straining for students who show higher academic performance and for elderly people with higher levels ofeducation compared to less educated seniors of the same age (Rindermann & Baumeister, 2013) – thus,‘Matthew effects’ (“the rich get richer, and the poor get poorer”; Matthew 25:29) seem to be more common forthe cognitive training programs by Klauer than ceiling effects.Limitations of both studies were the small sample sizes. Further, there was no follow-up phase for thesecond training group. Therefore, it is possible that in the first study, positive effects of the training would haveemerged in later phases after the students had more opportunities to apply the trained skills in daily life. Futurestudies should try to investigate the training’s effectiveness with larger samples and longer follow-up phases(e.g. 3 to 15 months; Klauer & Phye, 2008).Finally, a problem of the statistical method of effect estimation is that different effect sizes result indifferent interpretations: Several variants for calculating d-values exist depending on the homogeneity orheterogeneity of the sample and the resulting standard deviations (cf. Rindermann & Baumeister, 2013). Inaddition, d-values as effect levels are numerically higher than r- or β-values (e.g. small effect according toICLS 2014 Proceedings43© ISLSCohen, 1988: d = .20 vs. r / β = .10). Therefore, it is recommended to report at least two variants for calculatingthe effect size, for example, d and β. If the performance test (e.g. intelligence test) was conducted completely,test norms should be used to quantify the effectiveness in IQ points based on the population variance.A further methodological challenge is to use a suitable control group, for example, in the form of afurther training program pursuing different aims (e.g. Jaeggi et al., 2011) or by separating and comparing thedifferent components of one and the same training program (e.g. Dorbath, Hasselhorn, & Titz, 2011).Since K. J. Klauer’s cognitive training programs are the most often evaluated ones with more than 100experimental studies and more than 4.000 participating children from Europe and the USA, the potential effectsare undoubted (Klauer, 2014). Thus, it can be recommended to integrate the training in the curriculum ofkindergartens and schools, including refreshing sessions several months later (Möller & Appelt, 2001) – thiswould take no longer than 10 lessons and could substantially help children to improve their cognitive abilitiesand academic performance.ReferencesBereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: LawrenceErlbaum Associates.Butera, F., Caverni, J. P., & Rossi, S. (2005). Interaction with a high- versus low-competence influence sourcein inductive reasoning. The Journal of Social Psychology, 145, 173-190.Campbell, F. A., & Ramey, C. T. (1994). Effects of early intervention on intellectual and academicachievement: A follow-up study of children from low-income families. Child Development, 65, 684698.Cattell, R. B., Weiß, R. H., & Osterland, J. (1997). Grundintelligenztest Skala 1 (CFT 1). Braunschweig:Westermann.Ceci, S. J. (1991). How much does schooling influence general intelligence and its cognitive components? Areassessment of the evidence. Developmental Psychology, 27, 703-722.Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading,writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction (pp. 453-494).Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Colom, R., Quiroga, M. A., Shih, P. C., Martínez, K., Burgaleta, M., Martínez-Molina, A., et al. (2010)Improvement in working memory is not related to increased intelligence scores. Intelligence, 38, 497505.Cronbach, L., & Snow, R. (1977). Aptitudes and instructional methods: a handbook for research oninteractions. New York: Irvington.Dorbath, L., Hasselhorn, M., & Titz, C. (2011). Aging and executive functioning: A training study on focusswitching. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 1-12.Fiechtl, S. (2010). Effekte kognitiven Trainings bei Kindern mit Defiziten in deren schulischen Fertigkeiten(Unpublished diploma thesis). University of Graz, Graz.Grimm, H. & Schöler, H. (1991). HSET – Heidelberger Sprachentwicklungstest. Göttingen: Hogrefe.Hasselhorn, M. (1995). Kognitive Trainings: Grundlagen, Begrifflichkeiten und Desiderate [Cognitive training:Basics, concepts, and desiderata]. In W. Hager (Ed.), Programme zur Förderung des Denkens beiKindern [Programs for promoting thinking in children] (pp. 14-40). Göttingen, Germany: Hogrefe.Hendricks, C. (2001). Teaching causal reasoning through cognitive apprenticeship: What are the results fromsituated learning? The Journal of Educational Research, 94, 302-311.Irwing, P., Hamza, A., Khaleefa, O., & Lynn, R. (2008). Effects of Abacus training on the intelligence ofSudanese children. Personality and Individual Differences, 45, 694-696.Jaeggi, S. M., Buschkuehl, M., Jonides, J., & Shah, P. (2011). Short- and long-term benefits of cognitivetraining. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108,10081-10086.Jung, C. (2012). Effekte des computergestützten Denktrainings nach Klauer auf die kognitiven Fähigkeiten vonKindern (Unpublished bachelor‘s thesis). Technische Universität Chemnitz, Chemnitz.Klauer, K. J. (1989). Denktraining für Kinder I. Ein Programm zur intellektuellen Förderung. Göttingen:Hogrefe.Klauer, K. J. (1991). Denktraining für Kinder II. Göttingen: Hogrefe.Klauer, K. J. (2008). Denksport für Ältere: Geistig fit bleiben (2., überarbeitete Auflage). Bern: Verlag HansHuber.Klauer, K. J. (2014). Training des induktiven Denkens – Fortschreibung der Metaanalyse von 2008 [Training ofinductive reasoning – an updated meta-analysis]. Zeitschrift für Pädagogische Psychologie, 28, 5-19.Klauer, K. J., & Phye, G. D. (2008). Inductive reasoning: A training approach. Review of Educational Research,78, 85-123.ICLS 2014 Proceedings44© ISLSLou, Y., Abrami, P. C., & d’Apollonia, S. (2001). Small group and individual learning with technology: A metaanalysis. Review of Educational Research, 71, 449-521.Lenhard, A., & Lenhard, W. (2011). Computerbasierte Intelligenzförderung mit den „Denkspielen mit Elfe undMathis“ – Vorstellung und Evaluation eines Computerprogramms für Vor- und Grundschüler.Empirische Sonderpädagogik, 2, 105-120.Lenhard, A., Lenhard, W., & Klauer, K. J. (2012). Denkspiele mit Elfe und Mathis. Förderung des logischenDenkvermögens für das Vor- und Grundschulalter [Thinking games with Elfe and Mathis. A training oflogical thinking skills for preschool and primary school age]. Göttingen: Hogrefe Verlag.Marx, E. (2005). Kognitive Entwicklungsförderung bei hörgeschädigten Kindern [Cognitive competencedevelopment in hearing impaired children]. Zeitschrift für Entwicklungspsychologie und PädagogischePsychologie, 37, 36-45.Marx, E. (2006). Kognitive Förderung Jugendlicher mit Lernstörungen. Psychologie in Erziehung undUnterricht, 53, 166-177.Masendorf, F., & Klauer, K. J. (1987). Intelligenztraining bei lernbehinderten Sonderschülern: ein kognitivprozessualer Ansatz [Cognitive training with special-needs students with learning disorders].Psychologie in Erziehung und Unterricht, 34, 14-19.Möller, J., & Appelt, R. (2001). Auffrischungssitzungen zur Steigerung der Effektivität des Denktrainings fürKinder I [Booster sessions to foster the effectiveness of the training to reason for children I]. Zeitschriftfür Pädagogische Psychologie, 15, 199-206.O’Donnell, A. M., & O‘Kelly, J. (1994). Learning from peers: Beyond the rhetoric of positive results.Educational Psychology Review, 6, 321-349.Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and monitoringactivities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117-175.Rindermann, H. (2011). Intelligenzwachstum in Kindheit und Jugend [Increase of intelligence in childhood andyouth]. Psychologie in Erziehung und Unterricht, 58, 210-224.Rindermann, H., & Baumeister, A. E. E. (2013). Effekte des Klauerschen Denktrainings bei Schülern mitMigrationshintergrund, Förderbedarf und bei Senioren [Effectiveness of Klauer’s cognitive trainingwith immigrant students, special-needs students and elderly people]. Psychologie in Erziehung undUnterricht, 60, 121-132.Rindermann, H., Flores-Mendoza, C., & Mansur-Alves, M. (2010). Reciprocal effects between fluid andcrystallized intelligence and their dependence on parents’ socioeconomic status and education.Learning and Individual Differences, 20, 544-548.Rindermann, H., Michou, Ch. D., & Thompson, J. (2011). Children’s writing ability: Effects of parent’seducation, mental speed and intelligence. Learning and Individual Differences, 21, 562-568.Rogoff, B., Paradise, R., Mejía Arauz, R., Correa-Chávez, M., & Angelillo, C. (2003). Firsthand learningthrough intent participation. Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 175-203.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer(Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 97-118). New York: Cambridge UniversityPress.Schmiedek, F., Lövdén, M., & Lindenberger, U. (2010). Hundred days of cognitive training enhance broadcognitive abilities in adulthood: Findings from the COGITO study. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 2,1-10.Schoenfeld, A. H. (1985). Mathematical problem solving. New York: Academic Press.Sonntag, W. (2004). Experimentelle Untersuchungen zum Einfluss des Klauerschen Denktrainings aufmathematisches Denken und Lernen von lernbehinderten Sonderschülern [Experimental studies on theimpact of Klauer’s training to reason on mathematical thinking and learning with slightly retardedstudents]. Zeitschrift für Pädagogische Psychologie, 18, 101-111.Sonntag, W. (2006). Auffrischungssitzungen zur Steigerung der Effektivität des “Denktrainings fürJugendliche” bei lernbehinderten Sonderschülern [Do booster sessions increase the effects of aninductive training on intelligence and learning with slightly retarded children in special schools?].Psychologie in Erziehung und Unterricht, 53, 178-187.Voigt, I. (2012). Evaluation der Effekte des computergestützten Denktrainings nach Klauer auf dieSprachfähigkeit von Kindern (Unpublished bachelor‘s thesis). Technische Universität Chemnitz,Chemnitz.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Wechsler, D. (2004). The Wechsler intelligence scale for children - fourth edition. London: PearsonAssessment.AcknowledgmentsWe want to express our gratitude to Sylvia Fiechtl, Cindy Jung, and Isabel Voigt for collecting the data.ICLS 2014 Proceedings45© ISLS