“These are Facts”:Opportunities for and Barriers toPolicy Changes that Support LearningAbigail Stiles, Julie Bryant, Kersti Tyson and Vanessa Svihla, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NMabigails@unm.edu, julieb97@unm.edu, kersti@unm.edu, vsvihla@unm.eduAbstract: Barriers to high quality learning experiences are often indirectly attributed topolicy, such as mandated testing, yet learning scientists seldom engage the policy arena. Thisstudy presents early-stage design-based implementation research that aims to change policy.Interactions between legislators and a collaboratory constituted to investigate performanceassessments are analyzed to better understand barriers and opportunities. We founddifferences along party lines that can be interpreted as barriers and constraints, suggestingdirections for our ongoing work.Issues AddressedNationwide, in the United States, students take tests that are used to evaluate student progress, teachereffectiveness, and school quality; many test results are not useful in making instructional decisions and arecontroversial markers of learning and teacher effectiveness. To address this issue, a group of education leaders,teachers and university faculty formed a collaboratory. This group took their mission, vision, and research to thelegislative education study committee (LESC) in hopes of launching policy change regarding opportunities forstudents to demonstrate mastery. Legislative perceptions of assessment practices and opportunities for learningare important to understand in order to make policy reform that creates opportunities for learning.SignificanceAssessments currently measure basic skills and knowledge and tend to broaden and shallow the curriculum.These tests foster methods of instruction that make schools “a lousy place to learn anything in” (Becker, 1972).Prior work raised concerns about over-reliance on traditional forms of assessment because they can misrepresentwhat students know (Phillips, Gawel, Svihla, Brown, Vye, & Bransford, 2009). Further, such methods have notbeen successful at narrowing achievement gaps or improving students’ opportunities to learn. Efforts to reformcurriculum and instruction have been obstructed by the specter of high stakes testing. Performance assessments(PAs) allow students to demonstrate the complex practices and integrated understanding called for in newstandards, such as Common Core. However, there are numerous barriers to adopting PAs in place of traditionalassessment; this study sought to surface barriers and opportunities in the perceptions of legislative educationcommittee members in relation to PAs.Methodological ApproachWe report initial-phase design-based implementation research (Fishman, Penuel, Allen, Cheng, & Sabelli, 2013).Detailed field notes were collected to document the interactions between the LESC and members of thecollaboratory who had been invited to present. The notes were analyzed using open coding with attention toopportunities for and barriers to policy change aimed to support assessment practices that create opportunitiesfor learning. Once opportunities and barriers were identified, we looked for patterns within those categories.Findings, Conclusions, and ImplicationsThe legislators raised questions and concerns about current and proposed assessment practices. They talkedabout teachers and classrooms they have known personally or have heard of, but few claimed expertise ineducation. They told stories to warrant some of their claims. But the personal stories may also limit legislatorsfrom being able understand perspectives beyond their personal experiences. Urban and suburban democratsbrought concerns about how much they perceive that teachers teach to the test. This represents an opportunityfor policy change, but is hardly a novel notion. We see other opportunities in the urban Democrats’ calls forreform of assessment, as well as the cross party laments about students’ lack of critical thinking skills (Table 1).Several LESC members who were past or current educators offered support for PAs. Barriers were also visiblein the concerns raised, predominantly from Republicans. A rural/urban Republican who is a retired educatorexpressed concerns about teachers’ capabilities. Her lack of faith in the competency of teachers indicates aserious barrier to the potential for change in assessment policy.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1643© ISLSTable 1: Sample of codes identified, examples, and the political party affiliations of speakersDescription of codeExamplesParty &SettingOpportunity: Aneed for reform ofassessmentHow long will we wait for assessment reform?Standardized tests might give a nice measurement, but the question is,what are they measuring?UrbanDemocratsOpportunity:Critical thinkingidentified as gap instudent abilityStudents do not have critical thinking skills at the core level, and they arenot readingUniversally we [the USA] are considered to not be teaching our studentscritical thinking and it can be traced back to NCLBRural/UrbanRepublican,SuburbanDemocratBarrier: Mistrust inteacher competencySome teachers do not have the basic skills. They don't have basic grammarskills and they are not prepared. These are the facts.Who will deliver these assessments if not all teachers are ready to beteachers?Rural/UrbanRepublicanAs we continue to seek change in assessment policy, we will attend to the opportunities and barriersmade visible in these interactions. It is clear, for instance, that demonstrating teacher impact and professionalismwill be vital; we will be able to show this through the designs teachers create for PAs, the feedback that theygive on drafts of student work as part of the PAs, and their engagement in a professional network to score PAsfrom other teachers’ classrooms.ReferencesBecker, H.S. (1972). A school is a lousy place to learn anything in. American Behavioral Scientist. 16(1), p. 85105.Fishman, B., Penuel, W. R., Allen, A., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2013). Design-based implementationresearch: An emerging model for transforming the relationship of research and practice. NationalSociety for the Study of Education Yearbook, 112(2), 136-156.Phillips, R., Gawel, D. J., Svihla, V., Brown, M., Vye, N. J., & Bransford, J. D. (2009). New technologysupports for authentic science inquiry, practice, and assessment in the classroom. Paper presented atAERA, San Diego.AcknowledgmentsWe acknowledge support provided by an Interdisciplinary Research grant from the College of Education incooperation with the Office of the Provost, University of New Mexico.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1644© ISLS