Women Becoming EngineersJoanna Weidler-Lewis, University of Colorado Boulder, joanna.weidler-lewis@colorado.eduAbstract: In this paper, I present a case study of a student becoming an engineer to highlightthe ways in which women become engineers. Drawing on theories of situated learning andfeminism in engineering education, I analyze the gendered practices of engineering education.My analysis suggests that the construction of gender in engineering education has implicationsfor how engineering learning occurs, resulting in implications for both engineering educationand learning theory more broadly.IntroductionIn a recent article in the Journal of Engineering Education, Johri and Olds, along with multiple contributorsfrom the learning sciences, argue that the research communities of engineering education and learning sciencescan both benefit by their mutual engagement and collaborative research (2011). The authors argue that thetheory of situated learning in particular is gaining prominence in both fields and is a promising theoretical lensto approach studies of learning in engineering. The research presented in this paper is the result of this type ofcollaboration between learning scientists and engineering educators. This work comes out of a broader, ongoingethnographic study called Cognitive Ethnographies of Engineering Design in which engineering educators andlearning scientists are investigating engineering design practices in both undergraduate courses and workplaces.My individual focus, however, in on women becoming engineers through their undergraduate coursework.According to the NSF (2013), women represent less than 18% of all engineering enrollments. Much ofthe research to date on women in engineering focuses on quantitative measures of women's success and/orpersistence in the field (Beddoes and Borrego, 2011). My research focuses on how women are succeedingand/or persisting. The goal of my research is to uncover how undergraduate classroom practices, andinstitutional structures and policies, enable and/or constrain women's success in undergraduate engineering: ormore succinctly, how women are learning to be engineers. This work has implications for the ways in whichgender is taken up in learning theory, and has the potential to inform ways in which women's success can beincreased in engineering.Conceptual FrameworkTo investigate women becoming engineers I draw from theories of situated learning and feminism inengineering education. Both theories focus on the individual in context. While situated learning has explanatorypower regarding the ways individuals navigate pathways and trajectories, feminism highlights how thesepathways and trajectories are gendered.Situated versus Cognitive Theories of Engineering LearningSituated learning takes learning to be a function of the activity, context, and culture in which it occurs; it is afundamentally social phenomenon. This stands in opposition to cognitive approaches to learning in whichlearning is thought of as the acquisition of decontextualized concepts transferable to other situations at othertimes. In documenting how students become engineers, Stevens et al., (2008) demonstrate that persons arealways and without exception, persons in context. The broader organizational practices individuals engage withinfluence the pathways in or out of a community and there are both official and unofficial routes to becoming anengineer. This results in some students pulled in and other students pushed out of the discipline.Interactional versus Liberal FeminismThe majority of research regarding women in engineering is implicitly based in a liberal feminist tradition(Beddoes & Borrego, 2011). Although valuable in its seeking of equality between men and women, liberalfeminism is limited in that "woman" is seen as a homogenous category, often universalizing white, western,middle class women. Interactional feminism, on the other hand, is concerned with the ways gender is producedin the encounters and processes of every day. By focusing on discourse, interactional feminism rejects presumedbinaries, and attempts to uncover gendered behaviors and interactions to produce new explanation as to how andwhy masculine biases persist in engineering.MethodsThis study was conducted at a large, US public university. It is based on the analysis of observational datacollected in two undergraduate engineering courses. This first course was a general engineering freshman designcourse with 30 students enrolled. The second course was a senior mechanical engineering design course with100+ students enrolled. The freshman course met three times a week; the first session was a one-hour courselecture; the other two were two-hour working labs. The senior course met twice a week for one hour and fifteenICLS 2014 Proceedings1629© ISLSminutes. In addition to these courses, this study includes observations of the weekly planning meetings forinstructors teaching freshman design, weekly staff meetings held by the instructor of senior design, and weeklyteam meetings from one senior design team. The data includes fieldnotes from over 100 hours of observation, aswell as informal interviews with students, instructors, and teaching assistants in the design courses.A Case Study of Becoming an EngineerPreliminary findings underway suggest that gender is made salient in undergraduate engineering education inways that impact potential learning. Engineering classroom practices as well as institutional structures continueto prescribe gender norms resulting in fixed categories of expectation. In my poster, I will expand upon thesepractices and my analyses, but I offer the following vignette as a representation of my preliminary analysis.Vignette: Ares. The engineering center is a collection of buildings, connected by a labyrinth ofwalkways so that you never have to go outside to get from one building to the next. There are computer labs,and machine shops dispersed throughout with some labs underground three floors. Signs are suspended from theceilings directing you which way to go, and directing you to the women's restrooms. The women's restroomswere retrofitted from previous men's restrooms with the urinals left in tact. I navigate this maze to the freshmandesign classroom. Outside of the classroom are pictures of engineering projects for third-world countries underthe caption "engineering with heart" only the heart was the symbol and not the word. It is in the freshman classthat I first met Ares. Ares would often sit in the back or the corners of the classroom, slouched in a chair. Withblack pants and black shirt, Ares seemed invisible. Ares could pass for a twelve year-old boy; awkward and shylike many other freshmen. For the first few weeks of observations, I thought she was male. It wasn't until theclass was split into their project teams that I realized she was biologically female. Instructors are stronglyencouraged to pair females in group-work so that no one female is left with the secretarial tasks. After manyobservations and informal interviews, Ares gender remains ambiguous. She has told me that at times she bindsher breasts to suppress her femininity, but likes her feminine eyeglasses. She plans on double majoring inaerospace engineering and French because she likes both the hard science aspect of engineering but enjoyscommunications. In more ways than one she defies categorization.DiscussionAs this vignette suggests, gender is made visible in engineering education at every literal turn. The signage thatpoints to the women's restrooms containing men's urinals serve as a reminder that as a woman you don't belonghere, or at least you didn't at one time. The imagery on the wall of engineering with a heart is strategicallyplaced outside of the freshman design classroom to entice female students into engineering by appealing to theirsensitive emotions, one of the many practices that essentializes women's identities in engineering education.Ensuring that women are not lone participants on a team is another strategy designed to improve women'sexperience (Tonso, 1996), but when probed as to why, instructors often cite that is so women can sharesecretarial duties, not to prevent them from doing it in the first place. Women are categorized and thenessentialized in engineering education. What, then, do we make of Ares? She is confronted with imagery andpractices that remind her you can only be one gender, and she is placed on a team based on her sex, but can wesay her experience is improved because of it? This remains to be seen and needs further investigation.The learning sciences as a field continues to explore the connections between identity and learning, andyet, a salient feature of identity, gender, continues to be under-theorized. As Ares' case suggests, understandinggender and learning is complex, and we need to advance our learning theories to address this complexity.ReferencesBeddoes, K., & Borrego, M. (2011). Feminist theory in three engineering education research journals: 19952008. Journal of Engineering Education,100(2), 281-303.Johri, A., & Olds, B. M. (2011). Situated engineering learning: Bridging engineering education research and thelearning sciences. Journal of Engineering Education, 100(1), 151-185.National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics. (2013). Women,Minorities, and Persons with Disabilities in Science and Engineering: 2013. Special Report NSF 13304. Arlington, VA. Available at http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/wmpd/.Stevens, R., O’Connor, K., Garrison, L., Jocuns, A., & Amos, D. M. 2008. Becoming an engineer: Toward athree dimensional view of engineering learning. Journal of Engineering Education, 97(3), 355–368.Tonso, K. L. (1996). The Impact of Cultural Norms on Women*. Journal of Engineering Education, 85(3), 217225.AcknowledgmentsAll participants are listed with pseudonyms. This work was supported in part by NSF grant CMMI-1355599.The opinions in this paper are those of the author and not necessarily of the US National Science Foundation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1630© ISLS