NAPLeS: Networked Learning in the Learning SciencesFrank Fischer, LMU University of Munich, Germany, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.deFreydis Vogel, LMU University of Munich, Germany, freydis.vogel@psy.lmu.deDaniel Sommerhoff, LMU University of Munich, Germany, daniel.sommerhoff@psy.lmu.deJulia Eberle, LMU University of Munich, Germany, julia.eberle@psy.lmu.deDeborah Fields, Utah State University, USA, Deborah.Fields@usu.eduSusan Goldman, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA, sgoldman@uic.eduStian Håklev, OISE, University of Toronto, Canada, shaklev@gmail.comDaniel T. Hickey, Indiana University, USA, dthickey@indiana.eduCindy Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University, USA, chmelosi@indiana.eduManu Kapur, National Institute of Education, University of Singapore, Singapore, manu.kapur@nie.edu.sgMarcia Linn, University of California, Berkeley, USAKris Lund, ICAR Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, France, kristine.lund@ens-lyon.frSadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA, puntambekar@education.wisc.eduJim Slotta, OISE, University of Toronto, Canada, jslotta@gmail.comSusan Yoon, University of Pennsylvania, USA, yoonsa@gse.upenn.eduAbstract: The workshop about networked learning in the Learning Sciences is based on theISLS initiative to establish a network for PhD and Master’s programs in the Learning Sciences.The main objective of this network is to support the academic exchange for professors andstudents in Learning Sciences programs worldwide. An important question that has been raisedin several meetings of members of the network is how learning material for students in theLearning Sciences can be developed, used in Learning Sciences classes worldwide andevaluated for sustainable learning. This workshop will bring together Learning Scientists todiscuss this question from various perspectives including those concerned with pedagogy,technology networked learning and evaluation. Finally, the participants will come up with afeasible plan for the development, implementation and evaluation of learning materials that canbe used across Learning Sciences programs worldwide.The Network of Academic Programs in the Learning Sciences (NAPLeS)The International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS) is formed by a community of academics, practitionersand students from different disciplines (e.g. cognitive science, educational sciences, psychology, sociology) whoare concerned with research and practice in the scope of teaching and learning (ISLS, 2009). Over the years, theLearning Sciences community has become increasingly international with active members from North America,Europe, and Asia, but also South America, Australia, and even Africa (Kienle & Wessner, 2006). Thecommunity is characterized by non-institutionalized collaborations and exchanges among scholars located indifferent countries and representing various disciplines (Hoadley, 2005). Because of the ad-hoc nature of thesecollaborations, it has been difficult for students and young researchers who wish to affiliate with the LearningSciences to access the enormous amount of knowledge the community has generated over the years. NAPLeSseeks to address this challenge, giving students and young researchers greater access to community knowledgeand helping them to become active members in a scientific community (Eberle, Stegmann, & Fischer, 2014).Graduate students in the Learning Sciences are often educated only within their university’s Learning Sciencesprograms, which naturally reflect the research foci and viewpoints of the local faculty. Having access to thebroader Learning Sciences community and the variety of disciplines and perspectives concerned with teachingand learning could enrich their graduate training, and offer sustained access to postdoctoral scholars and earlycareer professors.. The NAPLeS initiative is designed to provide such access.The educational aims of the ISLS are to facilitate Learning Sciences students and young researchers intheir effort to acquire knowledge in the multiple fields of the Learning Sciences, to conduct and publishLearning Sciences research, and eventually become active members of the global Learning Sciences community(ISLS, 2009). To realize these aims and to foster high quality Learning Sciences programs internationallythrough mechanisms that support teaching and learning, the ISLS has established the Network of AcademicPrograms in the Learning Sciences (NAPLeS), an institutional network of PhD and Master’s programs in theLearning Sciences.Before NAPLeS was founded in the summer of 2012, an extensive search for international academicLearning Sciences programs was conducted. In the spring of 2012, a survey was sent to 37 universitiesworldwide that offered Learning Sciences and related academic programs, in order to investigate whichacademic Learning Sciences programs would be willing to contribute and what they would expect fromparticipating in NAPLeS.ICLS 2014 Proeedings1704© ISLSFigure 1. Types of activities in which the Learning Sciences programs were interestedThe survey was well-accepted, with a response rate of about 70% responding that they were veryinterested in joining a network, with particular interests in the exchange of learning materials, staff, and studentswith other Learning Sciences programs (see figure 1). However, the survey also revealed that most of theprograms were not at all or only to a very slightly willing or able to financially contribute to the network (seefigure 2).Figure 2. Budget the Learning Sciences programs could contribute to the networkAgainst the backdrop of the outcomes of this survey, a NAPLeS taskforce was formed and started toplan several activities to be implemented in the network, with an emphasis on low cost of participation and earlyreturn on investment. Amongst others, the activities included:••••Collecting examples of syllabi used in existing Learning Sciences programs.Creating learning resources prepared by renowned scholars on specific topics in the Learning Sciences.Offering scholarships for students to visit other Learning Sciences programs.Facilitating the organization of international supervision of doctoral projects.To ensure the quality of participating programs, it was agreed that to join NAPLeS, a graduate programmust offer (or be preparing) a PhD and/ or Master’s degree in the Learning Sciences, with at least three ISLSmembers associated to the program (two of whom should be faculty). Furthermore, NAPLeS member programs(and their associated faculty and students) are expected to actively participate in the network in following ways:•••Naming a program representative (e.g., a PhD student) to serve as a liaison for NAPLeSSubmitting program information, to be presented on the NAPLeS websiteProviding visiting scholar opportunities for other NAPLeS studentsICLS 2014 Proceedings1705© ISLS••Submitting exemplary syllabi for exchange with other NAPLeS membersCollaboratively developing and exchanging learning materials (e.g. on the NAPLeS webinar series).After the initial planning phase, the NAPLeS network was officially founded at the 2012 ICLSmeeting, beginning with programs from 12 member institutions. Since then, many new programs have joined,and currently NAPLeS has more than 30 programs affiliated to 24 different member universities (see Table 1).Table 1: Location of NAPLeS member universities and type of programs (March, 2014)UniversityCarnegie Mellon UniversityIndiana UniversityNanyang Technological UniversityNew York UniversityNorthwestern UniversityOpen University of the NetherlandsRutgers UniversitySaarland UniversityStanford UniversityUniversity at Buffalo - StateUniversity of New YorkUniversity of California, BerkeleyUniversity of California, Los AngelesUniversity of HaifaUniversity of Illinois at ChicagoUniversity of Munich (LMU)University of NottinghamUniversity of OuluUniversity of PennsylvaniaUniversity of PittsburghUniversity of SydneyUniversity of TorontoUniversity of WashingtonUniversity of Wisconsin-MadisonUtah State UniversityLocationPittsburgh, PA, USABloomington, IN, USASingaporeNew York, NY, USAEvanston, IL, USAHeerlen, The NetherlandsNew Brunswick, NJ, USASaarbrücken, GermanyStanford, CA, USALearning Sciences programMaster’s, PhDMaster’s, PhDMaster’s, PhDMaster’s, PhDMaster’s, PhDMaster’s, PhDPhDMaster’sMaster’s, PhDBuffalo, NY, USAMaster’s, PhDBerkeley, CA, USALos Angeles, CA, USAHaifa, IsraelChicago, IL, USAMunich, GermanyNottingham, UKOulu, FinlandPhiladelphia, PA, USAPittsburgh, PA, USASydney, AustraliaToronto, Ontario, CanadaSeattle, WA, USAMadison, WI, USALogan, UT, USAPhDPhDMaster’s, PhDPhDMaster’s, PhDMaster’s, PhDMaster’s, PhDMaster’sPhDMaster’s, PhDMaster’s, PhDMaster’s, PhDPhDMaster’s, PhDSince the official initiation of the NAPLeS network, many Learning Sciences programs, as well asLearning Scientists not affiliated with a member program, have contributed to the collection and exchange oflearning resources. Currently, the NAPLeS website gives access to more than 15 syllabi from different LearningSciences Master’s and PhD programs in various topic areas representing the multitude of contents ininternational Learning Sciences. In October of 2013, NAPLeS launched an online seminar series – the so called“webinar series” – with more than 50 of the most influential and renowned researchers in the Learning Sciences.The webinars are categorized into four main topics, namely (1) how people learn, (2) supporting learning, (3)methodologies for the Learning Sciences, and (4) Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. These fourtopics and the broad spectrum of researchers serve to reflect the multiple research areas within the LearningSciences. Each webinar session has been recorded and shortly afterwards the corresponding video recordingmade available as a resource on the NAPLeS webpage – not only to serve as a resource for learning andteaching in Learning Sciences programs, but also for the general public. Up to today, 25 webinars have beenconducted and are now available on the Naples web site (see the ISLS home page).A look at the access statistics of the NAPLeS webpage reveals that all digital learning resources on theNAPLeS webpage have been quite well received. Since the webinar series started, the NAPLeS webpage has upto 21,000 hits per month and more then 1,400 unique visitors from over 30 different countries worldwide. But itis not only the recordings of the webinars that are popular. The syllabi collection is also highly frequented, witha total number of up to 545 downloads per month.Nevertheless, it is still an open question how these video recordings and other learning resources can beoptimized for access and uptake within the community, and how they can be successfully integrated intocurricula and informal learning processes. Most importantly, as we are a community concerned with the natureof learning and instruction, it seems evident that the pedagogical approaches being researched within theLearning Sciences field might be more systematically applied to facilitate learning within our own community.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1706© ISLSThe challenge, then, is to identify principles derived from Learning Sciences research that can serve toguide the design of these digital learning resources and give clear recommendations for their use in differentcurricular and informal environments.Objectives of the NAPLeS Workshop at ICLS 2014The NAPLeS workshop at ICLS 2014 should bring together professors, post-docs, and PhD students to discussabout the Learning Sciences as a domain of learning in an international context. Participants will discusspotential formats of learning resources to ensure sustainable learning for PhD and Master’s students in theLearning Sciences. Specific topics to be discussed are: learning and technology, networked learning, communitybuilding, and collaborative learning at a distance. Four expertise teams will be formed to discuss this issue toarrive at a concept of how to realize digital learning resources in the Learning Sciences in the future, and howthese digital resources can be used in Learning Sciences degree programs and beyond. Additionally, a timelinewill be created covering concrete steps for the implementation of the concept into the NAPLeS network andNAPLeS activities. The concrete objectives of the workshop are as follows:1.2.3.Creating a concept for the development of digital learning resources in the Learning Sciences froma pedagogical, technological, and community building perspective.Developing recommendations for lecturers in the Learning Sciences, regarding how to implementthese digital learning resources in their own Learning Sciences courses.Planning future activities within the ISLS community to create, share, and evaluate learningresources.The outcomes of the workshop will be used as foundation for the creation and preparation of learning resourcesfor PhD and Master’s students in the Learning Sciences. Furthermore, the outcomes will provide guidelines forlecturers in the Learning Sciences how these resources may be integrated into their own teaching. As anextended activity and outcome of this workshop, the workshop organizers will create high quality videorecordings of short introductory talks or interviews of different learning scientists throughout the ICLSconference. The digital resources and instructions, which will be created during this ICLS workshop, will thenbe made available for lecturers and students in the Learning Sciences (ISLS and/ or NAPLeS members).NAPLeS Workshop Expertise TeamsThe creation and use of digital learning resources for PhD and Master’s students in the Learning Sciences willmainly be discussed in four distinct expertise teams and from their specific points of view.Pedagogical IssuesWhen designing and publishing digital learning resources, pedagogical questions cannot be ignored. This teamwill clarify the pedagogical issues related to the creation of digital learning resources for students and lecturersin the Learning Sciences, discussing the functionality needed for new online resources, the goals for their use inteaching and learning, and the pedagogical aspects that must be considered. This team will also consider howpedagogical approaches from Learning Sciences research can be systematically applied.Technological IssuesWhen talking about digital learning resources, technological aspects of learning have to be considered as well.Research results about digital and online learning and also the increasing number of available online learningenvironments both have to be taken into account when planning for the new digital learning resources. Thisexpertise team will work on the use of technological developments for the digital learning resources, taking intoaccount the constraints given by the limited funding of the NAPLeS network.Networked LearningThe NAPLeS network aims to create a worldwide community of Learning Sciences students as a platform fornetworked learning and as a starting point for their integration into the ISLS community. This expertise teamwill discuss how networked learning and community building aspects can be facilitated within the NAPLeSnetwork and how the facilitation could be enhanced by including different digital learning resources.EvaluationCreating more digital learning resources is only one side of the coin. Carefully assessing and evaluating them isequally important to ensure a high quality and usability of the resources. In order to make sure that the digitallearning resources fulfill their pedagogical objectives, match the high standards of the community and reflect thecommunities’ needs, an ongoing process of evaluation is required. This expertise team will work on a plan forthe evaluation of the digital learning resources in NAPLeS.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1707© ISLSReferencesEberle, J., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2014). Legitimate Peripheral Participation in Communities ofPractice—Participation Support Structures for Newcomers in Faculty Student Councils. Journal of theLearning Sciences, doi:10.1080/10508406.2014.883978Hoadley, C. M., (2005). The shape of the elephant: scope and membership of the CSCL community. In T.Koschmann, Suthers, D. D., Proceedings of the 2005 conference on Computer support for collaborativelearning: learning 2005: the next 10 years! (CSCL '05). ISLS. 205-210.ISLS(2009).TheInternationalSocietyoftheLearningSciences.Retrievedfromhttp://www.isls.org/ISLS_Vision_2009.pdfKienle, A., & Wessner, M. (2006). The CSCL community in its first decade: development, continuity,connectivity. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(1), 9–33.doi:10.1007/s11412-006-6843-5NAPLeS (2014). NAPLeS – Network of Academic Programs in the Learning Sciences. Retrieved March 11,2014 from http://naples.isls.orgAcknowledgementsBeyond the authors of this paper, an international group of professors, post-docs, and PhD students has beenworking on the NAPLeS mechanisms and activities. We would especially like to thank: Kim Gomez, EleniKyza, Jim Pellegrino, Peter Reimann, and Baohui Zhang.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1708© ISLS