Student Regulation of Collaborative Learningin Multiple Document IntegrationJun Oshima, Ritsuko Oshima amd Keita FujiiGraduate School of Informatics, Shizuoka University, 3-5-1 Johoku, Naka-ku, Hamamatsu-shi, Japanjoshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp, roshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp, kfujii@kai.cs.inf.shizuoka.ac.jpAbstract: We designed a learning environment for facilitating students’ regulation of theircollaborative learning in a pre-service teacher course, based on a theoretical model of learningregulation and the jigsaw method. Each student in a group read a different document related tolearning environment principles (expert group work). Then, students worked together tointegrate the ideas in the documents through discussion (jigsaw group work). We examinedthe proposed design by analyzing the types of regulation that students used and by interpretingtheir means of solving social conflicts. Furthermore, the relationship between groupcharacteristics and learning outcomes was explored. Results show that stable engagement insocially shared regulation of learning in the jigsaw group was related to better learningoutcomes. In addition, students failed to maintain their socially shared regulation whenmembers had different regulation strategies for solving their social conflicts in groups.Theoretical Background and Research AimsWhen contributing to a collaborative task, learners have to regulate themselves, others, and the group as a whole(Winne, Hadwin, & Perry, 2013). In self-regulated learning, learners regulate their own learning in order tocontribute to group performance, based on their individual perception of tasks and their strategic knowledge. Inanother layer of metacognition, namely, co-regulated learning, learners also regulate themselves in relation toothers. Each learner in a group monitors the task perception, goals, and standards of other group members andconsiders ways their actions and interactions influence one another and the task. In the final layer ofmetacognition, learners engaged in a collaborative task collectively regulate their group cognition: this issocially shared regulation of learning (SSRL). In Hadwin, Jäevelä, and Miller (2011), SSRL is defined as“interdependent or collectively shared regulatory processes, beliefs, and knowledge orchestrated in the serviceof a co-constructed or shared outcome/product” (p. 69). In SSRL, learners are collaboratively involved in theplanning, monitoring, evaluation, and regulation of social, cognitive, and behavioral aspects of their learning.The importance of social regulatory processes for learning in small group settings has been preliminarily butempirically supported by several studies in the last decade. For instance, Järvenoja and Järvelä (2009) found thatindividual, shared, and other forms of regulation during group interactions can be differentiated and that thesedifferent types of regulation are used to maintain group work when students encounter a challenge. Moreover,social regulation of learning is associated with the use of deep-level learning strategies and learning transfer.By drawing on recent findings on SSRL, it is possible to conduct a more systematic study of howcollaboration should be designed. Here, we employ design-based research methodology to investigate howcollaboration can lead learners to more successful learning. Based on the reported mechanism of regulation ofcollaborative learning (Hadwin et al., 2011; Winne et al., 2013), we designed a learning environment tofacilitate university students’ regulation of collaborative learning in a task called “collaborative readingcomprehension” (Oshima & Oshima, 2011); we then analyzed how our design elements helped learners toregulate their collaboration for deeper conceptual understanding.In collaborative reading comprehension, there are two types of group work. The first type is expertgroup work, in which learners in a group share the same content (here, a document) and attempt to constructtheir own understanding of it through their interaction. In the expert group, therefore, learners are required toengage appropriately in reciprocal co-regulated learning (named as two-way Co-RL later). A learner mustunderstand the document in order to explain it to others who are unfamiliar with it in the subsequent jigsawgroup; consequently, each individual learner in the expert group is more oriented toward their individualperception and goal. Their interaction with other members who study the same document facilitates reciprocalco-regulated learning where learners monitor each other’s understanding by expressing their ideas and receivingfeedback from others. The second type is jigsaw group work, in which members who studied differentdocuments share and collaboratively integrate ideas from different documents. Each learner is required ofcontributing to the construction of shared understanding by referring to others’ ideas as well as their own ideas.In this group work, each learner is required to engage appropriately in SSRL.In this paper, we report our first year attempt to design collaborative reading comprehension based onthe theoretical framework of learning regulation. We focus our attention on design conjecture rather than ontheoretical conjecture (Sandoval, in press). In the early stage of design-based research, the main issue is toexamine whether the implemented design would work as expected rather than whether the design would lead toICLS 2014 Proceedings967© ISLSsuccessful outcomes. To evaluate our design, we take up the following research questions. First, how dostudents engage in regulation of learning in the expert group and the jigsaw group, and are there any differencesin learning regulation between groups? We examined regulation of learning by identifying which level ofregulation learners engaged in. In addition, we conducted finer-grained discourse analysis by applyingconversation analysis (Schegloff, 2007) to conversation segments that were representative of unique groupcharacteristics. Second, if there are differences between the groups, what learning outcomes result from groupdifferences in regulation of learning? We evaluated the following learning outcomes: learners’ written discoursesummarizing their ideas in a computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) system after collaborativereading comprehension.Learning Context of This StudyCollaborative reading comprehension was implemented as a part of an intensive course during the summer termof a teacher certification program at a Japanese public university. The course was four consecutive days, and theactivity was conducted during the first day and a half. The second author was the instructor. Toward fulfillingthe course requirements, 7 third-year undergraduate students and 1 graduate student participated in this study.The goal of the course for students was to understand basic concepts of CSCL in order to apply lesson plansappropriately. The goal for students in the collaborative reading comprehension was to understand basicprinciples of how to design learning environments (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 1999).Collaborative reading comprehension is an activity structure designed based on the jigsaw method(Aronson & Patnoe, 2011). It encourages learners to engage in collaborative knowledge construction throughbuilding an understanding of multiple document resources (see left in Figure 1). Students were first placed inexpert groups after listening to an instructor’s brief lecture on “the learning environment,” the target concept. Ineach expert group, four students collaboratively read and constructed an understanding of one document, whichthey explained to others afterward in jigsaw groups. Through expert group collaboration, each student produceda summary by using a prepared worksheet, which would be used as a handout for the explanation in jigsawgroups. After the expert groups finished, jigsaw groups were formed; these groups consisted of one studentfrom each expert group. Students in the jigsaw groups worked to integrate the ideas contained in the fourdifferent documents from explanations by the student expert for each document. After discussing the fourdocuments, the students reported how ideas from the documents were related to one another and interpretedthem with reference to the basic framework of learning environments in the Knowledge Forum CSCL system.Figure 1. Participatory structure of collaborative reading comprehension (left)and worksheet for students to organize their ideas from documents (right).Documents used in the activity came from a book on how people learn in Japanese (Inagaki & Hatano,1989). We selected four chapters of the book, covering four basic principles of learning environments: learnercentered, knowledge-centered, assessment-centered, and community-centered. Each chapter was transcribed toelectronic form and reprinted as a standalone document. These documents were given as reading assignments tothe expert groups, and we provided students with a worksheet to organize ideas from their document in relationto the learning environments concept (see right panel in Figure 1). In jigsaw groups, students brought the ideassummarized from the documents on their worksheets and discussed how the ideas from different documentscould be integrated for advancing their understanding of the principles of learning environments. To facilitateSSRL, we further provided students with a whiteboard, on which a large Venn diagram of the learningenvironment was drawn and sticky notes so that they could externalize and manipulate their ideas on the sharedspace.ICLS 2014 Proceedings968© ISLSResultsData CollectionTo examine student regulation in collaborative learning, we collected data in the following way. First, wecollected each student worksheet and made an electronic copy (in Portable Document Format). Second, we tookpictures of the whiteboard, where they had recorded their ideas by placing sticky notes on the learningenvironment diagram. Third, we video-recorded the conversations in the expert and jigsaw groups andtranscribed them. Finally, students’ written thoughts on integrating their ideas from documents in the CSCLsystem were included. In this study, the transcription of student conversations and the writings in the CSCLsystem were used for discourse analysis.Regulation of Collaborative Learning for Students in Expert and Jigsaw Groups:Group DifferencesStudent conversation was first divided into segments by tasks that learners engaged in. Each segment ofconversation was then categorized as one-way co-regulated learning, two-way co-regulated learning, or SSRL.Whenever a specific student intended to regulate collaborative learning and the others followed (whether or notthey were willing to), the segment was categorized as one-way co-regulated learning. If the regulation wasreciprocal in constructing understanding, the segment was categorized as two-way co-regulated learning. Whenstudents shared problems and collaboratively regulated their learning, this was categorized as SSRL. The firstand third authors collaboratively conducted the segmentation of transcripts and independently categorizedsegments. The authors agreed on 70% of categorizations, with disagreements resolved through discussion.We calculated how much time students spent in regulating their collaborative learning and found thefollowing group differences: (1) two expert groups were more likely to engage in co-regulated learning (98% oftotal time for expert group 1 and 84% for expert group 4), and the other two were more likely to engage inSSRL (87% for expert group 2 and 79% for expert group 3) and (2) both jigsaw groups spent more than a halfof the time on engaging in SSRL (58% in jigsaw group A and 63% in B). These results suggest that our designof participatory structure appropriately promoted learners’ regulation in their collaborative learning. On theother hand, we also found that every expert group and jigsaw group A engaged in one-way Co-RL. To furtherinvestigate why and how learners performed the unexpected regulation of their collaborative learning, wefocused on how regulation of collaboration was related to social conflict. As Järvenoja and Järvelä (2009)demonstrated in their work, students apply different levels of regulation strategies when confronted with socialchallenges within their groups. In the next section, we analyze segments of conversation in which learners hadsocial conflicts and a learner exerted her/his one-way Co-RL strategy to terminate sequences of conversationturns.How Students Regulated Social InteractionWe identified segments of conversation where social conflicts were found. The first example was from expertgroup 1, which was oriented to co-regulated learning. In the following segment, they discussed how adescription in their document was related to the learning environment principles. The original conversation wasin Japanese; we have provided an English translation below the original.そ1 A1:そこ-そういう見方そ学習:::者特性/Well, so…if we take the perspective we discussed, this might be related to learner characteristics…/2 B1:=ああ(1.0)ほそ学習者単独[いい？評価入っ？]/Oh, I see.So is it OK to say that this is directly related to the learner-centeredidea? Or do you think that it might be closer to the assessment-centered idea?3 A1:[う::::::::]/Hmmmm/4:(8.0)((B1話振っ後取っいA1枠組資料見考えい))/B1 is taking notes after uttering line #2. A1 is thinking while looking at his frameworkworksheet./5 A1:いいそ細く分けく/No, you (B1) need not think in such a strict way./6 B1:7 :8 A1:=あ/Oh, yeah./(1.0)主張ぶ/We would be confused./9 B2:う/OK./ICLS 2014 Proceedings969© ISLS10:取っ(23.0)((B1い取っA1い様子))/B1 is taking notes. A1 is also taking notes./こ11 A1:視点本文全体(1.0)え:::こ大筋/This perspective does not seem to be related to the main message in the document, does it?/12 B1:う:::(｡)ああう(2.0)°°/Ummm, yeah, but what should we do about it?/13 : (4.0)14 A1:あ いい/Well, it’s alright./In the conversation above, the two students had conflicting learning goals. B1 was attempting tounderstand deeply how the ideas in their document were related to learning environment principles; A1 wasfocused on task completion. In lines 2 and 12, B1 expressed concern about the relationship between thedocument ideas and the learning environment principles, but A1 ignored B1’s requests for discussion and triedto end the discussion (lines 5, 8, and 14). Although these segments were categorized as one-way co-regulatedlearning during the previous analysis, here we found through fine-grained conversation analysis that these twostudents applied different regulation strategies to the conflict in goals. B1 challenged the task-completion goalheld by A1 several times, trying an ultimately unsuccessful SSRL strategy. We found similar conversationsegments across expert groups oriented to co-regulated learning.Another example of conversation is given below. In this segment, students in jigsaw group A wereexamining each other’s ideas in front of the whiteboard; these ideas had been written on sticky notes and placedon the whiteboard. A1 explained his idea by referring to his sticky note, and A2 raised a question about A1’soriginal idea and proposed a different interpretation (lines 8 and 9). A2’s proposal was then shared with A3 andA4, who responded (lines 10, 11, and 12). However, A1 did not discuss A2’s proposal, simply moving hissticky note to the section that A2 had suggested. In the video of this conversation, the other three members seemsurprised by A1’s act of moving his sticky note. A3 expressed his surprise immediately after noticing A1’s act(line 13). This segment of conversation was also categorized as one-way co-regulated learning because A1 wasregulated by other group members (particularly by A2). Conversation analysis, however, presents a moredetailed picture of what was happening. Three group members used the SSRL strategy to scrutinize A1’soriginal idea and A2’s proposed a new interpretation (lines 8–12), A1 applied the co-regulated learning strategyby accepting A2’s proposal without discussion (line 13). Thus, we see conflicting regulation strategies, withdifferent goals among group members. Through conversation analysis of expert group and jigsaw groupactivities, we found that conflicts in the learning goals of members might lead group members to failing topursue the SSRL strategy.1 A1:見方，自分英語能力低さ見::人いう，(本人見えい壁)/In a sense, she does not like it when others notice her low level of English literacy./234::そういう見方え::(1.0) っ 起こっわけ(，そ学習者っ違う，学習者特性)/We may usually think so. But, she may have a different perspective, too. It’s totallydependent on her learner characteristics.5 A3:6 A1:(.)あ:::::((自分貼っ付箋紙確認))/So, ((A1 is looking at his sticky note to confirm what he said.))/7: (3.0)そ っ 結局自分 ，自分 こ評価::，ここ((評価中心)) へ8 A2: えっ，9い？/Oh, but in this example the person assesses herself. Isn’t this close to the assessment-centeredidea?/ほ，評価 入っ10 A3: =あ::/I see. I also think that it might be related to the assessment-centered idea.11 A4: (.)う:::/Let me see…/12 A3: =あ:: い い い/Uh, yeah, I got you (A2)./))13: (6.0)((A1 何 言わ 付箋紙 動/((A1 quickly moved his sticky note, which had been placed on the learner-centered section, toICLS 2014 Proceedings970© ISLSthe assessment-centered section without consulting other members.))/14 A3:あ:::/Oh…/How Group Differences in Regulation Were Related to Learning OutcomeLearning outcome was measured by evaluating the quality of written discourse in the CSCL system aftercollaborative learning. The reasoning in the written discourse was categorized as either best-fit strategy orknowledge transformation (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1993). When groups simply wrote how their ideas fromdocuments were fitted to one or more of the four learning environment principles, their reasoning wascategorized as a best-fit strategy. When a group attempted to describe the four principles in their own wordsbased on their ideas from the documents, their reasoning was categorized as knowledge transformation. Wefound that jigsaw group B outperformed A in their number of knowledge transformation (χ2 = 3.07, df = 1, p< .10).DiscussionWe designed a collaborative reading comprehension exercise to facilitate knowledge integration in readingdocuments; this was done on the basis of cognitive models of collaborative learning regulation. Our preliminaryanalysis for the first year of implementation suggested that students were engaged in socially shared regulationwithin the designed learning environment (jigsaw participatory structure with shared worksheets andwhiteboard), and that they were able to integrate their knowledge from multiple documents when they regulatedcollaborative learning in the socially shared way. Although we found positive effect from the designed learningenvironments, our analysis also revealed a problem that kept learners from productive collaboration. Assuggested in previous research (e.g., Järvenoja & Järvelä, 2009), learners held and attempted to resolve socialconflicts in their group work by exerting their different regulation strategies. The new finding in our study is adescription of how group members attempted to solve conflicts but could not maintain the SSRL when membershad different regulation strategies or different goals in collaborative learning. Thus, to improve collaborativereading comprehension, a socially shared goal in collaborative learning could be further promoted, and studentscould be instructed on how to learn collaboratively in a more successful way. In future studies onimplementation, we plan to design goal instructions and scaffolds in expert and jigsaw groups.ReferencesAronson, E. & Patnoe, S. (2011). Cooperation in the classroom: The jigsaw method (3rd ed.). London: Pinter &Martin, Ltd.Bereiter, C. and Scardamalia, M (1993). Surpassing Ourselves: An Inquiry into the Nature and Implications ofExpertise. Chicago, IL: Open Court.Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.) (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience,and school. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Hadwin, A. F., Jäevelä, S., & Miller, M. (2011). Self-regulated, co-regulated, and socially shared regulation oflearning. In B. J. Zimmerman & D. H. Schunk (Eds.), Handbook of Self-Regulation of Learning andPerformance (pp. 65-84). New York, NY: Routledge.Inagaki, K. & Hatano, G. (1989). How people learn—the world of everyday cognition. Tokyo: Chuo-koronsha.[in Japanese].Järvenoja, H. & Järvelä, S. (2009). Emotion control in collaborative learning situations? Do students regulateemotions evoked from social challenges? British Journal of Educational Psychology, 79, 463–481.Oshima, R. & Oshima, J. (2011, April). Knowledge building for pre-service teachers through collaborativereading comprehension. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational ResearchAssociation, New Orleans, LA.Sandoval, W. (2014). Conjecture mapping: An approach to systematic educational design research. The Journalof the Learning Sciences, 23, 18–36.Schegloff, E. (2007). Sequence organization in interaction: A primer in Conversation Analysis. New York:Cambridge University Press.Winne, P. H., Hadwin, A. F., & Perry, N. E. (2013). Metacognition and computer-supported collaborativelearning. In C. Hmelo-Silver, C. Chinn, C. Chan, & A. O’Donnell (Eds.). (2013). The internationalhandbook of collaborative learning (pp. 462–479). New York, NY: Routledge.ICLS 2014 Proceedings971© ISLS