Learners’ Intuitions about GeologyLauren Barth-Cohen, Jonathan Shemwell and Daniel CappsUniversity of Maine, Center for Research in STEM Education, 5784 York Complex #1, Orono, ME 04469Email: lauren.barthcohen@maine.edu, jonathan.shemwell@maine.edu, daniel.capps@maine.eduAbstract: Many principles in geology are intuitive to geologists who already understandthose principles, but little is known about learners' intuitions in geology. We apply existingtheoretical machinery about learners' intuitions in physics to learners' intuitions in geology,and we present several examples of geology intuitions from teachers' reasoning about relativeage relationships during field instruction. Implications are discussed for how to productivelyharness learners’ intuitions in geoscience education.Learners’ Intuitions from Physics Applied to GeologyIn the learning sciences, there is a body of work investigating learners’ productive use of intuitions in variousSTEM fields. Pratt and Noss (2002) presented a model of the microevolution of mathematical knowledge thatincluded what they called naïve resources about randomness. Talmy (1988) focused on what he called “forcedynamics” which are patterns and linguistic expressions for physical causes.diSessa (1993) outlined a framework for learning physics that is based on students having a collectionof intuitive knowledge about the physical world. These knowledge pieces, known as phenomenologicalprimitives, p-prims, are thought to be the fundamental elements of the cognitive system. They are important forthinking and learning in physics. They are intuitions that can be accessed in both everyday life and the physicsclassroom. An example of one of these intuitions is Ohm’s p-prim; more effort begets more results and moreresistance gets less results. This is often simplified to “more is more”. This intuition can be applied to manysituations. For instance, to explain why one needs to push harder to move heavier objects, one cites more weightand more resistance, which implies more force is needed. Researchers have expanded this work to identify pprim type intuitions in other STEM areas. For example, Lewis (2012) identified intuitions relevant toprogramming in computer science. Through a larger project investigating teacher’s learning about topics inbedrock geology we are beginning to identify geology intuitions that may function similar to p-prims observedin physics. Extending work in physics education to geology education is reasonable because we would expectintuitions about the physical world to cross discipline boundaries.Many fundamental principles in geology, such as the principle of original horizontality, which statesthat layers of sediment are deposited in horizontal layers due to gravity, are thought to be intuitive amonggeologists. This is not surprising as geology developed as an interpretative science from scientists carefullyobserving the natural world, intuiting how features arose. As observations of the natural world hold a prominentrole in geology, learning in field environments has been key in geology curricula. Recently, Mogk and Goodwin(2012) reviewed the goals and attributes of field instruction and discussed gains from field instruction in termsof embodiment, creation and use of inscriptions, and initiation into communities of practices. They describedthe arc of field instruction as new geologists learn the practices of experts.Here we connect intuitions about geological principles to research on intuitions in physics. We arguethat in some cases learners use these principles in ways similar to how p-prims are used when learning physics.We illustrate this argument with excerpts from data of teachers discussing the bedrock geology and glacialgeology of the area.Data Collection and Methodology to Identify IntuitionsThe data were collected as part of a professional development workshop with 17 sixth-grade earth-scienceteachers. The goal of the workshop was to support teachers in becoming accustomed to modeling as described inthe Framework for K-12 Science Education (NRC, 2012). The content focus was the geological history of theSchoodic Peninsula in Acadia National Park. During the workshop, teachers were engaged in fieldwork wherethey made a series of observations, drew surface and cross-sectional maps of the bedrock and surface features atthree different locations while learning about important geological principles. Using these data, the teachersdeveloped a series of increasingly sophisticated models of the geological history at three points in time (400million years ago, 200 million years ago, and 20,000 years ago). Data consisted of video and audio recordings,drawings created by the teachers, and researchers' field notes. Initially we open coded the data. From these opencodes we developed a set of focused codes including intuitive ideas relevant to geological principles.As described in diSessa (1993) p-prims are easily recognized and self-explanatory. When someone usesa p-prim to reason no further explanation is needed, there is a “that's how things are” implication. Whenidentifying p-prim-type intuitions it becomes important to look for instances where learners were satisfied andconfident with their reasoning. Another way to identify p-prims is to look for cases where people use everydayICLS 2014 Proceedings1531© ISLSlanguage. Finally, a useful heuristic is to look for commonalities across individuals or contexts to triangulatethe p-prim across situations. These heuristics were applied to the current data corpus in conjunction with theexisting list of p-prims (diSessa, 1993) to identify a series of candidate intuitions that are potentially p-prim-like.Data Analysis and ResultsSample data and results are presented in Table 1, and additional intuitions and data will be presented in theposter. Some of the geology intuitions listed are likely combinations of multiple p-prims-like pieces. This is notsurprising given different intuitions often have a high likelihood of occurring in tandem (diSessa, 1993).Table 1. Example intuitions in geologyIntuitionNameTheoreticalSchematization of theIntuitionConformity A liquid takes the shape ofof Shapea solid that is encasing it;the surrounding substanceguides a flowingsubstance. Possibly anapplication of vacuumimpels, which isschematized as emptinessrequires filling (diSessa,1993, p. 219).HeavyHeavy things under largethings move amounts of pressure willdownhillflow downhill.Springiness An object gives underandpressure and thenrebounding rebounds when thepressure is released.Possibly related tospringiness and springscale p-prims (diSessa,1993).Proposed IdealizedGeology ExampleData ExcerptAs a hot liquid rockcools it takes theshape of a solid rocksurrounding itresulting in thecooling rock’s shapeconforming to thesurrounding rock’sshape.Teacher: It just makes sense to me that this otherone came up and filled in the cracks... you cansee what’s holding this, I guess, it looks like itflowed, you know what I mean, flowed in thatcrack,...it seems like the black [rock] flowedaround because when you look at the stripesgoing up, this one here it looks like it filled in acrack that was already in the granite.A glacier feeling the Instructor: What causes the ice to flow? Whyeffects of its owndoes it want to flow in the first place?weight will flowTeacher: Cause, the weight of it pushing downdownhill or down a on it, it's more fluid than solid…weight of itpath where there is pushing down, it melts stuff at the bottom andleast resistance.goes where it can.Glaciers are heavyTeacher: When the glaciers were here, it pushedand will push down the land down, and then when the glaciers melton the rocks,the land comes back up, so maybe the cracksresulting in thewere formed that way.compression of the Instructor: So the pressure that came off whenbedrock below. When the glaciers went away. Alright.the glacier retreats the Teacher: I wonder if we are still rebounding, arerocks will rebound. we still rebounding from that glacier?Conclusion and DiscussionLearners accessed intuitions during geology field instruction that shared some resemblance with existingintuitions that are known to influence reasoning in physics. While this is not surprising because of the closetheoretical relationship between geology and physics, it might be productive for education research andinstruction in geology and other interpretative sciences to take into account learners’ intuitions.ReferencesdiSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10(2-3), 105-225.Lewis, C. M. (2012). Applications of Out-of-Domain Knowledge in Students’ Reasoning about ComputerProgram State. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses.Mogk, D., & Goodwin, C. (2012). Learning in the field: Synthesis of research on thinking and learning in thegeosciences. Geological Society of America Special Papers, 486, 131-163.National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Pratt, D., & Noss, R. (2002). The microevolution of mathematical knowledge: The case of randomness. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 11(4), 453-488.Talmy, L. (1988). Force dynamics in language and cognition. Cognitive Science, 12(1), 49-100.AcknowledgementsThis work has been supported by NSF Grant no. DUE-0962805.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1532© ISLS