Not a Magic Bullet: The Effect of Scaffolding on Knowledge andAttitudes in Online SimulationsIdo Roll, Adriana Briseno, Nikki Yee, Ashley Welsh, University of British Columbia,220-1961 East Mall, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z1, Canada{ido.roll; adriana.briseno}@ubc.ca, nikki.yee@alumni.ubc.ca, welshash@interchange.ubc.caAbstract: Common wisdom and prior research suggest that students with low priorknowledge are in greater need for scaffolding. However, some forms of scaffolding mayoverload novice-students’ cognitive capacity or short-circuit productive exploration of theproblem space. Hence, we evaluate the effectiveness of scaffolding in a virtual simulation inphysics, considering students’ attitudes and prior knowledge. 100 undergraduate studentscompleted either a scaffolded or a relatively unstructured activity, followed by anotherunstructured activity. While the given scaffolding was beneficial for students with high priorknowledge, it did not assist students with low prior knowledge. Furthermore, the scaffoldedactivity increased students’ attitudes towards memory-and-recall in a way that transferred tothe later unsupported activity, where these goals were no longer appropriate. Last, priorknowledge did not contribute to learning outcomes in the presence of intuitive groundedfeedback. We explain these results in terms of productive failure and cognitive load.IntroductionThe desired level of assistance in online exploratory learning environments has been the focus of an intensivedebate. In general terms, proponents of high level of guidance suggest that novice learners learn better insituations where direct and comprehensive instructional guidance is provided (e.g., Kirschner, Sweller, & Clark,2006). However, others assert that students should be given more agency over their learning processes withinthe supported environment (Hmelo-Silver, Duncan, & Chinn, 2007). It is increasingly clear that rather thanasking how much support, a more viable question is what timing and forms of support are most appropriate(Koedinger & Aleven, 2007; Wise & O’Neill, 2009).Many studies of inquiry learning have evaluated the effect of support on learning (e.g., de Jong & vanJoolingen, 1998; Manlove, Lazonder, & de Jong, 2007) and motivation (e.g., Butler, 1998; Horner & Gaither,2006). However, the integration of student characteristics such as incoming attitudes, prior knowledge, andexpectations, in the context of inquiry learning, has not yet received much attention. This study adds to theassistance debate by investigating the relationship between level of scaffolding and student prior knowledge andmotivation, in the context of an online physics simulation.The Interaction between Prior Knowledge and SupportStudents’ prior knowledge and experiences have been long recognized as a critical factors in their learningprocesses and outcomes. Tuovinen and Sweller (1999) suggest that novice learners can benefit from higherlevels of guidance, compared with more experienced learners, because guidance acts as a substitute for missingschemas. Thus, the scaffolding helps novices by minimizing working memory load. Experienced learners, onthe other hand, are less likely to need additional instructional guidance as they already possess schemas thatsupport the construction of mental representations. Kalyuga (2007) refers to this phenomenon as the “expertisereversal effect”, where guidance becomes redundant and thus, ineffective for experienced learners.Somewhat contrary to these results, a second strand of studies indicates that novice learners may finddifficulties in interpreting the provided assistance. Instead, novice learners may benefit more from engaging insolution attempts, albeit failed ones, before they can comprehend and make use of the provided guidance. Forexample, we have previusly found that novices may learn from their own explorations more than from usinghints, even though the hints led them to quicker solutions (Roll, Baker, Aleven, & Koedinger, 2014). In anotherexample, Vollmeyer, Burns, and Holyoak (1996) found that learners benefit more from answering their ownquestions, compared to being given scaffolding in the form of specific sub-goals. These lines of work highlightthe distinction between successful engagement (that is, completing the task without errors), and productiveengagement (that is, performing better on delayed measures of learning; Kapur, 2008; Schwartz & Martin,2004; Roll, Aleven, & Koedinger, 2009). Letting novices explore the problem space also helps them acquiremore flexible knowledge (Rittle-Johnson, Star, & Durkin, 2012). It seems that scaffolding the learning processby providing students with seemingly useful sub goals may put students in an “answer hunting” mode whichmay be counterproductive (Miller, Lehman, & Koedinger, 1999; Sweller, Mawer, & Ward, 1988).While the debate around scaffolding is framed mainly in terms of given and withheld information(Koedinger & Aleven, 2007), students may be given implicit scaffolding in the form of grounded feedback(Nathan, 1998). Environments that offer grounded feedback support learning by showing the outcomes ofICLS 2014 Proceedings879© ISLSstudents’ actions in an alternative, familiar, representation. One family of simulations that supports learningusing grounded feedback is PhET Simulations (Wieman, Adams, & Perkins, 2008). Overall, PhET simulationsare used over 45,000,000 times a year. Figure 1 shows the D/C Circuit Construction Kit, one of the morepopular simulations of the PhET family (http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/circuit-construction-kit-dc). Inthis specific simulation, students explore basic properties of D/C circuits by connecting wires, light bulbs,resistors, switches, and measurement instruments, on a virtual test bed. Grounded feedback in the simulation isgiven, for example, by matching the light intensity of the light bulbs to their current and voltage. In other cases,when the power is too high, elements in the circuit may catch on fire. In addition, students can see the speed inwhich electrons “travel” through the wires. This feedback gives students intuitive understanding on theoutcomes of their actions. Other features of the simulation require more domain-level expertise, such asmeasuring using the voltmeter, shown in the bottom-left corner of all screenshots in Figure 1.Figure 1. The D/C Circuit Construction Kit simulation. Grounded feedback is given in the form of lightintensity, electron speed, and fire.The Interaction between Attitudes and SupportThe role of scaffolding in learning may be explored in further detail through an examination of motivation asmeasured through success attributions and self-efficacy. Success attributions are factors that students recognizeas being the determinants of success in a particular context (Graham & Williams, 2009). They are important inhelping learners understand what is required from them in order to succeed. Thus, success attribution shouldmatch the learning situation. For example, while students in a highly scaffolded environment can learn byanswering questions, this strategy may be less appropriate for a less scaffolded environment, where studentsshould determine their own sub-goals. Self-efficacy describes an individual’s perceived capabilities andcompetencies for learning or acting in context (Bandura, 1997; Schunk & Pajares, 2009). Research suggests thatstudents’ perception of their ability is often inaccurate. In particular, novices often have unrealistic expectationsfor their own successes when confronted with novel tasks, as they are unaware of their personal knowledge gaps(Kruger & Dunning, 1999; Roll, Aleven, & Koedinger, 2011). Students tend to be more productive if they feelthat success can be achieved, they think that they know what they need to do to be successful, and they possessthe skills to do it (Butler & Cartier, 2004). Success attributions and self-efficacy research indicate a connectionbetween these motivational attitudes and increased achievement (Bandura, 1997; Wilson & Linville, 1982).Understanding students’ waxing and waning success attributions and self-efficacy can give us key insights intothe role of scaffolding in the learning process and help us structure scholastic activities more strategically.Similar to prior knowledge, students’ attitudes coming into the learning environment may show adifferentiated effect for different forms and levels of scaffolding. For example, Belenky and Nokes-Malackh(2013) found that students who enter a learning situation with low levels of mastery goals are more likely tobenefit from low levels of scaffolding (in the form of explicit instruction), compared with students with highlevels of mastery goals.Research QuestionsThe current study explores how learning gains and attitudes, and in particular, students’ expectations, changeover time and in relationship to learners’ prior knowledge and level of assistance provided. Specifically, we areinterested in investigating the following questions:(i)What is the effect of scaffolding on learning, contingent on prior knowledge?(ii)How do students’ expectations change with time, based on given scaffolding, and contingenton prior knowledge?MethodOne hundred post-secondary students from first-year physics classes in a large Canadian university participatedin the study on the topic of D/C circuits. Data collection occurred in two waves: once during the school year asan add-on to the physics class, and again in the summer as a more integrated part of the physics course content.ICLS 2014 Proceedings880© ISLSThe study procedure had five steps (see Figure 2): (i) Students first completed a 5-minute pre-test (assessingcontent knowledge) and pre-survey (assessing attitudes). (ii) Students then completed a 25-minute activity onlight bulbs using the online simulation. Students were randomly assigned to one of two conditions with high- orlow-levels of scaffolding, as described below. (iii) Following the learning activity, students were given a shortbreak, and then completed a mid-survey which was identical to the pre-survey. (iv) A transfer inquiry activityon the topic of resistors was then administered for 25 minutes. Students from both groups received only lowlevel of scaffolding in this activity. The activity used the same simulation that was used in the light bulbactivity. (v) Last, a post-test of learning outcomes from both activities and a third survey of attitudes wereadministered.Pre-test+ survey➡︎Light-bulb activity: ScaffoldedLight-bulb activity: Unstructured➡︎Midsurvey➡︎Resistor activity: lowscaffolding➡︎Post-test+ surveyFigure 2. The study procedure.MaterialsAll students used the D/C Circuit Construction Kit (shown in Figure 1) throughout the study. For the firstactivity, students in both conditions received the same learning goal and some advice for their exploration: “Usethe DC Circuit PhET simulation to explore how voltage, current, and the brightness of light bulbs depend on thenumber of light bulbs in a circuit and the arrangement of light bulbs in a circuit. For example, what happenswhen several light bulbs are connected in a line? What happens when light bulbs are sitting on different loopsin the same circuit, and when electrons are moving through different loops? What happens when you useseveral batteries and switches?” Half of the students were assigned to the Scaffolded condition. In addition tothe elaborated learning goal, students in this condition received a worksheet that guided their exploration ofthese topics. The activity was adapted from recommended activities by the designers of the simulation, usinginputs from the instructor of the course in which data was collected. The activity included diagrams that showedstudents which circuits to build, tables for students to fill in their measurements, and propmts that asked studentsto compare and contrast their measurements for the different experimental set-ups (see Figure 3a). The rest ofthe students received only the elaborated learning goals, without the additional worksheet. Even though studentsin this condition were supported by the learning goal and its recommendations, for simplicity, we refer to thiscondition as Unstructured.During the second activity, on the topic of resistors, all students received an (Unstructured) learninggoal with no worksheet. Notably, this activity was much harder, as the topic of resistors is less intuitive thanlight bulbs. Also, the grounded feedback was less relevant in this activity: when working with light bulbs, lightintensity offers useful information. However, when working with resistors, students should use the measurementinstruments (voltmeter, ammeter) and interpret numeric values.15) Rank the voltages across each of the light bulbs, from highest to lowest:(a)(b)Figure 3. An example from the worksheet of the Scaffolded group (a) and an example of a post-test item (b).The post-test covered both topics (light bulbs and resistors) and was administered online. All items inthe test were conceptual and required no calculations (see Figure 3b). The post-test was a reliable measure ofstudents’ knowledge, with Cronbach α = 0.75. The pre-test included a subset of the post-test items. Only itemsthat had no diagrams in the post-test appeared also in the pre-test, in order to prevent a bias in students’ inquirytowards regenerating pre-test questions. Three students had a perfect score on the pre-test and thus wereremoved from the analysis.ICLS 2014 Proceedings881© ISLSThe attitudinal survey of success attributions and efficacy was adapted from Butler and Cartier (2004),and included ten Likert-scale items with two stems: ‘I think that I can do a good job of…’ and ‘I think that I willsucceed if I…’ (see examples below). The same survey items were used before the first activity (pre-survey),between activities (mid-survey), and after the second activity (post-survey).AnalysisStudents were split to high- and low-prior knowledge groups, based on pre-test performance. The effects ofcondition and prior knowledge were evaluated using a MANOVA with light bulb and resistor scores from thepost-test as the dependant variables and condition and prior knowledge (median split) as factors. Since therewere two waves of data collection, and there were slight differences in the light bulb post-test items between thetwo waves, we use normalized z-scores throughout the analysis.To analyze the attitudinal surveys, a factor analysis was run on each of the three time periods (pre-,mid-, and post-). The factors obtained in the post-survey were used to indicate which items can be averagedtogether to create summary scores for each student*time*factor. The factors from the final time period wereused because they represent the final structure of the students’ attitudes, and they are highly interpretable. Thismethod allows us to see how students’ answers to the items across the final factors changed over time, and toexplore what variables might be influencing that change. Post-survey results indicated three, clear factors: Thefirst factor, success expectations, includes items about students’ expectations for success, such as ‘Before Ibegin a PhET sim activity, I think that I will succeed if… I try hard’. This factor included six items. The secondfactor, scientific reasoning, with two items, includes ‘When I work on a PhET sim like the one in the example Ithink that I can do a good job of …testing my ideas and theories’ and ‘…exploring the topic’. The last factor,memory and recall, also consists of two items: ‘I think that I can do a good job of …memorizing informationabout circuits’ and ‘…answering given questions’. Student scores on the items within each factor were averagedto give a summary score for each student on each of the three factors on the pre-, mid-, and post-survey. Thesummary scores for each of the time periods were then used as the repeated measures in a mixed designMANOVA, with prior knowledge and condition entered as independent variables, each with two levels.An alpha level of 0.05 is used throughout the analysis.ResultsNo significant differences were found between the Saffolded and Unstructred conditions on the pre-test, t(95) = .12, p = .91. Identical items between pre- and post-test show significant learning. Mean (SD): Pre: 0.47 (0.17);post: 0.62 (0.23); t(96) = 6.1, p < 0.0005. Analysis of learning by prior knowledge shows that students with lowprior knowledge learned more than students with high prior knowledge, though learning for both groups wassignificant: Low prior knowledge: from 0.33 (0.78) to 0.57 (0.22), t(44) = 6.5, p < 0.0005; High prior knowledge:from 0.59 (0.13) to 0.67 (0.24), t(51) = 0.015.Learning as a Function of Prior Knowledge and ConditionA MANOVA with normalized performance on the light bulb and resistor tests, as a function ofcondition and prior knowledge, found a marginally significant condition*prior knowledge interaction,motivating further analysis of the two separate ANOVAs: Wilks’ λ = .952, F(2, 92) = 2.3, p = .10. Descriptivestatistics of students' z-scores on both post-test sections are listed in Table 1.Table 1: Normalized mean (SD) of learning outcomes by condition(a) Light bulb post-test(b) Resistor post-test (notably, support levels refer tothe previous activity, as all students worked withUnstructured activity in this activity.)UnstructuredScaffoldedUnstructuredScaffoldedLow Prior-.09 (1.11)-.53 (.76)Low Prior-.33 (1)-.30 (.74)KnowledgeKnowledgeHigh PriorHigh Prior.33 (1.12).07 (1.01).41 (.87) b20 (.92)aKnowledgeKnowledge aaMain effect for prior knowledge, p < 0.01; b effect for prior knowledge within Scaffolded condition, p < 0.05.The ANOVA for the light bulb post-test showed a significant interaction effect for priorknowledge*condition, F(1,93) = 4.0, p < .05, η2p = .041. Planned contrasts indicated that within the Scaffoldedcondition, students with high prior knowledge significantly outperformed students with low prior knowledge:t(93) = 3.42, p = .001. The same difference was not found within the Unstructured condition: t(93) = -.59, p = .56.The ANOVA for the resistor post-test found a significant main effect for prior knowledge, F(1,93) = 8.71, p < .05,η2p = .086.ICLS 2014 Proceedings882© ISLSAttitudes as a Function of Prior Knowledge and ConditionA repeated measures MANOVA with the three factors as dependent measures found that time*condition*priorknowledge was significant, supporting a further exploration with the independent repeated measures ANOVAs.Wilks’ λ = .850, F(6, 88) = 2.58, p = .024. Table 2 shows the results for the three attitudinal factors.Table 2: M (SD) for factor summary-scores by prior knowledge and condition for pre-, mid-, and post-survey(a) Memory and Recall(b) Scientific Reasoning(c) Success ExpectationsUnstructured ScaffoldedUnstructured ScaffoldedUnstructured Scaffolded bLow2.63(.63)2.67(.62)Low2.82(.55)2.79(.64)Low3.02(.46)3.02(.51)Prior2.73(.61)2.98(.56)Prior 3.06(.62)3.11(.76)Prior3.03(.47)3.10(.70)2.42(.46)2.79(.51)2.92(.76)2.97(.76)2.98(.50)2.88(.70)2.71(.62)2.41(.49)2.95(.55)HighHigh2.90(.55)2.79(.49)High2.79(.55)2.77(.44)Prior a 2.79(.64)Prior3.25(.56)2.95(.49)Prior a 3.11(.62)2.97(.49)2.85(.65)2.79(.53)3.08(.55)3.15(.46)3.14(.49)2.98(.50)aA significant time * prior-knowledge interaction, p < 0.05; b a significant time * condition interaction, p < 0.05      With regard to memory and recall, a repeated-measures analysis revealed significant interaction fortime*condition: F(2,186) = 3.20, p = .038, η2p = .033, and for time*prior-knowledge: F(2,186) = 4.19, p = .032, η2p =.043. As seen in Figure 4a, students in the Scaffolded condition associated success with memory and recallduring the mid-survey, that is, right after completing the activity that required them to answer questions.Interestingly, their increased attitudes towards memory and recall remained high also after the second activity,which was Unstructured for all students.With regard to success expectations, the repeated measures ANOVA found a significant time*priorknowledge interaction, F(1.79,166) = 4.94, p = .022, η2p = .05. As seen in Figures 4b,c, students with low priorknowledge began the study much more certain of their ability. However, their confidence dropped after theresistor activity. Students with high prior knowledge showed the exact opposite trend, gaining confidence frompre- to post-survey.                 ###"""!!          !         Figure 4. Significant interactions in the attitudinal dataNo significant interactions were found with regard to the scientific reasoning factor. However, therewas a significant main effect for time, F(2,186) = 13.64, p < .05, η2p = .13.DiscussionOur first research question focuses on the relationship between learning, prior knowledge, and scaffolding. Inaddition to finding a main effect for prior knowledge on learning outcomes, results show a somewhat surprisinginteraction of prior knowledge with condition. In the light-bulb section of the post-test, prior knowledge wasvery helpful for students who worked with the Scaffolded activity, but had no effect on performance amongstudents working with the Unstructured activity. In fact, for students with low prior knowledge, performance onthe Scaffolded condition was lower than the Unstructured condition. This result raises two questions: Why didthe scaffolding help only students with high prior knowledge? And why did prior knowledge help students onlyin the Scaffolded condition?With regard to the first question, only students with high prior knowledge benefited from the givenscaffolding, suggesting that they were better able to infer relationships and generalize scientific rules based onthe questions and diagrams they were given. Rather than limiting their inquiry, the scaffolding was used byhigh-prior students to engage in inquiry with better data. Novice learners, on the other hand, may have beencognitively overloaded by answering questions or filling-in tables so that they did not engage in the higher-orderthinking that the worksheet had charted for them. In this case, it seems that the high scaffolding gave studentswith low prior knowledge a false sense of progress, as they could find values without understanding thepatterns. This result highlights the tension between successful behaviours (i.e., completing the task), andproductive behaviours (i.e., causing learning). While the high-level of scaffolding allowed students with lowICLS 2014 Proceedings883© ISLSprior knowledge to engage in more sophisticated experimentation, it did not support learning. We previouslyfound similar results in learning in a problem solving environment, where hints helped students with low priorknowledge to complete the given problems, but did not improve their chances of succeeding on future problems(Roll et al., 2014). Another clue for the negative (yet insigificant) effect of scaffolding on novice students in thelight-bulb activity may be found in their use of intuitive knowledge. As mentioned above, students could havemade significant use of grounded feedback (light intensity, electron movement, etc). However, the scaffoldingrequired students to use more formal physics and measurement instruments. Thus, pushing students towardsformal notaion and practices may pull them away from their intuitive ideas, and subseuently, hurts theirlearning. This is similar to the effect of equations vs. story problems among novice learners (Koedinger &Nathan, 2004).Interestingly, these results are at odds with the expertise reversal effect (Kalyuga, 2007). While wefound that students with high prior knowledge benefit more from high levels of scaffolding, the expertisereversal effect shows the opposite trend. One explanation for this difference is the given support. Our supportgave students more responsibilities in terms of collecting data and running virtual experiments. Thus, thescaffolding that we used may have led to an increase in students’ cognitive load. Kalyuga (2007), on the otherhand, used worked examples. Thus, that scaffolding reduced students’ cognitive load. Both forms of scaffoldingcan be useful – but apparently, for different populations.The second finding shows that prior knowledge did not improve learning on the light bulb post-test forthose in the Unstructured condition. It is possible that the prior knowledge of the high-prior students was toonarrow and did not prepare them to conduct productive inquiry during this activity. While prior knowledge didnot play a role in the light-bulb activity, it was a significant determinant of learning in the second activity. Giventhat both tasks were isomorphic for the Unstructured condition, why did prior knowledge improve learning inthe resistor activity, but not in the light bulb activity? Notably, the resistor activity requires much better domainknowledge. Thus, the effect of prior knowledge on learning is not surprising. In the light bulb activity, groundedfeedback may have helped low-prior students to overcome their lack of formal disciplinary knowledge.Effect of Condition and Prior Knowledge on AttitudesOur second research question focuses on the relationship between scaffolding, knowledge, and attitudes. Therepeated-measures MANOVA found that all three attitudinal factors changed over time, supporting the notionthat these motivational components are sensitive to contextual features. Interestingly, changes in attitudesgenerally tended to peak at the mid-survey, suggesting that students felt they knew what they needed to do to besuccessful based on their first activity. Perhaps this confidence was fostered by the grounded feedback from thePhET simulation on this activity, as the light bulb activity is much more intuitive than the measurementintensive resistor activity.Divergent patterns of success expectations based on prior knowledge can be noted from figures 4b-c. Inthe beginning, students with low prior knowledge tended to feel that they could navigate a path to success,whereas students with higher prior knowledge were not so confident. This difference in starting points may bedue to a greater familiarity with the content or task demands by more expert students, while students with lowprior knowledge may have suffered the dual burden of being unskilled and unaware (Kruger & Dunning, 1999;Roll et al., 2011). Students in both groups tended to peak at the mid-survey, and then switch trends: studentswith high prior knowledge maintained confidence, whereas more novice students saw a sharp decrease. Thisinteraction may be interpreted as a realignment of success expectations where novice students have now gainedthe experience to adjust success expectations based on a more realistic understanding of the task and theirabilities within the task. Although initial success expectations were not realistic, judging by performance on pretest, students’ expectations at the end of the study seem to reflect their actual knowledge.Interestingly, students with high prior knowledge within the Unstructured condition did not perform aswell on the light bulbs post-test, but did not seem to suffer much in terms of success expectations. Although thispattern may be explained by the pervasive influence of prior knowledge, it also seems to support the notion thatstudents with high prior knowledge in the Unstructured condition had their content knowledge affirmed throughthe online simulation. Rather than pushing themselves to ask more advanced questions, these students appearedto be satisfied with their success and continued prospects for success, without actually making advancements intheir knowledge about light bulbs.Interactions were also noted in the memory and recall factor, where students predicted that they couldbe successful at memorizing information and answering questions. Figures 4a-b indicate significant interactionsof time with condition and with prior knowledge. It is interesting to note that low ability students reported thatthey could be successful at memorizing information and answering questions, even though they did not seem toacquire much content knowledge by answering questions in the Scaffolded condition. Without basic conceptualunderstanding, merely filling in questions or memorizing facts is unlikely to support successful outcomes. Thisfinding seems to support earlier suggestions that novice students, especially within the Scaffolded condition,ICLS 2014 Proceedings884© ISLSmay be more pre-occupied with answering questions than focusing on deeper relationships. In addition, aninquiry activity requires a different kind of thinking than that encouraged by focusing on memory and recall.Last, the interaction between time and condition is especially interesting, as it transfers to the postsurvey, when all students worked with the same activity. Simply put, the level of support on the first activitydetermined students’ attitudes following both the first and the second activity. We can split graph 3a to two:First, in the mid-survey, students who worked with the Scaffolded activity were confident in their ability toremember facts and answer questions. This makes sense, as the activity asked students to do exactly that. Thesecond component of the graph is more surprising. Scaffolded students trusted their ability to remember andanswer also after the resistor activity, and even though that activity was Unstructured for all students. This resultdemonstrates the contextual nature of students’ attitudes, and how attitudes are shaped by experiences andexpectations. At the same time, it also shows some maladaptive behaviour, as Scaffolded students did notreadjust their expectations to the unstructured resistor activity.The study presented above has several limitations. First, the sample size is fairly small. Second,analysis of the attitudinal surveys showed different factors for the pre-, mid-, and post-survey. While we choseonly to use the post-survey distribution to factors, understanding the shift in the factor analysis is of interest.Last, the study relies on self reports and test scores, and lacks process measures. Examining students’ onlinebehaviours and paper materials, and inferring their strategies form these data, would improve our understandingof the effect of scaffolding, prior knowledge, and attitudes on learning (Kardan, Roll, & Conati, 2014).Summary and ImplicationsWe describe a study with 100 post-secondary students using an online simulation for D/C circuits. During thefirst activity, half of the students received a high level of scaffolding (using an elaborate worksheet), while theother half received only learning goals. During the second activity, which was much harder, all studentsreceived only learning goals. Results show that the level of support in the first activity had an effect on students’attitudes in the second activity. Thus, it is important for instructors to realize the contextual nature of successattributions and efficacy, which can work in a cyclical manner to influence learning outcomes (Butler & Cartier,2004).Secondly, results show that while students who received a high level of support benefited from theirprior knowledge, prior knowledge was not helpful in the Unstructured condition. Yet, this was the case only forthe first activity. Learning in the second, and more challenging, activity, benefited significantly from priorknowledge. We hypothesize that students’ intuition and grounded feedback play a role. In the light-bulbactivity, students could engage in productive inquiry using situational cues (such as light intensity and electronspeed). In the resistor activity, learning required the use of virtual measurement instruments, which was muchharder for students with low prior knowledge.Results also show that while the given scaffolding helped students with high prior knowledge, it wasnot effective for students with low prior knowledge. It seems that the scaffolding that we used, and whichfocused on giving students sub-goals and reflection questions, required more technical proficiencies fromstudents, thus, increasing their cognitive load. Also, it may have focused students on values and formalitiesrather than intuitive ideas. As a reminder, this support was modeled after common classroom activities. Thus,intuitions about the utility of different support mechanisms may not be confirmed by data (Koedinger & Nathan,2004). Rather than debating high versus low levels of support, it may be beneficial to identify which support, forwhat tasks, is useful for which learners.ReferencesBandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.Belenky, D. M., & Nokes-Malach, T. J. (2013). Mastery-approach goals and knowledge transfer: Aninvestigation into the effects of task structure and framing instructions. Learning and IndividualDifferences, 25, 21-34.Butler, D. L. (1998). The Strategic Content Learning approach to promoting self-regulated learning: A report ofthree studies. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90(4), 682-97.Butler, D. L., & Cartier, S. C. (2004). Promoting effective task interpretation as an important work habit: A keyto successful teaching and learning. Teachers College Record, 106, 1729-1758.de Jong, T., & van Joolingen, W. R. (1998). Scientific discovery learning with computer simulations ofconceptual domains . Review of Educational Research, 68, 179-201.Graham, S. & Williams, C. (2009). An attributional approach to motivation in school. In K. Wentzel and A.Wigfield (Eds.), Handbook of Motivation at School (pp. 11-33) New York: Routledge.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Golan Duncan, R., & Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaffolding and achievement in problem-basedand inquiry learning: A response to Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark (2006). Educational Psychologist,42(2), 99-107.ICLS 2014 Proceedings885© ISLSHorner, S., & Gaither, S. (2006). Attribution retraining with a second grade class. Early Childhood EducationJournal, 31, 165-170.Kalyuga, S. (2007). Expertise reversal effect and its implications for learner-tailored instruction. EducationalPsychology Review, 19(4), 509-539.Kapur, M. (2008). Productive failure. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3), 379-424.Kardan, Roll, & Conati (2014). The usefulness of log based clustering in a complex simulation environment. InProceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS).Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work:An analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-basedteaching. Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75-86.Koedinger, K. R., & Aleven, V. (2007). Exploring the assistance dilemma in experiments with cognitive tutors.Educational Psychology Review, 19(3), 239-264.Koedinger, K. R., & Nathan, M. J. (2004). The real story behind story problems: Effects of representations onquantitative reasoning. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(2), 129-164.Kruger, J., & Dunning, D. (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How difficulties in recognizing one's ownincompetence lead to inflated self-assessments . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(6),1121-1134.Manlove, S., Lazonder, A. W., & de Jong, T. (2007). Software scaffolds to promote regulation during scientificinquiry learning. Metacognition and Learning, 2, 141-155.Miller, C. S., Lehman, J. F., & Koedinger, K. R. (1999). Goals and learning in microworlds. Cognitive Science:A Multidisciplinary Journal, 23(3), 305-336.Nathan, M. J. (1998). Knowledge and situational feedback in a learning environment for algebra story problemsolving. Interactive Learning Environments, 5(1), 135-159.Rittle-Johnson, B., Star, J. R., & Durkin, K. (2012). Developing procedural flexibility: Are novices prepared tolearn from comparing procedures? British Journal of Educational Psychology, 82(3), 436-55.Roll, I., Aleven, V., & Koedinger, K. R. (2009). Helping students know 'further' - increasing the flexibility ofstudents' knowledge using symbolic invention tasks. In N. A. Taatgen, & H. van Rijn (Eds.),Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. (pp. 1169-74). Austin,TX: Cognitive Science Society.Roll, I., Aleven, V., & Koedinger, K. R. (2011). Metacognitive practice makes perfect: Improving students’self- assessment skills with an intelligent tutoring system. In G. Biswas (Ed.), Proceedings of theInternational conference on artificial intelligence in education (pp. 288-295). Berlin: Springer Verlag.Roll, I., Baker, R.S.J.d., Aleven, V., & Koedinger, K. R. (2014). On the benefits of seeking (and avoiding) helpin online problem solving environment. Journal of the Learning Sciences, DOI:10.1080/10508406.2014.883977Schunk, D. & Pajares, F. (2009). Self-efficacy theory. In K. Wentzel and A. Wigfield (Eds.), Handbook ofMotivation at School. (pp. 35-53) New York: Routledge.Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for future learning: The hidden efficiency ofencouraging original student production in statistics instruction. Cognition and Instruction, 22(2), 129184.Sweller, J., Mawer, R. F., & Ward, M. R. (1988). Development of expertise in mathematical problem solving.Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 112(4), 639-661.Tuovinen, J. E., & Sweller, J. (1999). A comparison of cognitive load associated with discovery learning andworked examples. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91(2), 334-341. doi:10.1037/00220663.91.2.334Vollmeyer, R., Burns, B. D., & Holyoak, K. J. (1996). The impact of goal specificity on strategy use and theacquisition of problem structure. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 20(1), 75-100.doi:10.1207/s15516709cog2001_3Wieman, C. E., Adams, W. K., & Perkins, K. K. (2008). PhET: Simulations that enhance learning. Science,322(5902), 682-683.Wilson, T., & Linville, P. (1982). Improving academic performance of college freshmen: Attribution therapyrevisited. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 367-376.Wise, A. F. & O'Neill, D. K. (2009). Beyond "more" versus "less": A reframing of the debate on instructionalguidance. In S. Tobias, & T. M. Duffy (Eds.) Constructivist instruction: Success or failure? (pp. 82105) New York: Routledge.AcknowledgementsThe work described in this paper is supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council ofCanada (SSHRC) grant #430-2012-0521 and by the Betty and Gordon Moore Foundation. We would like tothank Kathy Perkins, John Blanco, and the PhET project team for their assistanceICLS 2014 Proceedings886© ISLS