Improving Online Collaboration by Fostering Norm-OrientedContent Based Knowledge AwarenessMichail D. Kozlov, Tanja Engelmann and Richard Kolodziej,Knowledge Media Research Center, Schleichstrasse 6, D-72076 Tuebingen, Germanym.kozlov@iwm-kmrc.de, t.engelmann@iwm-kmrc.de, r.kolodziej@iwm-kmrc.deRoy B. Clariana, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA, rbc4@psu.eduAbstract: In transient online groups, fostering awareness about the content of the partners’knowledge from the outset has been shown to facilitate collaboration. A common problem,however, is lack of compatibility of individually designed knowledge representations. Toaddress this problem, in the current study collaborators were given insight into each other’srepresentation construction processes. As expected, the thus generated normalizedrepresentations facilitated the interaction.The Benefits and Challenges of Online CollaborationThe modern convenience of being able to work or learn collaboratively over long distances bears challenges aswell as advantages. For example, according to the information sampling model (Stasser & Titus, 2003) groupstend to discuss information that is shared by all group members, whilst neglecting information that is unshared.It is easy to see then how in a transient group collaborating over long distance crucial information might beneglected and lost; the result being an inferior group effort. In addition, groups need time to establish whoknows what in the group, i.e. to develop a transactive memory system (Wegner, 1986), so that in many cases thecoordination of (mental) labor in the transient online group can be messy, in particular in the early phases of thecollaboration.Content Based Knowledge AwarenessThe Content based Knowledge Awareness approach (CoKA, formerly known as Knowledge and InformationAwareness, KIA) has shown promise in ameliorating these problems (Engelmann, Tergan, & Hesse, 2010). Bygiving collaborators insight into each other’s knowledge content, the approach aims to raise awareness of theentirety of knowledge available to the group so that the chances of unshared knowledge being neglected arereduced (Engelmann & Hesse, 2011). Moreover, through having insight into the collaborators’ knowledgecontent (e.g. summarized in a diagram), group members have an easier time figuring out who knows what; atransactive memory system can thus be quickly established (Schreiber & Engelmann, 2010).While several studies (Engelmann et al., 2010; Engelmann & Hesse, 2011; Schreiber & Engelmann,2010) demonstrate the benefits of providing CoKA, there is the challenge that incompatibilities in knowledgerepresentations tend to emerge when collaborators generate their knowledge summaries individually (e.g.Engelman & Kolodziej, 2012). In order to circumvent this problem, in the current study group members wereprovided not only with insight into each other’s knowledge but also into each other’s knowledge representationgeneration process. It was anticipated that the resulting knowledge representations would be more compatibleand effective in fostering CoKA. This in turn should promote effective collaboration.MethodThe participants in this study were 120 (94 female, 36 male) University of Tübingen students, mean age 23.7(SD = 2.9) who participated for payment. They were grouped into triads. Gender composition of the triads wascontrolled across conditions; aside from this, condition assignment was random.Knowledge content representations were generated in the form of concept maps (Novak & Gowin,1984). All participants received training in using CmapTools, an online tool for concept map creation. Thecollaborative task was to find the ideal pesticide and the ideal fertilizer for a fictitious type of spruce forest beingthreatened by several fictitious pests. This fictitious scenario was chosen to prevent a potential influence of theparticipants’ prior knowledge. The scenario featured 13 concepts (e.g. building spruce, material bug) linkedamongst each other by 30 relations (e.g. material bug severely damages the building spruce).Each participant in a triad received a list of 12 sentences. These sentences represented that participant’sexpert knowledge on the issue. Overlaps in knowledge between participants were kept minimal. Each sentencedescribed two concepts (out of the 13) and a link between them. If transformed into an appropriate concept maprepresentation and combined with the expert knowledge of the other triad members the overall 36 sentencesshared between the collaborators would reveal the ideal solution for the spruce forest problem.During an individual phase, participants in the control condition were tasked with creating a conceptmap of their expert knowledge. Subsequently, in a collaborative phase, the participants had to pool theirICLS 2014 Proceedings1543© ISLSindividual knowledge, generating a joint concept map and solve the spruce forest problem. Importantly, at nopoint did the triad members in the control condition have access to the others’ individual concept maps. Incontrast, participants in the experimental condition were able to view the other group members’ maps during thesilent individual phase as well as later during the collaborative phase. They thus had CoKA.ResultsAs hypothesized the individual concept maps in the CoKA condition were more compatible than in the controlcondition. Three different measures corroborated this. In the CoKA condition individual group members hadless variation in number of correctly depicted concept nodes (CoKA: 1.459, Control: 2.282) and less variation innumber of correctly depicted relations (CoKA: 1.961, Control: 3.387). Both these differences were significant:Welch’s t (29.63) = 2.12, p <.05 and Welch’s t (27.40) = 2.87, p <. 05, for number of correct concepts andnumber of correct relationships, respectively. The third measure was node centrality: In each concept map, acentrality rank was assigned to each concept node. The higher the number of relations emanating from a conceptthe higher its centrality rank. If participants in a group had similar standards for concept map creation, then theyshould have more agreement about the centrality of the concepts from the same category. Thus their centralityrankings should be correlated. Indeed, the centrality rankings within the CoKA group were more correlated thanthe centrality rankings within the control group (Average Z-standardized correlation coefficients for CoKA:0.151, Control: 0.029). This difference was significant, Welch’s t (36.12) = 5.07, p <. 05.Regarding the hypothesis that CoKA with prior insight into the group members’ concept mapconstruction process, it was found that the degree of variability of maps within the groups, as measured by thestandard deviation in the number of correct nodes and the deviation in the number of correct relationships, isnegatively related to group efficiency in the CoKA condition (r = - 0.42; p = .07 and r = - 0.50; p < .05, forcorrect nodes and correct relationships, respectively). This means that groups in the CoKA condition found acorrect solution faster when compatibility of their concept maps was high. No such relationship was found in thecontrol condition (r = - 0.23; n.s. and r = - 0.08; n.s., for correct nodes and correct relationships, respectively).DiscussionThe results of this study indicate that giving collaborators insight into each other’s knowledge representationconstruction does indeed result in more compatible knowledge representations being created. This compatibilityexceeds simple concept overlap and includes the actual form of the representations. While the data is still beinganalyzed, preliminary results indicate that having more compatible knowledge representations of thecollaborators benefits group performance on the task. This is in line with previous results where participantswere a priori provided with compatible knowledge representations and their task performance improved (e.g.Engelmann et al., 2010).The results of this study further support the CoKA approach as a valid tool to facilitate transientinteractions between spatially distributed collaborators. The insight into the partners’ knowledge thatcollaborators using this approach gain at the outset of their interaction permits, amongst others things, a quickestablishment of a transactive memory system (Schreiber & Engelmann, 2010). Having an overview of theknowledge available to the group also makes it less likely that unshared information will be ignored (Engelmann& Hesse, 2011). The present study further increases the ecological validity of the approach, showing that withinsight into each other’s knowledge representation creation, collaborators are capable of creating sufficientlycompatible knowledge representations, which can foster CoKA and thus improve the collaborative effort.ReferencesEngelmann, T. & Hesse, F. W. (2011). Fostering sharing of unshared knowledge by having access to thecollaborators’ meta-knowledge structures. Computers in Human Behavior, 27, 2078-2087.Engelmann, T. & Kolodziej, R. (2012). Do virtual groups recognize situations in which it is advantageous tocreate digital concept maps? In A. Cañas, J.D. Novak. & J. Vanhear (Eds.), Concept Maps: theory,methodology, technology. Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Concept Mapping (Vol.1, pp. 172-179). Malta: University of Malta.Engelmann, T., Tergan, S.-O. & Hesse, F.W. (2010). Evoking KIA for enhancing computer-supportedcollaborative problem solving. The Journal of Experimental Education, 78, 1-20.Novak, J. D. & Gowin, D.B. (1984). Learning how to learn. New York: Cambridge University Press.Schreiber, M. & Engelmann, T. (2010). KIA for initiating transactive memory system processes of computersupported collaborating ad hoc groups. Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 1701-1709.Stasser, G. & Titus, W. (2003). Hidden profiles: A brief history. Psychological Inquiry, 14, 304-313.Wegner, D. M. (1986). Transactive memory: A contemporary analysis of the group mind. In B. Mullen & G. R.Goethals (Eds.), Theories of group behaviour (pp. 185-208). New York: Springer.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1544© ISLS