Collaborative Hypothesis-Building Using Immersive VirtualEnvironments for Ecosystems ScienceShari Metcalf, Harvard Graduate School of Education, shari_metcalf@harvard.eduAmy Kamarainen, New York Hall of Science, akamarainen@nysci.org,Tina Grotzer and Chris Dede, Harvard Graduate School of Education,tina_grotzer@harvard.edu, chris_dede@harvard.eduAbstract: EcoMUVE is a middle school science curriculum in which students explore animmersive virtual ecosystem and learn its causal dynamics through collaborative inquiryactivities. Students work in teams of four to construct hypotheses about the relationships in thevirtual ecosystem, using as evidence the data and observations collected through their virtualexperiences. An analysis of the audio files of four teams demonstrates the ways in which theirlearning processes are situated within the virtual world.IntroductionEcoMUVE (http://ecomuve.gse.harvard.edu) is a curriculum for middle school students to learn about complexcausal relationships in ecosystems simulated by Multi-User Virtual Environments (MUVEs). EcoMUVEsupports situated learning, in which students learn through being immersed in a richly represented ecologicalsetting. Students work in teams to observe the environment, collect physical, chemical, and population data, andtalk to digital characters, in order to solve a virtual mystery. This study articulates how students’ experiences inthis context aid in their collaborative concept mapping activities.Student engagement in scientific practices is a central theme in the Next Generation Science Standards.Integral aspects of scientific practice include understanding the nature of evidence, using scientific arguments,and interpreting data related to scientific claims (Achieve 2013). The literature on collaborative conceptmapping has found that this representational structure shows promise as an effective mechanism to supportstudents constructing representations of their conceptual understanding, as well as fostering sustained smallgroup discussion about scientific ideas and deeper understanding through discourse and evidence-basedarguments (Novak, 1990; Roth et al., 1994; Sizmur & Osborne, 1997).Multi-user virtual environments (MUVEs) have been demonstrated to be useful tools for scienceeducation (e.g., Barab et al., 2005; Clark et al, 2009; Ketelhut et al., 2010). In the design of EcoMUVE, we drawon Reiser’s (2004) characterization of scaffolding by software tools, which can support learning by structuringthe learning task, and drawing student attention to important aspects of the phenomena being represented andkey questions to solve. MUVEs can provide scaffolding through visualizations that highlight salient features,can simulate data collection and analysis tools, and can display multiple representations of phenomena (forexample, scientific processes represented at both macro and micro levels). These design features are intended tofacilitate student learning and to draw attention to important aspects of the phenomena being represented.MethodsEcoMUVE Pond is a two week, inquiry-based curriculum unit centered on a virtual pond and the surroundingwatershed. Students explore the pond and its biodiversity, and travel in time to see changes over the course of avirtual summer. They discover a fish kill, and are tasked with figuring out why it happened. Students makeobservations, shrink to view microscopic organisms, and track individual atoms. They collaborate in teams tocollect and share water, weather, and population data, as well as to graph changes in the data over time. Theyconstruct and present to the class an evidence-based concept map that represents their hypotheses of theecosystem relationships. To look at students’ collaborative hypothesis-building, we conducted a case study of ateacher and four classes of 7th grade students, ages 12-13, while they used the module. One team in each classwas randomly selected to be audiotaped for 4 days during their collaborative activities (N=16).FindingsFacilitated Observations and Inferences via Situated Learning in the Virtual WorldStudents perform observation and data collection tasks while immersed in the MUVE. In this example, studentseasily travel in time, and attend to salient visual features of the ecosystem:S3: Guys, on July 6th it’s raining. I don’t know if that has to do with anything, about like the nitrates andphosphates.S1: Record that. Record it was raining. Cause that makes things grow. And the water, just by looking at it, itlooks green.S2: Yeah, it got disgusting.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1579© ISLSS1: On August 15, too, it’s pretty bad.S3: Yeah, it has a lot of chlorophyll.Multiple Forms of MUVE-Based Evidence Used in Constructing HypothesesTypes of evidence students used from the MUVE included perceptual information (e.g., noticing the pondturning green, above), data viewed in tables and graphs, reference tools such as the atom tracker or online fieldguide, and testimony from characters in the world. In this example, students draw from all of these:S5: Oh you guys! When I was tracking carbon… On the 10th, there was a lot of bacteria, and on then 16ththey took in oxygen. So I think that’s also why some of the fish died because if there is an increase numberof bacteria on the 28th they’re taking in even more oxygen which is also making the fish die. And also theminnows eat a lot and so that was a lot of oxygen and they’re giving out a lot of carbon dioxide andminnows tend to eat small things like bacteria and algae so …S6: Yeah. What about the guy with the fertilizer? Do you think it could have run off the golf course? Wait,the day before the 28th - I think it was the 25th, the day before the 28th that you were allowed to measure it was raining and that guy had the fertilizer and was putting it on the golf course and maybe the rainwashed the fertilizer down into the lake and that killed all the fish!Collaborative Hypotheses with Concept Maps and MUVE-Based EvidenceStudents’ final concept maps were part of a group poster that included a written description of their hypothesis,and printouts of evidence from the world. Figure 1 shows one group’s poster, which includes printouts of graphsand tables, as well as “our key piece of evidence” printed from the in-world field guide.Figure 1. Student poster and example of evidence.DiscussionEcoMUVE places students in a richly immersive context with many learning resources. Findings presented heresuggest EcoMUVE scaffolds student use of perceptual information, data, reference materials, and testimony inservice of building collaborative explanations of ecosystems phenomena represented in the virtual environment.ReferencesBarab, S., Thomas, M., Dodge, T., Carteaux, R., & Tuzun, H. (2005). Making learning fun: Quest Atlantis, agame without guns. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(1), 86–107.Clark, D., Nelson, B., Sengupta, P & D’Angelo, C. (2009, October). Rethinking science learning through digitalgames and simulations: Genres, examples, and evidence, National Research Council, Committee forLearning Science: Computer Games, Simulations, and Education Workshop.Ketelhut, D. J., Nelson, B. C., Clarke, J. E., & Dede, C. (2010). A multi-user virtual environment for buildingand assessing higher order inquiry skills in science. British Journal of Educational Technology 41(1).Novak, J. D. (1990). Concept mapping: A useful tool for science education. Journal of research in scienceteaching, 27(10), 937-949.Reiser, B. J. (2004). Scaffolding complex learning: The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing studentwork. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 273-304.Roth, W. M. & Roychoudhury, A. (1994). Science discourse through collaborative concept mapping: newperspectives for the teacher, International Journal of Science Education, 16:4, 437-455Sizmur, S. & Osborne, J. (1997) Learning processes and collaborative concept mapping, International Journal ofScience Education, 19:10, 1117-1135ICLS 2014 Proceedings1580© ISLS