Kinecting in Physics:Student Conceptualization of Motion Through VisualizationJanice Anderson and Steven Wall, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hillanderjl@email.unc.edu, sdwall@live.unc.eduAbstract: The purpose of this study is to share findings associated with using a Kinect® togenerate large-scale visualization that served as a mechanism for student learning of physics.We explored the development of student comprehension of motion and examined thedevelopment of students’ communication of these concepts to others. We examined theaffordances of Kinect® in pedagogical practices, looking at how the hardware can be used tobetter scaffold student learning of physics.The Major IssueSecondary students often have ideas about science concepts that are disconnected. One way to overcomethese conceptual challenges is through the use of computer games and simulations that have thecapability of immersing students in the study of unfamiliar scientific concepts (e.g. NRC 2011). Studentsoften play virtual games and, through their play, develop tacit understandings of topics such as velocityand acceleration. However, gaming practices are not designed to provide opportunities f o r studentarticulation o f Newtonian P h y s i c s or to extend the ideas that emerge. Though this is a challenge,research suggests (e.g. Masson et al. 2011) that the scaffolding of games and simulations can be used tosupport learning (Gee 2008). These simulations also have the potential to support students in integratinginstructed knowledge with their tacit conceptual knowledge (NRC 2011), when the specific design of asimulation allows students to make choices that affects the models or visual images that are beinggenerated. By using visualizations students can begin to integrate discrete ideas, allowing them to begin tomake connections (Linn & Eylon, 2006) with complex scientific content that is represented throughobservable, unwritten representations. Studies, (e.g. Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2010) demonstrate that wheninstruction includes the students’ co-construction of knowledge, students feel empowered to takeownership of their learning. The Xbox Kinect represents a new type of digital tool that can potentiallystrengthen these social interactions and embodied experiences in physics classrooms (Tolentino et al., 2009).One way in which this can occur is through the representation of dynamic processes at multiple spatialresolutions (Tolentino et al., 2009). By using the Kinect, students can move between multiple levels ofabstraction (Megowan, 2007). This study examined the use of 3D simulation to support the teaching ofNewton’s Laws of Motion in a secondary physics classroom. Recognizing the affordances of embodimentand spatial resolution of this technology, our study aimed to identifying factors that allow Kinect simulationsto increase student participation while simultaneously challenging them in their conceptualization ofscience content. Specifically: How can the Xbox Kinect be used in pedagogically valuable ways toscaffold instruction in Newtonian physics?Context, Methods and AnalysisUsing a design based research methodology (Brown, 1992), this study has completed two iterative cycles.These were conducted at rural schools located in the Southeastern United States. Participants includedsecondary students in a physical science class (n= 24). During each cycle, students were engaged in aunit on kinematics with a specific focus on displacement, velocity, and acceleration. As part of the designedimplementation for each iteration, the students received instruction that included a series of stations withinquiry based learning. Each station allowed students to explore specific concepts related to kinematics. Theseactivities encouraged student learning in two ways: 1) understanding of basic concepts associated withkinematics and 2) the transfer of conceptual understanding from one context to another. In addition to thesestations, the experimental groups had an additional station that involved using the Kinect. Student transfer ofconceptual understanding was then challenged through the use of large-scale visualization andcommunication to their peers of ideas associated with kinematics. During the first iterative cycle, datawas collected from three primary sources: visual data using the Kinect, classroom observations, andinterviews with the students. In the second iterative cycle, data was collected from four sources: akinematic assessment, visual data (both traditional and Kinect generated), observations, and studentinterviews. The quantitative data was analyzed using descriptive statistics only because of a small samplesize. The qualitative data collected to date has been analyzed using naturalistic methods to examine howlearning unfolded during the use of the Kinect in the classroom. Using the constant-comparative method(Glaser & Strauss, 1967), researchers generated assertions from the data, consulting field notes and interviewdata to search for supporting and disconfirming evidence.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1641© ISLSResultsIterative Cycle I: Observations of activity with the Kinect revealed that students had basic understandings ofkinematics with one and two objects. Though comprehension was present, interviews revealed that the graphsbeing generated during the exercise resulted in some confusion. For example, when plotting acceleration, theKinect® registered acceleration of the body movement. Because the visualization extrapolated information frommultiple data points, the students had difficulty unpacking what was occurring. Their discourse also did notreflect that they were making sense of their observations. Instead of trying to understand the zig-zag linesgenerated by the multiple data points the students often stopped. For example, Brad, in the post interview statedthe following: “I was like, why is it doing this? It doesn’t look like a graph for velocity should.”Iterative Cycle II: Data and observations from this iterative cycle demonstrated that students have apreference for visual learning. In the interviews, one student noted, “I feel that seeing is the best way to learn. Iwould like to see it and then learn it.” This was a common theme throughout the interviews. Students madesense of their data through their comparisons of the Kinect data with graphs generated in the inquiry stations.The differences found in the graphing mechanisms seemed to contribute to students’ lack of conceptualunderstanding. This was supported by the quantitative findings that showed the experimental group scoringlower than the control group. This indicates that further scaffolding and support structures are needed in the nextdesign cycle that will help students to work through the visualization and eliminate the potentialmisconceptions.ConclusionsThe use of the Kinect® did generate large-scale visualizations and hands-on interactions that served as amechanism for student learning, and an analysis of the data demonstrated rudimentary evidence of thedevelopment in student comprehension of motion. The students were also engaged in recursive activitiesassociated with design-based learning and specific learning objectives, and, as a result of the structure of theactivity, were beginning to develop a level of communication related to the concepts being taught.The Kinect® presented numerous possibilities for learning, yet initial results have revealed that a highdegree of scaffolding is still relevant to student success with conceptualization and communication of the data.We believed that the Kinect® afforded a number of opportunities for the development of knowledgeconstruction. Yet, because of the challenges associated with presenting understandings that the students werenot fully comfortable with, we did not see major advancements in student learning that we had hoped to see.However, we do believe that given the right scaffolding in the next iterative cycle, the Kinect® can be used as away to encourage student learning by focusing on conceptual understanding through the use of content. Theinitial efforts of the students showed the beginning of this idea as the students were challenging their academicpeers to solve problems in reverse, e.g. “What does this image represent?” or “Can you emulate it?” Where thisactivity fell short was that students’ were not asking their peers to make connections between establishedlearning goals and what they were observing and doing. Though we have not yet established ideal use, webelieve these findings will continue to refine the practices and implications of digital gaming and simulations,such as Kinect®, as an instructional tool for the development of student comprehension in kinematicsReferencesBereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2010). Can children really create knowledge? Canadian Journal of LearningTechnology/La revue canadienne de l'apprentissage et del la technologie, 36(1).Brown, A. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141–178.Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2008). Basics of Qualitative Research: Technique and Procedures for DevelopingGrounded Theory (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, Inc.Gee, J. P. (2008). Learn and games. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Glaser, B.G. & Strauss, A.L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago, IL: Aldine Publishing.Linn, M., & Eylon, B. (2006). Science Education: integrating views of learning and instruction. In P. Winne(Ed.), Handbook of educational psychology (2nd ed.). London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Masson, M., Bub, D., & LaLonde, C. (2011). Video-game training and naive reasoning about object motion.Applied Cognitive Psychology, 25(1), 166-173.Megowan, C. (2007). Framing discourse for optimal learning in science and mathematics. Ph.D. Dissertation,College of Education,Division of Curriculum and Instruction, Tempe, AZ.NRC. (2011). Simulations and games in the classrom. In Honey, MA, Hilton, M. (Eds.) Learning sciencethrough computer games andsimulations. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Torentino, L., Birchfield, D., Megowan-Romanowicz, C., Johnson-Glenber,M.C., Kelliher, A., & Marinez, C.(2009). Teaching and learning in the mixed-reality science classroom. Journal of Science Educationand Technology, 18:501-517ICLS 2014 Proceedings1642© ISLS