Design CharrettesA design charrette is an intensive, collaborative experience that brings together stakeholders todevelop a shared understanding of the diverse needs a design must meet, and to brainstormpossible ways to address those needs through engaging directly in design. It is a fast-movingexperience that involves “thinking with your hands” and pushes the boundaries of how weexpect to interact with our colleagues around research and development. Participant-designersare tasked with developing models, experiences, objects or materials that address particulargoals, constraints, and scenarios of use. Whole group and sub-groups engage in design-basedactivities that can include hands-on modeling, role-play, story boarding, etc. Ideas underdevelopment are presented and discussed throughout the session to promote discussion andinnovation.Designing for Student Agency and Authority around Issues of Climate ChangeVictoria Hand, CU-BoulderLeilah Lyons, University of Illinois at ChicagoChrystalla Mouza, University of DelawareElizabeth Walsh, San José State University)Description: The effects of climate change may be most profoundly felt starting ten years from now. Today'syoung people, then, will be the primary inheritors of these effects. In response, organizations are investingresources in opportunities for youth to take action in political and social spheres around climate and pollution(e.g., Green Ninja; UN Children, Youth and Climate Change; Energy Action Coalition). This design charrettewill contribute to this effort by drawing on powerful media and educational resources to develop materials forcivic engagement of middle school students. The design process will involve high school students and learningscientists in activities that that inspire creative and systems-level thinking around climate change. High schoolstudents will be positioned as key contributors to this process.The Learning Theater: Designing a Flexible Reconfigurable Space forAmbitious Learning and Teaching on CampusGary Natriello, Columba UniversityHui Soo Chae, Columbia UniversityDescription: A renewed interest in experimentation with new forms and formats for learning and teaching oncollege and university campuses is creating pressure to re-think the spaces available for students and faculty tocome together for learning. Projects as diverse as the ASU Decision Theater (http://dt.asu.edu) the MIT TEALProject(http://web.mit.edu/edtech/casestudies/teal.html),andtheLearningSpaceToolkit(http://learningspacetoolkit.org/) illustrate the growing spirit of experimentation that is driving the creation orrenovation of spaces intended for learning. All too often learning scientists are brought into such projects late inthe design and development process or not at all. This design charrette will engage learning scientists in thedesign of a space to support ambitious learning and teaching.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1709© ISLS