Characterizing Teachers’ Support of Modeling Practicesin Science ClassroomsDeborah Peek-Brown, Shawn Stevens, LeeAnn Sutherland, Sung-Youn Choi, and Namsoo Shin,University of Michigan, 610 E University, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109dpbrown@umich.edu, sstevens@umich.edu, lsutherl@umich.edu, choisung@umich.edu, namsoo@umich.eduJoseph Krajcik, Michigan State University, 114 Erickson Hall, East Lansing MI, 48824, krajcik@msu.eduAbstract: Modeling used, as an inquiry tool is critical to the development of understandingsin science. Teacher knowledge of this use of models impacts their development of learningexperiences for students. This study focuses on teacher modeling practices and relates them tostudent performance on assessment items requiring interpretations of multiple representations.This characterization of teacher practices will provide insight into the learning experiencesneeded for students to engage in authentic scientific modeling.The practice of building, refining and redesigning models based on evidence lies at the core of scientificpractice. It drives scientific discoveries as scientists use models to guide experimental design, test variables, andgenerate hypotheses. (Windschitl, 2006) According to the Framework for K-12 Science Education (NRC, 2012)and the College Board Standards for Success in College (CB, 2009) these ideas play a critical role in thedevelopment of scientific ideas and understanding in students. While in the classroom, models are traditionallyused by teachers to present “correct” information to students, the power of modeling as a tool for inquiry andexploration is not often employed. (Justi, 2002)In order to foster the scientific practice of modeling in students we must better understand how teacherscurrently use modeling in the classroom. In this study, we will be to characterize teacher practice with regard tomodeling and explore the relationship to student performance on science assessment items that require modelingskills including the interpretation, evaluation and critique of models and representations.FrameworkDeveloping a learning environment that supports students in creating and using models requires a complex setof knowledge and skills. Teachers make instructional decisions based on their pedagogical content knowledge(PCK). When teachers lack sufficient knowledge about scientific modeling they are unable to make the type ofinstructional decisions necessary to support students’ understanding. In the classroom, the educative power ofmodels and modeling is commonly underestimated. Traditionally, the teacher uses models to presentinformation to students. For example, in their study of the beliefs of experienced secondary science teachers,van Driel and Verloop (2002) found that many teachers generally focused only on the descriptive function ofmodels and ignored the predictive power of models and the use of modeling as a scientific practice.Teachers’ orientation toward teaching science can also influence their instructional choices aroundmodeling. This orientation reflects the pedagogical knowledge teachers’ use to manage and organize classroomactivities. These general principles are another important aspect of PCK (Shulman, 1986). van Driel andVerloop (2002) found some teachers chose a teacher directed approach using models as a tool to focus on thecontent. Other teachers used a more constructivist approach, encouraging students to design and build models toform explanations. The latter is more consistent with by the national standards (NRC, 2012; CB, 2009).MethodsThis study is a part of a larger project focused on measuring students’ progress along a hypothetical learningprogression related to transformations in matter. Our study included 13 middle school science teachers from 5different schools. The schools included public, private and charter schools in urban and suburban settings. Theapproximately 1600 students varied in race, ethnicity, and SES (15%-52% free and reduced lunch).Students from each school were tested at the beginning (Fall 2010) and end (Spring 2011) of the schoolyear. We estimated students' latent ability parameter based on item response theory (IRT, Wilson, 2005)analysis and calculated the change in student mean ability levels for each teacher. For this study we alsocompared students’ gains on items that required students to use modeling skills with disciplinary knowledge.Data related to individual teacher enactment was collected through classroom observations andsurveys. We electronically collected surveys from teachers using Survey Monkey. Survey questions related toteachers’ backgrounds and their teaching practices, which included use of modeling and inquiry strategies. Weconducted multiple classroom observations to characterize teacher practice and the instructional experiences ofstudents. We used an ethnographic approach that focused on creating detailed descriptions of classroomactivities using a running record. Running records were coded using a coding matrix that focused on types andICLS 2014 Proceedings1635© ISLSpurposes of modeling activities in the classroom (Peek-Brown, 2013). For inter-rater reliability, two teammembers independently scored at least 10% of the data and reached 90% or greater agreement with 100%agreement after discussion.Results and DiscussionIn order to characterize teacher practices that might be related to student performance on assessment itemsrelated to modeling preliminary analysis of data was limited to two teachers (Creed and Dorsey) from the sameschool that teach the same grade. Their curriculum materials emphasize engaging students in the practice ofmodeling and support students in relating observed phenomena to the unseen processes that occur at themolecular level (development of a particulate model of matter).Despite similarities in population and curriculum materials, differences in student performance wereobserved. Dorsey’s students performed better on more complex items that require applying disciplinaryknowledge and interpreting, evaluating or critiquing representations. For five of eight items focusing oninterpreting molecular level representations, Dorsey’s students performed better than Creed’s students.Preliminary analysis of teacher data provides insight into the source of the observed differences instudent performance. In the survey Dorsey reported regularly using modeling strategies during instruction, whileCreed reported rarely using modeling even though modeling practices are an integral part of the curriculum.Observational data was consistent with the survey data. Dorsey had 19% more instances of modelingrelated activities than Creed. The majority of observed modeling activities in Creed’s class were student driven(88% of coded references). A more balanced approach was observed in Dorsey’s class with 46% of the codedreferences being teacher driven, 38% student driven and 16% collaborations between the teacher and students.Although these results would seem to indicate that Creed’s students spent more time engaged in activelybuilding their own models, a closer look at their modeling experiences suggests differently. For example, bothclasses were observed engaging in a modeling activity where students built molecules from gumdrops. Bothteachers used the same lessons from the curriculum however the focus of their lessons was very different. Creedgave students directions as to how to build their models, but gave very little explanation as to why they werebuilding them. In contrast, Dorsey engaged students in relating the model and the actual object in order to helpstudents understand the limitations and the purpose of building different models.Although both teachers participated in identical professional development activities around theselessons Creed did not seem to recognize the development of modeling skills as an important aspect of the lesson.This lack of understanding may have contributed to the instructional decisions that she made. Further supportingdata from student assessments and data for other teachers in the study will be included in the poster.ImplicationsAs the field moves toward the goal of supporting students in coherently developing understanding of corescience concepts blended with scientific practices, learning research is needed to gain insight into how toeffectively support teachers in meeting these goals. By characterizing teachers’ practice related to modeling andlinking it to student progress along a learning progression performance, this study contributes to that effort.ReferencesPeek-­‐Brown,	   Choi,	   Sánchez,	   Stevens,	   Shin,	   Krajcik, (2013). Poster presented at the National Association forResearch in Science Teaching Annual Conference, San Juan, Puerto Rico.College Board, The, College board standards for college success. New York: The College Board, 2009.Justi, R. S. and Gilbert, John K. (2002)., Science teachers’ knowledge about and attitudes towards the use ofmodels and modeling in learning science, International Journal of Science Education 24(12)National Research Council NRC (2012). A Framework for K–12 Science Education. Washington, D.C.:National Academy Press.Shulman, L. S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2)van Driel, J., & Verloop, N. (2002). Experienced teachers' knowledge of teaching and learning of models andmodelling in science education International Journal Of Science Education 24 (12): 1255-1272Wilson, M. (2005). Constructing measures: An Item response modeling approach. Mahwah, New Jersey:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Windschitl, M. and Thompson, J. (2006) Transcending simple school science investigations: can pre-serviceinstruction foster teachers” understandings of model-based inquiry? American Educational ResearchJournal, 43 (4): 783-835AcknowledgmentsThis work was funded by the National Science Foundation (grant number 0822038). Any opinions expressed inthis work are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the funding agency.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1636© ISLS