Development of an Empirically-Based Learning PerformancesFramework for 3rd-Grade Students’ Model-Based Explanationsabout Hydrologic CyclingCory T. Forbes, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68583, cforbes3@unl.eduChristina Schwarz, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, cschwarz@msu.eduLaura Zangori, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68583, laura.zangori@huskers.unl.eduAbstract: Elementary students should engage in the articulation, negotiation, and revision ofmodel-based explanations. However, scientific modeling remains underemphasized inelementary science learning environments and more research is needed to understand earlylearners’ engagement in domain-specific modeling practices. To address this need, we areengaged in design-based research to foster and investigate 3rd-grade students’ model-basedexplanations for hydrologic phenomena. First, we developed an empirically-based learningperformances framework that integrates relevant science content and modeling practices. Thisframework a) grounds the iterative adaptation and enhancement of a commonly-usedcurricular unit and b) lays the foundation for ongoing development of an associated learningprogression. Second, we report on findings from analysis of 3rd-grade students’ model-basedexplanations around the water cycle. Results indicate that elementary students generatemechanism-based causal claims and highlight target concepts and modeling practicesemphasized in students’ model-based explanations for hydrologic cycling.Study Rationale and ContributionTo become scientifically-literate, students must learn to reason about complex, global issues such as waterresource management and sustainability at an early age (American Association for the Advancement of Science[AAAS], 2007; National Research Council [NRC], 2012; 2007). Early learners’ understanding of the nature ofwater, how it cycles and changes state, and its relationship to human activities, are all necessary to help themmake sense of everyday experiences and to serve as a foundation for their learning about other Earth systemsand water-related global issues with scientific, social, and economic dimensions. However, past research hasshown that early learners often struggle to understand hydrologic phenomena (e.g., Bar, 1989; Henriques, 2002).Elementary students therefore need greater support for learning about hydrologic systems.To develop conceptual understanding of hydrologic systems, students must engage in theory-drivenscientific practices focused on the articulation, negotiation, and revision of model-based explanations (Braaten& Windschitl, 2011; NRC, 2007; Windschitl, Thompson, & Braaten, 2008). Modeling is a core scientificpractice advocated in the Next Generation Science Standards (NRC, 2012) in which models, or workingrepresentations of complex natural systems, are used to reason scientifically about system-specific phenomena.Modeling practices, however, remain underemphasized in K-12 science, particularly in the elementary grades,despite growing evidence that, with scaffolding, elementary students can effectively engage in scientificpractices (Hapgood, Magnusson, & Palinscar, 2004; Hardy, Jonen, Möller, & Stern, 2006; Herrenkohl &Cornelius, 2013; Lehrer & Schauble, 2006; Manz, 2012; Metz, 2004; McNeill, 2011). Investigations ofelementary students’ model-based reasoning, particularly about the water cycle, are largely absent from theliterature. More research is therefore needed to inform the design of elementary science learning environmentsthat afford students opportunities to develop and use models to formulate explanations.To begin to address these issues in the field, we are engaged in three years of exploratory research anddevelopment to foster and investigate 3rd-grade students’ model-based explanations about the water cycle. Wedraw upon work on scientific modeling (Lehrer & Schauble, 2006; Schwarz et al., 2009; Windschitl, Thompson,& Braaten, 2008), content- and practice-based learning progressions (Alonzo & Steedle, 2008; Lee & Liu, 2010;Mohan, Chen, & Anderson, 2009; Stevens, Delgado, & Krajcik, 2010), and heuristics for curriculum materialsdevelopment (Krajcik, McNeill, & Reiser, 2007; Shin, Stevens, & Krajcik, 2010) to articulate a domain-specificstudent learning performance framework that integrates science content and scientific practice (i.e., modeling).Such learning performances are critical to ground the design of curricular, instructional, and assessmentdimensions of classroom interventions. In this paper, we report on work from Year 1 of the project: a) theempirical development of learning performances and b) analysis of student artifacts to investigate their use ofmodels to formulate evidence-based explanations for hydrologic cycling. We ask two research questions: 1)what are measureable levels of 3rd-grade students’ model-based explanations about water? and 2) how do 3rdgrade students formulate model-based explanations for target concepts related to water? This workforegrounds elementary students’ learning as constituent component of their discipline-specific epistemicpractices and therefore exemplifies the ICLS 2014 conference theme of ‘learning and becoming in practice’.ICLS 2014 Proceedings46© ISLSTheoretical FrameworkStudents’ Model-Based ReasoningThe hydrologic cycle is a foundational model-based scientific concept highlighted throughout the K-12 sciencecurriculum (AAAS, 2007; NRC, 2012). Models are defined as abstracted, multi-modal representations ofnatural systems, not exact recreations, which are used within communities to illustrate, predict, and explainsystem-specific scientific phenomena. They are used extensively by hydrologists, climate scientists,meteorologists, and soil scientists to make predictions about, investigate, and explain hydrologic cycling. Pastresearch has shown, however, that students possess a diverse set of pre-existing ideas about hydrologicphenomena, ideas that are often times inconsistent with scientific explanations (e.g., Bar, 1989; Henriques,2002). Model-based investigative practices can support students in constructing, negotiating, and revisingexplanations for scientific phenomena in a variety of scientific disciplines. Students’ construction, evaluation,and revision of models of hydrologic cycling can help them make their thinking visible, but such models alsoserve to shape their reasoning about water systems through use. As such, models act as both representationsand tools, not only serving as records or artifacts of sense-making activity, but also playing a critical role inshaping reasoning activity itself. Past research has shown that elementary students often have difficultyengaging in model-based reasoning around scientific phenomena (Lehrer & Schauble, 2006; Schwarz et al.,2009). They may emphasize singular events or phenomena in their models rather than interacting systems. Evenwhen students do focus on broader systems, they may not connect system-specific phenomena to empirical data.While developmental limitations are often viewed as obstacles to young students’ learning, the authors ofTaking Science to School (NRC, 2007) note that “young children have a repertoire of cognitive capacitiesdirectly related to many aspects of scientific practice, and it is problematic to view these simply as a productof…development” (pg. 44). Recent empirical research provides evidence that, with scaffolding, early learnerscan engage productively in scientific modeling (Lehrer & Schauble, 2006; Manz, 2012).An Integrated Learning Performances Framework for Model-Based ExplanationsA comprehensive framework is required to both foster and assess students’ formulation of model-basedexplanations in effectively-designed elementary science learning environments. Empirically-tested learningprogressions have been developed to account for students’ conceptual understanding in various content domains(e.g., Alonzo & Steedle, 2008; Lee & Liu, 2010; Mohan, Chen, & Anderson, 2009; Stevens, Delgado, &Krajcik, 2010). However, knowing and doing are mutually constitutive – what the learner knows influenceswhat he/she does, and vice versa. The practice-based nature of learning is encapsulated by learningperformances (Krajcik, McNeill, & Reiser, 2007; Shin et al., 2010), or behavioral claims that specify howstudents engage in scientific practices to employ their conceptual knowledge. A learning progression iscomprised of individual learning performances that represent domain-specific scientific practices. The learningprogressions community has begun to acknowledge the need for learning progressions that not only account forstudents’ conceptual understanding, but also their engagement in scientific practices (e.g., Schwarz et al., 2009;Shin et al., 2010). While a small number of researchers have explored practice-based learning progressions,including those for elementary students’ modeling practice and model-based reasoning (Lehrer & Schauble,2006; Schwarz et al., 2009), much more work is needed to articulate practice-based learning progressions thataccount for BOTH epistemic and conceptual dimensions of elementary students’ domain-specific learning.We have generated a hypothetical learning performances framework for students’ use of scientificmodels to formulate explanations for target concepts around the big idea that all geosystems are the result ofenergy flow and mass cycling (AAAS, 2007; NRC, 2012). As related to water, the three concepts underlyingthe big idea targeted in this project are water exists in different forms below, at, and above the Earth’s surface(Concept 1); water on Earth is in motion and cycles at a global scale (Concept 2); and the cyclical movement ofwater on Earth shapes and impacts the geosphere (Concept 3). Students are afforded opportunities to generateand use models of the water cycle to formulate evidence-based explanations for each of these concepts.Epistemic dimensions of scientific explanation include components, sequence, explanatory process, mapping,and principle (Schwarz et al., 2009). The learning performances framework is shown in Table 1.Table 1: Learning performances framework for students’ model-based explanations about hydrologic cyclingComponentsSequenceExplanatoryProcessMappingPrinciple(1) Forms of waterThe properties of water enableit to exist in 3 forms - liquid,vapor/gas, and ice – dependingon temperature. Temperatureaffects the state of water. Thisrelationship explains whyICLS 2014 Proceedings(2) Water in motionThe cyclic motion ofwater above, on, andwithin the Earth islargely determined bythe force of gravity andgeospheric components47(3) Water/geosphere interactionsJust as water’s movement isinfluenced by the geosphere,water in turn shapes the geosphereas it moves over and through it.Many landforms and geosphericfeatures we observe everyday are© ISLSComponentsSequenceExplanatoryProcessMappingPrinciplewater is found all over theEarth in different forms.with which waterinteracts.a result of these processes.Together, these features comprise mechanism-based explanations (Braaten & Windschitl, 2011; NRC,2012) for water-related phenomena. The framework in Table 1 foregrounds how students attend to scientific‘mechanisms’, or the “unobservable, theoretical components” (Braaten & Windschitl, 2011, p. 662) that bringabout an observable effect. The components feature emphasizes both visible and non-visible elements of thephenomena. Sequences establish temporal relations between system sub-processes. Explanatory processemphasizes mechanisms that explain process sequences. Principle involves a generalization about thephenomena that relates to abstracted components of the model. Finally, mapping emphasizes explicit statementsthat explain how the representation or components in the representation relates to the physical phenomenon. Amodel-based explanation occurs when students use systems representations to build on their existing knowledgeto understand ‘how’ and ‘why’ they observed what they did (e.g. the mechanism). Consistent with this view, thepurpose of explanation construction in the science classroom is for students to make sense of how the worldworks by connecting the cause and effect of natural phenomena with its underlying mechanism (explanation).MethodThe 3-year project is grounded in design-based empirical research. Empirical findings are used in an iterativemanner to inform the design and implementation of curricular and instruction interventions to foster students’construction of model-based explanations about water.Participants and ContextIn Year 1 of the project, six 3rd-grade elementary teachers were recruited from schools in a Midwestern state.179 eligible 3rd-grade teachers taught kit-based elementary science curriculum materials provided and managedby a regional educational services unit (ESU). Project teachers were selected using purposeful, maximumvariation sampling (Patton, 2001) in consultation with ESU staff to identify experienced teachers from urban,rural, and suburban settings serving students from underrepresented demographic groups with widely variantsocio-economic profiles. Participant teachers already used the Full Option Science System (FOSS) Watermodule through the ESU. While FOSS units are reasonably well-developed, the Water module does not engagestudents in substantial modeling to situate domain-specific conceptual understanding targeted in unitinvestigations within broader, systems understandings of hydrologic cycling. We therefore engage in constructcentered design (CCD - Shin et al., 2010) and use the learning performances framework to enhance the FOSSWater module to more effectively foster students’ model-based explanation-construction. CCD is based uponempirically-tested heuristics for learning progressions-based curriculum development (Krajcik, McNeill, &Reiser, 2007) and involves four steps. First and second, we define the content and articulate learningperformances (Table 1) that provide the conceptual and epistemic underpinnings of module development.Third, we use learning performances developed in Step 2 to design an accompanying modeling task that isintegrated into the existing module. In Year 1, we employed a limited version of the modeling task wherestudents construct models at the beginning at the end of the unit only. Fourth, the full version of the modelingtask will be developed and implemented in Years 2 and 3 based upon empirical results from Year 1.Data CollectionData collection occurred during the enactments of the modified FOSS Water module in each participantteacher’s classroom. To investigate 3rd-grade students’ model-based explanations for water, we draw upon anumber of data sources. First, we collected pre- and post-unit student modeling tasks (npre=112, npost=107). Themodeling task is designed to elicit student learning performances in Table 1 through diagrammatic, conceptprocess models in which students draw upon a variety of text-, numeric-, and image-based elements. Studentsare prompted with the question, ‘What happens to rain when it reaches the Earth’s surface?’ and asked to usetheir existing ideas to construct a model of groundwater cycling. Students concluded the module by evaluatingand revising their models. Students were also asked to justify their modeling decisions through scaffoldedwritten responses. Second, clinical interviews were conducted with five students from each classroom inconjunction with their pre- (n=30) and post-unit models (n=30). Students were purposefully selected (Patton,2001) by the research team and the six participant teachers to represent a continuum of academic achievementand classroom engagement. The clinical interview protocols were designed to elicit student reflections on theirwater cycle models and written responses around each of the learning performances in Table 1.ICLS 2014 Proceedings48© ISLSData AnalysisData analysis involved both quantitative and qualitative methods. All audio recorded interview data wastranscribed, student artifacts scanned and digitized, and all data imported into ATLAS.ti, a widely-availablequalitative data analysis suite, for coding. Student interview data was coded using the learning performancesframework in Table 1. This coding process involved 15 codes, one for components, sequence, explanatoryprocess, principle, and mapping for each of the three target concepts. Joint coding was performed on a 10% datasample. Inter-coder reliability was 85% before discussion and 100% after discussion. Code queries wereconducted to isolate data for each of the codes representing learning performances in in Table 1. Within eachdata subset, analyses focused on the identification and articulation of measureable ‘levels’ for each componentof students’ model-based explanations about the three concepts in Table 1. Qualitative analysis involved aniterative process of data reduction, displaying, and verification to identify learning performance levels. Thelevels of a learning performance represent varying degrees of sophistication for domain-specific, model-basedexplanation-construction. The learning performance levels were then used to develop a scoring rubric as ascaled measure of students’ understanding of the three target concepts as evidenced in the models and writtenresponses in the modeling task. The rubric allowed for examination of the learning performances at three levelsof sophistication (Levels: 0 – 3). Students’ pre-unit and postunit modeling tasks were scored using the rubric.The student data was nested per teacher which required a multi-level model analysis (Littell, Milliken, Stroup,Wollonger & Schabenger, 2006). The analysis was conducted in SAS using a double-factor repeated-measuresmixed-model ANOVA. The dependent variable was the postunit models while the independent variables werethe dimension, concept, and the interaction between dimension and concept. The ANOVA formula is Yijk = µ+ αj + βk + (αβ)jk + eijk where i is the pre or postunit models, j is concept, k is dimension, and e is the error inthe dependent and independent variables. Statistical-significance of the interaction term indicates that somecombination of dimension and the concepts affect the models (Kleinbaum et al., 1998).ResultsDefining Levels of Learning PerformancesAnalysis of the student interviews yielded three definitive levels for each of the learning performancesillustrated in Table 1. In this paper, we discuss learning performance levels for each of the epistemic features ofmodel-based explanation in Table 1 for Concept 1 to illustrate ranges of students’ model-based explanationconstruction and distinguishing characteristics of the learning performance levels.For a model to illustrate dynamic interactions within a system, it must first include the relevantcomponents. For Concept 1, students should recognize that water exists in three forms – liquid, ice, and vapor –and that water is represented in these three forms at various points throughout the water cycle. Further, animportant underlying characteristic of mechanism-based explanations is accounting for unseen/unobservableforces that drive observable cause and effect. The three levels of the components learning performance forConcept 1 emphasize student understanding of both visible and non-visible phases of water. At Level 1,students include at least one representation of VISIBLE water in a naturally occurring form (rain, surface water,ice, clouds, etc.). At Level 2, students include multiple representations of both visible and non-visible water.Non-visible water forms would include water vapor. Finally, at Level 3, students include multiple visible andnon-visible water forms, including subsurface groundwater. Level 3 understanding is illustrated by thefollowing interview excerpt:S: When the water hits a tree it grows and then when it takes it out, it takes water from thetree and the surface runoff I did a tiny mountain right there and then the water fallingdown.I: That’s your hill with the surface runoff?S: Then the rain goes up to the ground and then it goes up like the last one. Its evaporation,condensation and then precipitation happens when there’s cold and hot air up there. Whenit starts to get plus and minuses there’s lightning and thunderstorm and everything.(P:46:31:42)At a Level 3, students identify both visible and non-visible atmospheric and geospheric components ofthe water cycle which, as illustrated in the sample student quote, is an enabling factor in their articulation ofprocess and mechanism for hydrologic system dynamics.For a model to illustrate mechanisms for system processes, it must first also include the relevantsequence of these processes and their constituent parts. For Concept 1, students should recognize that watergoes through phase changes between its three forms – liquid, ice, and vapor – and that phase change occursthroughout the water cycle. The three levels of the sequence learning performance for Concept 1 emphasizestudent understanding of both what phase changes occur and the directionality or order in which they occur. Forthe sequence dimension of Concept 1, Level 1 understanding involves simple description of at least one phaseICLS 2014 Proceedings49© ISLSchange, for example, from water vapor to liquid water in the form of precipitation. At Level 2, students beganto recognize multiple phase changes that occur at places in the water cycle and how one sequentially leads to thenext. However, students do not illustrate understanding that phase changes can occur in multiple directions. Ata Level 3, students begin to describe phase change in multiple directions. Level 3 understanding is illustrated bythe following interview excerpt:I: … do you think there is water up in the sky all of the time? How does it get up there?S: Yes, it evaporates...which means that little tiny, that you can’t see, water droplets comeout of the oceans, lakes, rivers, and ponds, and they go up into the clouds. And, whenthere is too many water droplets in the clouds, it starts to rain or snow. (P6:48:55)In the Level 3 example student quote, the student describes both evaporation and precipitationsimultaneously. While condensation is also an important process in part of the water cycle, no student describedit as a stand-alone, mediating phenomena that leads to cloud formation.Building upon students’ model-based reasoning of both system components and sequence, studentsshould articulate a mechanism-based explanatory process for system processes represented in their models. ForConcept 1, students should recognize that varying temperature impacts phase change as an unseen causalmechanism. The three levels of the Concept 1 explanatory process learning performance emphasize studentunderstanding of relationships between related constructs and their underlying mechanisms. For theexplanatory process dimension of Concept 1, Level 1 understanding involves simple description of the process,such as components or sequences, indicative of the absence of a formal mechanism, without which there is noexplanation-construction occurring. For example, students might recognize ice in polar regions and that it canmelt without referencing temperature. At Level 2, students began to recognize a relationship betweentemperature and phase change. At this level, it is an associative relationship, however, not a causal one, in thatstudents may associate changing temperature with phase change but not attribute one to the other. At a Level 3,students begin to represent temperature as a direct, causal agent that explains observable phase change as part ofthe water cycle. Students’ explanations are grounded in models that represent temperature in some way as acritical element of the water cycle. Level 3 understanding is illustrated by the following interview excerpt:S: I put the pluses for hot and I put some pluses there you can’t see the minuses much that Iput up there for cold. That also creates rain, it helps rain fall.I: The minuses, the cold helps rain fall?S: Yes but usually the hot on the bottom. Yes but when the hot is on the top of the cold onthe bottom that actually creates rain too. See? Usually it’s the other way around and that’salso why it creates rain. (P 1: 3053:3059)As illustrated in the excerpt, the student describes heat causing evaporation and cooling causingcondensation/precipitation, which he/she represented in the model as +s and –s.A critical element of model-based explanations involves students’ making connections between theirrepresentation of the phenomena and the phenomena itself. This component, referred to as mapping, involvesstudents explicitly articulating how their model, or elements of their model, relates to the natural system. Thethree levels of the mapping learning performance for Concept 1 emphasize students’ relating theirrepresentations of forms of water to the natural world. At Level 1 understanding, students simply state thatsome aspect of their model is intended to represent some component of the system. At Level 2, students providesome rationale for how or why their model represents the natural system. For example, students may state thatclouds are grey because they’re full of water as they have observed on rainy days. At a Level 3, studentsarticulate explicit rationales for representational elements of their models and how they map onto the real-worldphenomena. Level 3 understanding is illustrated by the following interview excerpt:I:You said condensation was something you learned about in class…where is that in yourmodel?S: In the test we did in [class], I drew the cloud and cut the cloud in half and showed you thelittle water droplets in it. That side had more. That side had less. Then I made a littlecircle and a little line to connect it with a bigger circle to show that when it wascondensing and …two of the little gas water droplets were coming together and gettingbigger in there and turning into rain drops and falling. (P 4: 1574:1599)In the Level 3 example student quote, the student describes how he/she represented evaporation andcondensation to illustrate phase change underlying these processes.Finally, an important aspect of model-based explanations involves students generalizing from theirmodel about an underlying scientific principle. While specific components and sequences represented in themodel map onto real-world phenomena, and model elements illustrate explanatory processes for these systems,students should also be able to derive generalized principles about system-specific phenomena. The three levelsICLS 2014 Proceedings50© ISLSof the principle learning performance for Concept 1 emphasize students’ relating their representations of formsof water to forms of water in the natural world. At Level 1 understanding, students may identify a generalizedscientific principle, but do so either erroneously or inconsistently. For example, students might attribute gravityto phase change or incorrectly state that increasing temperature causes water to freeze. Level 2 understandinginvolves some accurate articulation of a relevant scientific principle but relating it incompletely. At Level 3,students correctly and fully match components of the model with an underlying scientific principle. Level 3understanding is illustrated by the following interview excerpt:S: Usually, water that stays there usually goes deeper into the ground.I: Why does it go deeper?S: The big drops probably are heavier so it goes down faster so it, so like the air can’t push itup again. And the small drops go down slower because and because they’re lighter andthey’re, um, the air can push them up easier (P24: 827:881)In the Level 3 example quote, the student describes a fundamental cause and effect relationship thatexplains the presence of subsurface groundwater – that the downward force of water in large volumes can moreeasily move through Earth materials. However, the student does not attribute this to gravity or other explanatoryprocesses, thus illustrating principle as an epistemic commitment distinct from explanatory process.Students’ Model-Based Explanations for Hydrologic CyclingTo address research question #2, we analyzed students’ pre- and postunit modeling tasks for the five epistemicfeatures of mechanism-based explanation construction (Table 1). First, analysis suggests that there was nostatistically-significant difference between epistemic features (Table 1) represented in the students’ pre- andpostunit models. However, a statistically-significant difference was observed between pre- and postunit modelsfor each Concept 1, F (2,3147) = 7.12, p < .0001, Concept 2, F (2,3147) = 6.77, p < .0001, and Concept 3, F(2,3147) = 21.61, p < .0001. These results indicate that while the students did not include additional epistemicfeatures within each concept from pre- to postunit models, the features they did represent for each conceptincreased in sophistication over the course of the unit. In the postunit models, we found a significant interactionbetween features of epistemic dimensions and concepts, F(8, 1355) = 45.67, p = <0.0001, when controlling forthe pre-unit model scores. We used paired-samples t-tests to make post hoc comparisons between concepts foreach feature to ascertain which epistemic dimension contributed most to differences observed between targetconcepts in postunit modeling tasks. The results indicate statistical significance for mapping, t(1355) = -5.16, p= <0.0001, and sequence, t(1355) = -11.53, p = <0.0001, between Concept 1 and 2. Students’ engaged in moresophisticated representations of Concept 2 ( = 1.08) than Concept 1 ( =0.76) due to a stronger emphasis onrepresentation of sequences and mapping for Concept 2. Further, differences between epistemic features forConcept 3 compared to both Concept 1 and 2 were all statistically-significant. This result is due to the lessfrequent representation of Concept 3 ( =0.08) in students’ models. Together, these results suggest thatstudents’ models emphasized water movement more so than the forms of water. Further, representations ofinteractions between water and Earth materials (Concept 3) were rare. Students’ representations of targetconcepts increased in sophistication during the unit. Differences in representations of target concepts instudents’ postunit models were largely attributable to two epistemic features: sequence and mapping.Findings from qualitative analysis for research question 2 illustrate two dominant themes. First,findings show that students’ efforts at mapping most frequently emphasized water in motion above ground andtheir connection of their representations to the physical world did not typically change from pre to postunitmodels. Students expressed that their 2-D drawings were insufficient for ‘realistic’ representations ofprecipitation and were concerned that they were unable to represent all of the pieces of this process that they feltwere necessary in the ‘real world’. This was most frequently observed in students’ attempts to represent thepresence of the sun prior to rain, in which students would draw the sun, and then the ‘absence’ of the sun duringrain, which often involved students drawing over the sun. When asked why the sun was initially present andthen drawn over they identified that in the ‘real’ world, the sun is originally visible but “when it rains, it gets allfoggy and clouds start to turn gray and then it [the clouds] just covers up the sun” (P 1: 3377:3386). In theirmanner of including then removing the sun, they were attempting to map accurately the processes they observedoccur during precipitation rather than identifying their drawings as abstractions of the physical world (Figure 1).Second, we found that sequences underlying students’ model-based explanations relied on combiningscientifically-accepted mechanisms (e.g. gravity, temperature) with their pre-existing mechanisms (e.g. alternateconceptions). These mechanisms most frequently explained the “hidden” sequences of evaporation. Whilestudents articulated in both their pre- and postunit models that temperature change was necessary for water to‘leave clouds’ and gravity was necessary for water to ‘fall to the ground’, they also relied on and incorporatedalternate conceptions for how and why water returns to the sky from the clouds. Most frequently students’sequences of water vapor returning to the sky were drawn as one large quantity moving as a single entity fromICLS 2014 Proceedings51© ISLSthe ground surface to a large dark cloud. Their mechanism for this movement was represented and articulated astubes reaching from the ground to a specific cloud. For example, while Caroline represented that an increase intemperature was the mechanism for liquid water to change its state to water vapor, her mechanism for watervapor returning to the sky was “invisible helium tubes” that “take the water vapor and bring it up to the cloud”(Figure 1, P54:037). Additionally we found some students were unable to conceptualize how water might returnto the sky so they did not include sequences for water’s return. They articulated mechanisms for water toremain on the because the Earth ‘holds’ water by “sucking” or “absorbing” water to store (N.EM2, W.S1M1).Figure 1. Student model of ‘hidden sun’ (S9:N) and ‘evaporation’ (W:S17)Conclusions and ImplicationsScientific modeling is a core scientific practice highlighted in the Next Generation Science Standards (NRC,2012). Modeling practices, however, remain underemphasized in K-12 science, particularly in the elementarygrades (Windschitl, Thompson, & Braaten, 2008; NRC, 2007) and, as a result, little research exists to guideefforts to foster epistemically-rich, model-centric elementary science learning environments. This studyleverages and makes contributions to research on model-based science teaching and learning (Lehrer &Schauble, 2004; Schwarz et al., 2009; Windschitl, Thompson, & Braaten, 2008) and content- and practice-basedlearning progressions (Alonzo & Steedle, 2008; Lee & Liu, 2010; Mohan, Chen, & Anderson, 2009; Stevens,Delgado, & Krajcik, 2010) through the development of a learning performances framework and empiricalfindings from its use to investigate 3rd-grade students’ model-based explanations for hydrologic cycling.Past research has illustrated aspects of the water cycle, a core subject in the K-12 curriculum (NRC,2012), that are often challenging for students (Bar, 1989; Henriques, 2002). Though recent research has shownthat elementary students can learn to effectively engage in scientific practices, including scientific modeling, todevelop conceptual understanding (Hapgood, Magnusson, & Palinscar, 2004; Hardy, Jonen, Möller, & Stern,2006; Herrenkohl & Cornelius, 2013; Lehrer & Schauble, 2006; Manz, 2012; Metz, 2004; McNeill, 2011), littlework has been conducted to investigate students’ formulation of model-based expalanations for hydrologiccycling. Findings from this study highlight the range of ideas evident in students’ model-based explanations forsystem processes that underlie the water cycle. Results suggest 3rd-grade students emphasize sequences of watermovement and statements that map representations of water movement onto real-world phenomena moreeffectively than for the forms of water. Further, students do not foreground the relationship between water andthe Earth in their model-based reasoning about the water cycle. These findings provide insight not only intoleverage points through which to foster early learners’ formulation of model-based explanations for water, butalso those concepts and epistemic features for which curricular and instructional guidance would likely be mostimpactful. Further work is needed to explore how to build upon the domain-specific (i.e., hydrologic cycle)epistemic commitments and conceptual strengths students exhibit, as well as appropriate design andimplementation of scaffolds for students’ use of models to reason about the water cycle.This work also highlights the utility of a set of empirically-based learning performances (Krajcik,McNeill, & Reiser, 2007), developed from the ground up as part of a design-based research program, that can beused to both design and study discipline-specific model-centric science learning environments. The integratedlearning performances framework developed here illustrates critical trends in 3rd-grade students’ model-basedexplanations for hydrologic cycling, such as a de-emphasis on unobservable components of water systems,bidirectionality of system processes, and rationales for representational norms. Measureable levels of modelbased explanations for water cycle processes, based upon empirically-derived trends in students’ thinking, havegrounded the ongoing study of the curricular and instructional components of these 3rd-grade science learningenvironments. Such work is necessary to inform the future development of learning progressions that a)integrate the scientific practices of modeling AND domain-specific concepts and b) are sufficiently robust toaccount for elementary students’ learning within the Earth Sciences, a domain within which little learningprogressions work has thus far been carried out. This learning performances framework, as well as theICLS 2014 Proceedings52© ISLSmodeling task and findings from project research, will inform ongoing efforts to design elementary sciencelearning environments through the development of science curriculum materials and assessment resources, aswell as efforts to foster teachers’ instructional practices that promote ALL students’ model-based learning.ReferencesAlonzo, A. C. & Steedle, J. T. (2008). Developing and assessing a force and motion learning progression.Science Education, 93(3), 389-421.American Association for the Advancement of Science. (2007). Atlas for scientific literacy. Washington, DC:National Science Teachers Association Press.Bar, V. (1989). Childrens' views about the water cycle. Science Education, 73(4), 481-500.Braaten, M. & Windschitl, M. (2011). Working toward a stronger conceptualization of scientific explanation forscience education. Science Education, 95(4), 639-669.Hapgood, S., Magnusson, S., & Palinscar, A. (2004). Teacher, text, and experience: A case of young children'sscientific inquiry. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(4), 455-505.Hardy, I., Jonen, A., Möller, K., & Stern, E. (2006). Effects of instructional support within constructivistlearning environments for elementary school students’ understanding of “floating and sinking”.Journal of Educational Psychology, 98(2), 307–325.Henriques, L. (2002). Childrens' ideas about weather: A review of the literature. School Science andMathematics, 102(5), 202-215.Herrenkohl, L. & Cornelius, L. (2013). Investigating elementary students’ scientific and historicalargumentation. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 22(3), 413-461.Krajcik, J., McNeill, K. L., & Reiser, B. (2007). Learning-goals-driven design model: Developing curriculummaterials that align with national standards and incorporate project-based pedagogy. ScienceEducation, 92(1), 1-32.Lee, H.-S. & Liu, O. (2010). Assessing learning progression of energy concepts across middle school grades:The knowledge integration perspective. Science Education, 94(4), 665-688.Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Cultivating model-based reasoning in science education. In K. Sawyer (Ed.),Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 371-388). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge U. Press.Littell, R. C., Milliken, G. A., Stroup, W. W., Wolfinger, R. D., & Schabenberger, O. (2006). SAS for mixedmodels: Second edition. Cary, NC: SAS Institute, Inc.Manz, E. (2012) Understanding the codevelopment of modeling practice and ecological knowledge. ScienceEducation, 96(6), 1071-1105.McNeill, K. L. (2011). Elementary students views of explanation, argumentation, and evidence, and theirabilities to construct arguments over the school year. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48(7),793-823.Metz, K. (2004). Children's understanding of scientific inquiry: Their conceptualization of uncertainty ininvestigations of their own design. Cognition and Instruction, 22(2), 219-290.Mohan, L., Chen, J., & Anderson, C. W. (2009). Developing a multi-year learning progression for carboncycling in socio-ecological systems. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 675-698.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, cross-cutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.National Research Council. (2007). Taking science to school: Leaning and teaching science in grades K-8.Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Patton, M. Q. (2001). Qualitative research and evaluation methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Schwarz, C., Reiser, B., Davis, E. A., Kenyon, L., Acher, A., Fortus, D., Schwartz, Y., Hug, B., & Krajcik, J.(2009). Developing a learning progression for scientific modeling: Making scientific modelingaccessible and meaningful for learners. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 632-654.Stevens, S.Y., Delgado, C., & Krajcik, J.S. (2010).Developing a hypothetical multi-dimensional learningprogression for the nature of matter. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 47(6), 687-715.Shin, N., Stevens, S.Y., & Krajcik, J. (2010). Designing assessments to track student progress. In K. Gomez, L.Lyons, & J. Radinsky (Eds.), Learning in the Disciplines: Proceedings of the 9th InternationalConference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2010). University of Illinois at Chicago: Chicago, IL.Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., & Braaten, M. (2008). Beyond the scientific method: Model-based inquiry as anew paradigm of preference for school science investigations. Science Education, 92(5), 941-967.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation (DRL-1427115). Anyopinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) anddo not necessarily reflect the views of NSF.ICLS 2014 Proceedings53© ISLS