Scientific Practices Through Students’ Eyes:How Sixth Grade Students Enact and Describe Purposes forScientific Modeling Activities Over TimeChristina Krist and Brian J. Reiser, Northwestern University, Evanston, ILEmail: ckrist@u.northwestern.edu, reiser@northwestern.eduAbstract: Recent reforms in science education emphasize engaging students in scientificpractices (NRC, 2011). These reforms aim to not only have students doing things scientistsdo, but to have them doing them with the similar goal of constructing explanatory accounts ofthe natural world in principled, consistent ways. In this case study, we used a communities-ofpractice framework to analyze how students’ perceptions of the epistemological purposes ofseveral classroom activities change over time. We found that students used their everydayexperiences in ways that allowed them to engage in and describe modeling practices thatcontributed to their classroom’s knowledge building goal. In addition, we found that students’articulations of that goal became more epistemologically sophisticated over time. Our analysisprovides insights on how students productively use everyday experiences in scientificpractices and offers suggestions for how to rethink learning progressions to account forstudents’ perceptions of their modeling practices.Recent reforms in science education emphasize scientific practices as the means by which students developscientific ideas (NRC, 2011; Achieve, Inc., 2013). These practices, such as constructing scientific explanations,arguing from evidence, and developing models, are the ways in which scientists build knowledge about thenatural world. Thus, the goal in engaging students in scientific practices is to have students doing things thatscientists do driven by a similar epistemological purpose: to construct explanatory accounts of the natural worldin principled ways. As such, classroom scientific practices must connect classroom activities to larger scienceideas and principles in ways that help students to make progress in constructing larger scientific ideasthemselves and in understanding the principled ways in which those ideas were constructed (Duschl,Schweingruber, & Shouse, 2007; Sandoval & Reiser, 2004).Despite the best efforts of curriculum designers and teachers, students will not be engaged in scientificpractices unless they see their activity as meaningful for their knowledge building—that is, as connected to theirclassroom’s epistemological goal (Barron, et al., 1998; Duschl, et al., 2007; Sandoval, 2005). However,engaging students in building scientific knowledge requires that most classrooms make significant shifts in howboth teachers and students think about the work they do. These shifts, transforming classrooms from placeswhere teachers communicate the ideas of science to students to places where students and teacher work togetherto build those ideas through scientific practices, take time. As such, classrooms are designed communities thatare in the process of developing shared epistemological goals and related practices.Because we want to know how students come to see their classroom activities as meaningful practicesrather than routines, we investigated how students’ enactments and perceptions of the epistemological purposesof classroom activities developed over the course of a unit. In particular, we focused on activities designed toengage students in the practice of developing and using scientific models. In this case study of a classroomworking to establish scientific knowledge building practices, we found that students’ engagement in anddescriptions of modeling activities shifted from using and describing diagrammatic models as displays of ideasto using and describing diagrammatic models as tools for working out ideas. In addition, students began torecognize peers’ roles in working towards their classroom’s epistemological goal.Participation in Scientific Practices in Classroom CommunitiesThe call to engage students in the practices of scientists is not new. However, engaging students in activities thatmeaningfully contribute to scientific knowledge building is difficult. Hands-on investigations and labs, if notconnected to a larger knowledge building goal, do little more than teach students the immediate practical skillsnecessary for the routine (Barron, et al., 1998). In other words, they gain neither deep content understanding nora justification for doing the “steps” in the first place. So how do teachers and students work to developknowledge-building goals and engage in practices that meaningfully contribute to those goals?Studies of classrooms in which researchers and teachers carefully designed the substance and structureof the context to engage students in scientific practices have found that students successfully engaged inknowledge-building practices when the discourse framing and supporting inquiry emphasized the goal ofdeveloping shared knowledge (Herrenkohl, 2006; Rosenberg, Hammer, & Phelan, 2006; Schwarz, et al., 2009).In addition, students developed rich understandings of the incremental building of evidence-based scientificexplanations during sustained engagement (6 years) with teaching designed to support students’ epistemologicalICLS 2014 Proceedings270© ISLSthinking (Smith, et al., 2000), suggesting that sophisticated epistemologies take time to develop. Meaningfulengagement in scientific practices, then, requires the careful design of sustained sequences of inquiry activitiesaround rich, appropriate content learning goals that are enacted in ways that offer appropriate social supports.Guided by these social supports, students can become active participants in a community that builds knowledgeusing the tools, social interactions, constructs, epistemological criteria, and discourses of disciplinary science(Ford, 2008). Therefore, viewing science learning as participation in a classroom community of practice offersa useful analytical framework for understanding how teachers and students develop knowledge-building goalsand learn to engage in meaningful scientific practices.To examine how classroom communities engage in scientific knowledge building, we interpretedprinciples about how learning occurs in communities of practice through a lens of epistemological development.In particular, we focused on the practical epistemologies that can actively guide the classroom work (Sandoval,2005), and how those epistemologies develop, or how changes in activation of coherent sets of epistemologicalresources occur over time (Hammer & Elby, 2002). In this paper, we focused on the characterizing howstudents’ perceptions of models and modeling activities changed over time. We anticipated that students couldbe using models in a variety of ways: to provide a right answer to the teacher; to record his or her own thinking;to explain how and why a phenomenon occurred; or to argue against a competing model (Schwarz, et al., 2009).However, epistemological development does not happen in isolation. We also wanted to understandhow teachers and students used social interactions and shared resources to construct meaning around themodeling work they were doing. We utilized Wenger’s (1998) three elements that characterize communities ofpractice to capture classroom epistemological development holistically. First, a community must establish ajoint enterprise, or a collectively developed understanding about what their community is about or what theyaim to do (Wenger, 1998). Through our epistemological lens, a student will ideally come to understand theepistemological joint enterprise of classroom science—constructing explanatory accounts of the natural world.In other words, students will shift from perceiving inquiry activities as standalone (Barron, et al., 1998), or asserving the purpose of simply propagating knowledge (Hammer & Elby, 2002), to seeing the activity as a meansfor them to build a larger causal or explanatory story over time (Rosenberg, et al., 2006).The other two critical elements support the community’s joint enterprise. Communities must establishmutuality, or norms of interaction and relationship for achieving the joint enterprise (Wenger, 1998).Epistemologically speaking, students will ideally learn to take on important knowledge-building roles that differfrom roles afforded by traditional teacher-centered classrooms (Berland & Reiser, 2009). These new rolesrequire that students develop enough trust to be able to both construct and critique each other’s knowledgeclaims (Ford & Ferman, 2006). In addition, communities must support members in using shared repertoires ofresources in order to accomplish the joint enterprise (Wenger, 1998). In a practices-centered classroom, some ofthese resources include the discourses, tools, and shared collections of knowledge of scientists. For the purposesof this paper, we focused on a particular set of tangible external resources and their related epistemologicalresources: those related to the construction and use of diagrammatic models. Students will ideally learn to viewdiagrammatic models as tools for forming explanatory stories or explanations of phenomenon (Hammer & Elby,2002; Passmore & Stewart, 2002; Rosenberg, et al., 2006; Schwarz, et al., 2009) rather than as check-youranswer activities, or accumulations and repositories of propagated ideas (Hammer & Elby, 2002).Based on our framework, as we investigated how students’ enactments and perceptions of theepistemological purposes of modeling activities developed over the course of a unit, we expected to see studentsincreasingly: 1. Describing a knowledge-building joint enterprise for their classroom; 2. Describing howclassmates’ ideas are used in constructing knowledge; and 3. Using and describing diagrammatic models astools for knowledge building. We found that while students did use models for some of the purposes weexpected, they also developed their own epistemological purposes for models that drew on their everydayexperiences in ways that contributed to their classroom’s knowledge-building enterprise. In addition, we foundthat they highlighted the importance of peer accountability in knowledge building.MethodsResearch ContextIn order to study how students’ enactments and descriptions of the epistemological purposes of classroommodeling activities developed, we focused on one classroom using a curriculum designed to engage students inscientific practices (Krajcik, McNeill, & Reiser, 2008). We selected a unit that emphasized the practice ofdeveloping and using models to build scientific knowledge because it is a challenging practice for teachers toimplement (Schwarz, et al., 2009). This 6th grade classroom is located in a high-achieving middle school in amiddle-to-upper-middle-class suburb of a large Midwestern city. The teacher, Mr. H, is an experiencedclassroom teacher who had taught for 14 years at the time of data collection. However, it was only his secondyear using this particular curriculum. Although his understanding of scientific practices and pedagogicalstrategies for engaging students in practices were still developing, he felt that his own orientation to and beliefsICLS 2014 Proceedings271© ISLSabout science teaching aligned well with the knowledge-building goals of the curriculum, especially the focuson having students address and challenge their own ideas and questions about the world with evidence fromclassroom activities (Interview, 3-18-13). Therefore, although he was still learning how to support students inmodeling practices, his commitment to engaging students in knowledge building made his classroom a richcontext in which to study the development of classroom scientific practices.Data CollectionThe first author observed and video recorded selected lessons in Mr. H’s classroom throughout the 2012-2013school year. The first curricular unit was these students’ first introduction to both scientific practices in generaland the specific practice of constructing and using scientific models. The data for this paper comes from thesecond curricular unit, enacted from January-early April 2013. The lessons selected for observation and analysis(Lessons 1, 4, and 6) were those in which students were constructing, presenting, or revising diagrammaticmodels and therefore had the potential to be activities in which students were engaged in the scientific practiceof developing and using scientific models.In addition to observing and video recording selected lessons, the first author conducted nine semistructured interviews over the course of the unit with three focus students from this classroom. Focus studentswere purposefully selected to represent a range of “getting it,” based on the classroom teacher’s perception,which likely represents some combination of ability, effort, and interest in science. The interviews weredesigned to elicit students’ perceptions on the purposes or goals of specific classroom activities from Lessons 1,4, 6. These interviews included questions such as, “Why did you draw a model right away at the beginning ofthe unit?”, “Why do you think you presented your models and ask questions about them?”, and “What kinds ofthings were you thinking about when you were drawing [a specific] model?” As a follow-up to each of thesequestions, we asked if or how the reasons they gave contributed to their learning in order to elicit theirperceptions of how each activity was connected to knowledge building. The first set of interviews occurredbetween Lessons 1 and 4; the second set occurred shortly after Lesson 6; and the third set of interviews occurredafter the end of the unit.Data AnalysisIn order to characterize the shifts occurring over the course of the enactment of the unit, we coded transcripts ofboth the interviews (163 min. in total) and the classroom observation data (370 min. in total) for epistemologicalpurposes: rationales for if, how, and why a particular classroom activity contributed to knowledge building.These rationales were relatively straightforward in students’ responses to interview questions. In the classroomvideo, we coded both explicit statements that described a particular epistemological purpose (e.g. “Felix is doingsomething good here, he’s making connections to things we did in the light unit,” coded as Compare to thingswe’ve done) as well as statements that implied or operationalized a particular epistemological purpose (e.g. Astudent saying, “But there can’t be empty space because air has to expand” in response to another student’smodel, coded as Compare to things we know). From the 9 semi-structured interviews, we first generated “invivo” codes (Miles, Huberman, & Saldana, 2014, p. 74) capturing the epistemological purposes that studentsdescribed. Drawing on Hammer & Elby’s (2002) categories of epistemological resources, we then collapsed ourinitial list into 19 “epistemological purpose” codes, each representing a particular combination ofepistemological activity + nature/source of knowledge. These codes included purposes such as, “Make thinkingvisible,” “Public evaluation,” and “Shift individual understanding.” We then applied these codes both theinterview data and the classroom discourse. Applying these codes to the classroom video generated oneadditional code: Compare to real life experiences (see Table 1).After coding all the data, we eliminated epistemological purpose codes that were not a) included atleast twice in the three focus student interviews from the class period of interest, and b) included at least onceduring the classroom discourse. Although we acknowledge that any classroom activity has multiple overlappinggoals and purposes, this reduction was an attempt to focus on the most salient purposes at each point of timeduring the unit as enacted by the teacher and students AND as interpreted by students in interviews.Characterizing Classroom Enactment and Students’ Perceptions of ScientificPracticesWe argue that over the course of the unit, students’ enactment and descriptions of the purposes of activitiesrelated to constructing and using scientific (diagrammatic) models shifted from enacting and describingdiagrammatic models as displays of ideas to describing and enacting models as tools for working out ideas. Inthe classroom enactment, the class shifted from using their models for displaying or collecting knowledge tousing their models as revisable representations of the ideas they were comparing and actively (re)building. Thisshift in enactment preceded a parallel shift in how students explicitly described the purposes for modelingactivities. However, rather than describing models as tools for working out ideas, students instead described thesocial mechanisms through which they used their models for knowledge-building. Taken together, these shiftsICLS 2014 Proceedings272© ISLSsuggest that students were developing meaningful ways of participating in scientific modeling practices. In thispaper, we characterize these shifts first by looking at classroom activity, supported with data from studentinterviews. We then analyze student interviews for additional ways in which students developed meaningfulmodeling practices. Finally, we discuss the implications of these shifts for epistemological development.Table 1: Epistemological purpose codes.(These codes were found at least twice in the three focus student interviews and found at least once duringclassroom discourse.)“Epistemological Purpose”Epistemological Activity +Paraphrased descriptions of the point of theNature/Source of Knowledgeactivity(from Hammer & Elby, 2002)Displaying + InherentThe point is seeing each other’s ideas to get a senseMake thinking visibleRecord thinking for future useAccumulating + PropagatedCompare to things we knowComparing + PropagatedCompare to real lifeexperiencesComparing + Direct PerceptionCompare to things we’ve doneComparing + Fabricated and/orDirect PerceptionRevise representation throughpeer feedbackLearn through collaborationFormation + Fabricated (specificideas represented)Formation + Inherent (in other)and/or FabricatedSolve or piece together puzzleFormation + Fabricated (bigideas)of what students thinkThe point is to keep track of what we know for useon a test in the future, to prevent myself from gettingconfused, or to compare later and see how muchwe’ve learnedThe point is to think about the facts we’ve learned tosee if a model or idea matches with themThe point is to think about things we’ve seen,experienced, or know from real life and see if amodel or idea matches with themThe point is to think about the experiments anddiscussions we’ve had in class to see if a model oridea matches with themThe point is to change my model based on thequestions and critiques my peers gave meThe point is to use peers or teacher as a resources asthey ask questions, give critiques, or offer their ideasand understandingsThe point was to make another connection (snapanother piece in) that moved us closer to solving theoverall puzzle/questionModels as Idea Displays: Seeing Ideas and Making ComparisonsDuring the first lesson of the unit (Jan 10th-11th, 2013), Mr. H had students smell an odor in a film canister anddiscuss how they thought the odor moved through the air so they could smell it. Students then drew a modelillustrating their ideas about what makes up the odor if they were to magnify it. In framing and enacting thislesson, both Mr. H and the focus students explicitly described the purpose of modeling activities as MakingThinking Visible (see Table 1). When students began drawing their models during Lesson 1, the teacheremphasized that students were to be drawing “YOUR ideas, not you and your neighbor.” He then said that onceenough people had something on their paper, they would “take a peek at” each other’s models and “share out”their ideas. After giving students a few minutes to draw, he asked if anyone was ready to share their models,stating, “Don’t worry, we’re not here to judge, especially since none of us has the answers. We’re all justgetting started with this, so we’re curious. We’re curious what you think.” In framing this activity, Mr. Hexplicitly denied any evaluative purpose.In retrospective interviews following Lesson 1, two focus students described the purpose of drawingand presenting these initial models in ways that mirrored Mr. H’s framing of the activity. Carly said the purposewas “just to see like what our preference is on it, like what we think it is.” Similarly, Ruthie said the purpose ofsharing their models was so that they could see what everyone else was thinking. Again, neither of themdescribed an evaluative goal. In and of itself, the epistemological purpose of “making thinking visible” does notsuggest any connections or contributions to a joint enterprise; rather, students are each displaying their owninherent ideas. Here, it seems that Mr. H was working to position this activity in contrast to the evaluativepurposes that frame most presentation-like school activities.As students presented their models, however, they did not simply note each other’s ideas. Instead, theclass began to make comparisons between the previous unit (the “light unit”) and the current one (the “smellunit”). Mr. H first connected the two units by guiding students to think more deeply about how they smelled theodor: “Now I know that you guys are pretty careful observers, and you noticed that smelling whatever is in here,that was actually a sort of process. There’s a beginning, a middle, and an end. I remember for our light unit wetalked about light starts somewhere, goes to an object, bounces off the object, hits our eyes, and we knowthere’s a lot more too with color now. But there’s a process, right?” Mr. H made an explicit connection to howthey had been working on ideas in the light unit, drawing a parallel to how they would investigate this newICLS 2014 Proceedings273© ISLSquestion about how odors travel. This connection was his first attempt at establishing a joint enterprise: to figureout the process by which an odor moves across a room. Notably, this enterprise is a knowledge-building one.During their model presentations, students also made connections to the light unit in ways thatcontributed to the newly established joint enterprise, suggesting they were at least somewhat bought in to Mr.H’s initial framing. Felix, who presented first, used ideas from the light unit to highlight how his ideas abouthow odor moved contrasted with light: “And then you can see like where the odor moves around in all thesedifferent directions. So it doesn’t have to, unlike with the light it doesn’t really have to travel in straight lineseither. So it goes anywhere it wants, really.” Lola, the second student to present, also highlighted a differencebetween the how light and odor travel. She represented odor as a line with a curve in it to indicate “the odor isnot like straight lines, but like where the wind takes it and curves it around corners.”In response to Lola’s presentation, the class began to bring in ideas from their everyday experiences tojustify their comparisons. Mr. H asked the class if they agreed that odor could move around corners. Onestudent said, “You can smell something that’s on the other side of the house.” The class briefly discussedsmelling cookies baking, and then Lola turned to Mr. H and said something inaudible to the camera. He turnedto the class and shared her question, saying, “All right, now I don’t have any answer for this, because herquestion was […] asking if temperature has anything to do with this, with odors.” Several students responded,all seeming to be in agreement that temperature did have to do with smelling odors. Mr. H said he thought theywould need to collect some evidence to decide if temperature was a factor. The class agreed, and Lola wrote herquestion on a Post-It note.In these two presentations (and the four that followed), students used their models to display ideas thathighlighted contrasts between their new ideas about how odor traveled and their knowledge from the previousunit that light travels in straight lines. So they were both “displaying” ideas, but they were also “comparing” towhat they all knew. In addition, to support this epistemological activity of comparison, they began bringing inreal life experiences—the experience of smelling food around corners—to help them generate potential factorsinvolved in odor travel and provide initial justifications for whether or not those factors mattered. In otherwords, students were using their models as a visual platform for making comparisons and generating questionsbased in their everyday experiences. Importantly, the teacher affirmed these moves and valued questions asimportant products of the discussion: each time a student made a case for a new potential factor based on apersonal experience, he gave the student a Post-It note to record the question and made comments like, “I’mcurious too!” and “Good, we’re getting somewhere.” Through his affirmation, Mr. H established the jointenterprise for the unit and acknowledged that the ways students were engaging in the activity—recording anddisplaying their ideas and making comparisons to generate questions—contributed to that enterprise.Models as Thinking Tools: Making Sure Our Ideas Make SenseAs the unit progressed, students continued to draw on their prior knowledge and experiences in modelingactivities. In Lesson 4 (Jan 30th, 2013), making comparisons to prior experiences allowed students to initiate theone instance of sustained argumentation between competing ideas that occurred during the smell unit.By this point in the unit, the class had decided that air was an important factor in how an odor movedand were investigating how air behaved when expanded or compressed. Lesson 4 began with Mr. H adding andremoving air from a sealed flask. Students then drew what they thought air looked like in a normal sealed flask,in the flask where air was removed, and in the flask where air was added. After working individually for a fewminutes, two students presented their models. The first student, Summer, presented a rather elaborate modelexplaining that when air was removed from the flask, each individual air particle expanded to fill up the space.Likewise, when more air was pumped into the flask, each individual air particle shrank to allow more particlesto fit in (see Figure 1). Students asked her a few questions, including what was in between the particles. Shestated that there was more air in between; she just did not have time to draw that many particles.2b2a2d2cFigure 1. Summer’s Models, Lesson 4. 2a: Key. 2b: Normal air. 2c: Air removed. 2d: Air added.The next student to present, Jared, claimed that there was “nothing” between the particles: when youadded air, there was more air and less nothing, and when you removed air, there was less air and more nothing(see Figure 2). Almost immediately, the class erupted into a heated discussion about his idea, arguing that it wasnot possible to have empty space between particles. Summer stated several times, “there can’t be empty space,ICLS 2014 Proceedings274© ISLSbecause air has to expand” because “otherwise it wouldn’t be a gas,” highlighting a contrast between Jared’smodel and a principle they had learned in class. Nate tried to imagine1 what it would mean for there to be emptyspace. He asked, “Would that mean if I stepped into it, I would shrink or something? If there was no air?”Jared then attempted to defend his idea by drawing on a real-life experience: he asked, “What about inspace?” Summer, supported by many other students, argued that there is air in space, it is just THIN air becausethe individual particles have each stretched out so much that they are very thin. Robbie and Dexter both addedthat air in space is like thin air at high elevations, which is why climbers on Mt. Everest need oxygen. Here, theclass co-refined Summer’s initial idea to make it fit the knowledge they had about places with “thin air.”Jared then tried another tactic to defend his model: he described what having no air between particleswould look like on his model. He said, “I think if [their idea] was true then, I think [the models] would all belike the same, like that [pointing to his first model].” Mr. H asked, “They would what?” Jared clarified, “They’dall look like that, they’d all be the same. The same amount of particles there. Cuz they’re saying that there’s airin here? [pointing to empty space in his model].” Unfortunately Mr. H did not understand what Jared was tryingto say. He asked if that meant all the lines would get fatter, and Jared gave him a confused look. Then anotherstudent asked an off-topic question, and Mr. H adjourned the class for the day.Despite this unsatisfying end to the argument, we want to highlight that rather than models simplydisplaying ideas, they now display ideas for a purpose. Students considered whether or not they were persuadedby another student’s model and expressed a need to resolve the discrepancies they saw. In addition, Jared madea move that was, as of yet, unprecedented in this classroom: he attempted to use his model as a tool to rebut acounterargument. His model made his (and Summer’s) ideas visible in order to determine which idea betterexplained this phenomenon, based on what they knew to be true about the world. In this episode, students usedmodels as tools to work through and form ideas together about what air looks like so they could figure out howodors move through it. Importantly, the mechanism by which they worked through and formed these ideas wasby drawing on and comparing displayed ideas to their prior knowledge and everyday experiences in the world.2b2c2a2dFigure 2. Jared’s Models, Lesson 4. 2a: Key. 2b: Normal air. 2c: Air removed. 2d: Air added.By Lesson 6 (Feb 13th, 2013), the class returned to their original question about how odors move acrossa room. They saw an animated simulation that showed particles traveling in straight lines until they bounced offof each other. They then worked in small groups to draw a revised model showing what the odor looked like inbetween the odor source and the nose. In an interview following this activity, Felix explained how he used theactivity of drawing his model in Lesson 6 as a tool to help him work through ideas. He described how, as theywere drawing, he and his partner wondered about how particles would bounce: “I was also wondering like howit would work, like in what direction would [the particle] go in? Let's say it hits like the exact corner of a wall,directly at the corner, like would it just bounce off, or would it like scatter away, or would it split up? Probablynot, but you know I was wondering about that, you know.” Here, Felix used the process of drawing the model tohelp him think through questions he still had and to articulate the specifics of his explanatory account. He laterdecided that particles would not split apart, and that they needed to hit obstacles placed at different angles inorder to spread all around the room. For Felix, the diagrammatic model itself was not the goal; rather, thepurpose was to think through his ideas to figure out how the odor was movingAlthough Jared and Felix used models as tools for refining ideas in practice, none of the studentsexplicitly stated an idea-refining purpose for models in interviews, such as using models to compare or decidebetween competing ideas. Instead, of the 15 purposes they did describe, 10 of them were about makingcomparisons to things they had done or experienced. This is not surprising, given the prevalence of connectionsthey made during Lessons 1 and 4 and the lack of uptake of Jared’s use of his model. However, students diddescribe modeling activities as serving a knowledge-building goal more generally. In doing so, they describedhow the social aspect of knowledge building helped them to refine their models. Their descriptions suggest thatchanges in social roles, or establishing mutuality, were more salient for students than changes in how they wereusing models to build knowledge. We turn next to their interviews to illustrate this emphasis.Describing How Peers Connect Models to the Joint EndeavorAlthough students enacted modeling practices in ways that suggested they saw them as meaningfully connectedto the joint endeavor, we also wanted to see how students’ articulation of the connection developed over time.We found that by midway through the unit (during their second interviews), students explicitly described, inICLS 2014 Proceedings275© ISLStheir own words, the joint endeavor of their classroom in ways that involved both metaphors for building ideasand implied a necessarily social process. When asked about drawing models, Ruthie said, “I like how this classis […] sort of like a mystery that you unravel day by day, so we're sort of like invested in trying to figure outlike what's the big like secret that we always like have (italics added).” Carly described model drawing in asimilar way, saying that when drawing a model in a group you can take in other people’s ideas and perspectivesand “piece together the puzzle.” From these statements, we see that these students were beginning to see theirmodeling activities as tools that allowed them to build knowledge together.Interestingly, students’ third interviews at the end of the unit described more articulately how peersinfluenced their classroom knowledge building during modeling activities. This shift is especially striking, asthe interview questions remained the same. Felix described how he considered peers’ ideas during modelpresentations: “I'm paying attention to what I don't have, […] but I would ask like, why would you put this in?And then if it gave me like a good explanation for it, I'd like think about it and try to put it into my [model], if itwas like really good.” Here, Felix described a three-step accountability process: he notices differences betweenthe presented model and his own, he asks for the presenter’s rationale, and he decides if the rationale is goodenough or not. Ruthie also articulated a three-step accountability process when she described how discussingsomeone else’s model helped the presenters: “Because if you're like telling them, […] like, you should probablydo this, and then they could, and then the whole class could like join in and see if that's a good idea or a badidea, because sometimes you have bad ideas, and you share them, but then like the class like keeps you incheck.” According to Ruthie’s description, a presenter shares an idea, a student offers a suggestion, and the classdecides if that suggestion is worthwhile or not. Although these students are not describing how they decide if anidea is good or bad, a process for which science has very explicit criteria, they are recognizing that knowledgebuilding in science class requires accountability for ideas. In other words, not only do they recognize that theirmodels and modeling activities are resources they use to contribute to the joint enterprise, but they are alsobeginning to recognize that there are particular ways to use those resources, and that using them requires thateach member contribute. Their participation in modeling activities is not just another classroom routine. Instead,it is a meaningful practice in which they, as a class, build scientific ideas together.Implications from Students’ Enactments and Perceptions of PracticesWe have shown how over the course of the unit, this class gradually developed meaningful ways of engagingwith scientific models that went beyond simply adding a new school routine. First, they used models simply tomake their thinking visible. However, students quickly took up the new joint enterprise—figuring out theprocess for how odor moves—and began making comparisons to prior knowledge and experiences in order togenerate new ideas and questions. In their next modeling activity, students continued to make comparisons tothings they knew or had experienced. They used these comparisons to initiate the one instance of extendedargumentation that occurred in this classroom during this unit, using their model displays as tools to workthrough ideas together. Interviews with students suggested that, both individually and in groups, they continuedto use their models to work through, rather than simply display, their ideas, and that peer accountability played asalient role in how their knowledge building worked. These shifts suggest that modeling activities in thisclassroom were developing as instantiations of a meaningful, purposeful scientific practice.So how did these meaningful epistemological purposes for modeling activities develop over time? Inthis case study, two important activities afforded students both epistemic authority and epistemic accountability.First, this class engaged frequently in the epistemological activity of making comparisons, especially when theknowledge source was students’ shared or everyday experiences in the world. These students often engaged in“everyday sensemaking” (Warren, et al., 2001) during scientific modeling activities. In this classroom, everydaysensemaking afforded students the epistemic authority to construct knowledge and allowed them to argueagainst a Jared’s claim even without deep content knowledge or scientific expertise. Second, students describedhow their class engaged in a simple form of classroom accountability to keep each other “in check.” At least toour focus students, peer accountability was a salient and purposeful part of their knowledge building.It is important to note that students’ forms of everyday sensemaking were valued and even praised bythis classroom teacher. The challenge for the teacher here was not learning to make sense of, recognize, andvalue students’ everyday ideas, as was the case in other studies (e.g. Lee, 2001; Warren, et al., 2001). Instead,this teacher struggled to connect students’ everyday sensemaking to more disciplinary ways of engaging inthose practices—or with balancing students’ epistemic authority with disciplinary accountability (Ford, 2008),or guidance for students in how they decide if an idea is good or bad. Mr. H’s difficulty in facilitatingargumentation demonstrates the need for explicit guidance or “rules of thumb” for teachers in how to helpstudents engage in more meaningful versions of scientific practices. Learning progressions for practices, then,should help teachers not only in understanding the disciplinary versions of scientific modeling practices but alsoin how to use moments of sophisticated practice driven by everyday intuitions into more disciplinarilyconsistent versions of the practices. In other words, we need tools that help teachers know how to balanceepistemic authority and accountability in order to develop students’ modeling practices deeply, connectingICLS 2014 Proceedings276© ISLSeveryday and disciplinary practices at each stage of a learning progression, in conjunction with tools that helpteachers move students from simple to more sophisticated versions of scientific practices.Endnotes(1) Although Hammer & Elby (2002) list “imagining” as a distinct epistemological activity, we considered the purpose ofNate’s move to be parallel to Summer’s: testing to see if Jared’s idea was compatible with things they knew or hadexperienced. Therefore, we coded Nate’s utterance as an instance of Comparing to [imagined] real-life experiences.ReferencesAchieve, Inc., on behalf of the twenty-six states and partners that collaborated on the NGSS. (2013). NextGeneration Science Standards. Achieve, Inc.Berland, L. K., & Reiser, B. J. (2009). Making sense of argumentation and explanation. ScienceEducation, 93(1), 26-55.Barron, B. J., Schwartz, D. L., Vye, N. J., Moore, A., Petrosino, A., Zech, L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998). Doingwith understanding: Lessons from research on problem-and project-based learning. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 7(3-4), 271-311.Duschl, R. A., Schweingruber, H. A., & Shouse, A. W. (Eds.). (2007). Taking science to school: Learning andteaching science in grades K-8. National Academies Press.Ford, M. (2008). Disciplinary authority and accountability in scientific practice and learning. ScienceEducation, 92(3), 404-423.Ford, M. J., & Forman, E. A. (2006). Redefining disciplinary learning in classroom contexts. Review of researchin education, 30, 1-32.Hammer, D., & Elby, A. (2002). On the form of a personal epistemology. In B. K. Hofer & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.)Personal epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing (pp. 169-190).Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Inc.Herrenkohl, L. R. (2006). Intellectual role taking: Supporting discussion in heterogeneous elementary scienceclasses. Theory Into Practice, 45(1), 47-54.Krajcik, J., McNeill, K. L., & Reiser, B. J. (2008). Learning-goals-driven design model: Developing curriculummaterials that align with national standards and incorporate project-based pedagogy. ScienceEducation, 92(1), 1-32.Lee, C. D. (2001). Is October Brown Chinese? A cultural modeling activity system for underachievingstudents. American Educational Research Journal, 38(1), 97-141.Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldaña, J. (2013). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook. SAGEPublications, Incorporated.National Research Council. (2011). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington DC: National Academies Press.Passmore, C., & Stewart, J. (2002). A modeling approach to teaching evolutionary biology in highschools. Journal of Research in Science teaching, 39(3), 185-204.Rosenberg, S., Hammer, D., & Phelan, J. (2006). Multiple epistemological coherences in an eighth-gradediscussion of the rock cycle. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(2), 261-292.Sandoval, W. A. (2005). Understanding students' practical epistemologies and their influence on learningthrough inquiry. Science Education, 89(4), 634-656.Sandoval, W. A., & Reiser, B. J. (2004). Explanation-driven inquiry: Integrating conceptual and epistemicsupports for science inquiry. Science Education, 88, 345– 372.Smith, C. L., Maclin, D., Houghton, C., & Hennessey, M. G. (2000). Sixth-grade students' epistemologies ofscience: The impact of school science experiences on epistemological development. Cognition andInstruction, 18(3), 349-422.Schwarz, C. V., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Kenyon, L., Achér, A., Fortus, D., & Krajcik, J. (2009). Developinga learning progression for scientific modeling: Making scientific modeling accessible and meaningfulfor learners. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 632-654.Warren, B., Ballenger, C., Ogonowski, M., Rosebery, A. S., & Hudicourt-Barnes, J. (2001). Rethinkingdiversity in learning science: The logic of everyday sense-making. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 38(5), 529-552.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge university press.AcknowledgmentsThis research was funded by the National Science Foundation grant DRL1020316. Any opinions, findings, andconclusions or recommendations expressed here are those of the authors.ICLS 2014 Proceedings277© ISLS