Analyzing Equity in Collaborative Learning Situations:A Comparative Case Study in Elementary Computer ScienceNiral Shah, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley CA 94720 USA, niral@berkeley.eduColleen Lewis, Harvey Mudd College, Claremont, CA 91711 USA, lewis@cs.hmc.eduRoxane Caires, New York University, New York, NY 10012 USA, roxane.caires@gmail.comAbstract: This paper presents a comparative case study of the different ways that equity andinequity emerged as an elementary computer science student collaborated with two differentclassmates on programming tasks. Data collected include audio recordings of students’interactions, field notes, written assessments, and students’ digital work. Using a mixedmethods approach, quantitative patterns were identified in the distribution and content ofstudent talk at multiple grain-sizes, which were analyzed in conjunction with pivotalsequences of interaction. Findings indicate that despite the existence of participation structuresdesigned to foster equitable collaboration, inequities emerged in both dyads as studentspositioned themselves and their classmates with identities as more or less competent incomputer science. While in the first dyad this positioning was often overt, in the second dyadpositioning assumed a more passive form. Further, there is evidence that these positioningshad an impact on students’ opportunities to learn.IntroductionCollaborative learning is a complex pedagogical undertaking that has the potential to foster both individualcontent learning and mutual respect between peers (O’Donnell & Hmelo-Silver, 2013; Webb & Farivar, 1994).However, when not carefully structured, collaborative learning can also inadvertently lead to inequitablelearning situations where all students do not have access to the resources needed for learning (Cohen & Lotan,1995; Esmonde, 2009; Sfard & Kieran, 2001). To better understand the interaction between collaborativelearning and equity, this paper presents a comparative case study of how equity (and inequity) emerged as twodyads of elementary computer science students collaborated on joint programming tasks.Learning environments are equitable when all students have access to the cognitive and socialresources that foster learning given their particular histories and needs (Abrahamson & Wilensky, 2005; Boaler,2008). From a sociocultural perspective, one resource that is critical to engagement in the learning process is apositive domain identity as a competent learner (Nasir & Hand, 2008). That is, if students are not affordedopportunities to develop such identities, or if they are actively positioned as having low intellectual status, thenthey may not participate in the kinds of practices (e.g., asking questions, sharing their ideas) that have beenshown to facilitate content learning (Cohen & Lotan, 1995). Characterizing the equity dynamics of acollaborative learning situation, then, call for an analysis of the processes by which students position themselvesand their peers as being certain types of learners, with varying potential to contribute to joint problem solving.The findings presented in this paper are based on a mixed methods analysis of field notes, transcripts ofaudio data, written assessments, and digital student work collected during a three-week introductory computerscience course for 10-11 year-old students in Northern California. The study focused on a student named Jason(pseudonym) as he collaborated with two classmates, Aaron and Samantha (pseudonyms), on separate days.Three strands of analysis were coordinated to progressively support or refute hypotheses related to the equitablenature of each dyad’s interactions: 1) quantitative patterns were identified in how talk was distributed withineach dyad across different phases of problem solving; 2) quantitative patterns were identified in the content ofstudents’ talk; and 3) qualitative analysis was conducted of key sequences of interaction in both dyads, whichshed light on how students positioned each other (and themselves) with respect to identities as competent doersof computer science.Findings indicate that inequities surfaced in both dyads’ interactions through two different types ofpositioning: overt and passive. In the Jason-Aaron dyad, Aaron dominated the interaction by overtly positioningJason as not capable of contributing to the problem solving process on multiple occasions. There is evidencethat this inequity had a material impact on Jason’s opportunities to learn. In contrast, data suggest that the JasonSamantha dyad was more equitable. However, while overt forms of positioning were less prevalent in theirinteraction, analysis revealed instances where Samantha passively positioned Jason as less competent (e.g., bynot asking for Jason’s input on something she did not understand before asking a teacher for help).These findings are significant because they illuminate aspects of the complex interaction betweenpositioning, status, and content learning. Further, they demonstrate how even when collaborations seemequitable on the surface, students may be positioning each other in subtle ways that lead to inequitableconditions. Understanding some of the ways in which students come to be positioned as competent is criticallyimportant to designing learning environments where all students have access to identities as capable learners.ICLS 2014 Proceedings495© ISLSEquity, Identity, and Positioning in Social InteractionIn educational contexts, “equity” has primarily been conceptualized in terms of either institutional barriers orperformance gaps on standardized tests. On the one hand, either a lack of material resources (e.g., computers,exemplary teachers) or a lack of access to the most rigorous coursework available (i.e., “tracking”) can limitstudents’ opportunities to learn (Margolis, et al., 2008; Oakes, 2005). On the other hand, even in the absence ofsuch institutional barriers, inequities can still emerge at the classroom level as students engage with each otherin the learning process.One dimension of equity that is linked to learning concerns is students’ access to the resources neededto construct identities as capable learners in a particular domain (Langer-Osuna, 2011; Nasir & Hand, 2008;Wortham, 2006). But what is meant by “identity”? According to Davie & Harré (1990), “an individual emergesthrough the processes of social interaction, not as a relatively fixed end product but as one who is constitutedand reconstituted through the various discursive practices in which they participate” (p. 46). Thus, rather than astable trait, “identity” can be thought of as the effect of an ongoing process of positioning embedded in socialinteraction (Davies & Harré, 1990; Hall, 1996).Applying this conceptualization of identity to the context of learning puts issues of intellectual statusfirmly in view. That is, learning is not a neutral process. The ways in which students engage in the socialpractices of learning are related to the positions they occupy within the learning environment. Students thatoccupy positions of high intellectual status (i.e., those that signify domain competence) may take up (or begranted) opportunities to participate in the learning process more often than students that occupy positions oflower intellectual status (Cohen & Lotan, 1995). Conversely, the more students engage in the learning process(e.g., by offering ideas, answering questions), the more readily they come to occupy positions of highintellectual status. A key point is that students are not inherently “low” or “high” status. Rather, the types oflearners that students become reflect what the learning environment makes available to them, how they aretreated by their classmates and teachers, and how they understand their own capabilities.Issues of identity formation and positioning are particularly salient in collaborative learning contextsbecause students are simultaneously confronted with both the cognitive challenges and social dynamics of jointproblem solving (Esmonde, 2009). For this reason, the present study sought to investigate some of the waysstudents come to be positioned as competent (and less competent) learners in computer science whilecollaborating with a partner on a common set of programming tasks.MethodsData were collected in a university-sponsored, summer-enrichment program for academically high-achievingstudents entering the sixth grade. The course was titled “Creating Music, Movies, and Games with Computers”and taught introductory computer science concepts primarily using Scratch, a visual, drag-and-dropprogramming language. There were two sections of the course offered, which each met for 36 hours over 12days during the same three-week period. Details about the research context and pedagogy are described in aprevious paper (Shah, et al., 2013). Forty-five students were enrolled across the two sections, of which twentythree students (51%) identified as female in enrollment records. After the first day of class, 12 students (6 perclass) were selected as focal students in an effort to maximize the variation between focal students with respectto gender, race, and personality.The course was designed and taught by the first two authors, who were supported by two teachingassistants. All instructional time was observed by at least one of three researchers who took fieldnotes focusedon one or more focal students. During each 180-minute instructional day, each focal student was observed for atleast 45 minutes and audio recorded for at least 90 minutes. A typical class included a 15-minute paper-basedassessment (referred to here as “warm-ups”), lecture and whole-class discussion, and students working onprogramming tasks presented in an online curriculum. The majority of each class involved students workingindividually or in pairs on the computers. On odd-numbered days students worked individually, while on evennumbered days they worked in pairs on the same computer. When working in pairs, students shared a computerusing a pedagogical structure common in computer science education called “pair programming” (Braught,Wahls & Marlin Eby, 2011). Pair programming utilizes roles to promote equitable collaboration (cf. Palinscar &Brown, 1984). Pair programming involves one student playing the role of “driver” while the other student playsthe role of “navigator.” Drivers use the keyboard and mouse, while navigators support the problem solvingverbally without touching the keyboard and mouse. Further, students switched roles every five minutes so thateach student has an equal opportunity to take up both roles.Comparative Case Study DesignThe full collection of 98 fieldnotes for the 12 focal students were systematically reviewed, discussed, andsummarized by the research team. The summaries included perceptions of the focal students' trajectories in theclass, interactions with partners and other students, and interactions with teachers. From a review of thefieldnotes and teaching experiences within the class, Jason was identified as a particularly interesting caseICLS 2014 Proceedings496© ISLSbecause of the variation we observed in his pair programming relationships. That is, because at times heappeared to be engaged in a productive collaboration, and at other times he was not, it was thought thatcomparing Jason’s learning experience across these different contexts might put into relief features ofcollaboration that might help explain this variation.Audio recordings from two days when Jason was pair programming were selected because theyincluded acceptable audio quality and variation in the quality of his partner interactions. On Day 4 of thetwelve-day class, Jason pair programmed with Aaron. Jason’s average scores on homework and warm-ups weresome of the lowest in the class, while Aaron had the second-highest average performance on warm-ups amongthe 45 participants. The content students worked on during Day 4 included programming their character to makevarious geometric shapes (e.g., a square “spiral” that progressively increases in size; a four-leaf flower). Thesetasks built on basic knowledge students learned on Day 2 about programming basic shapes, such as a triangleand a circle.On Day 6 Jason pair programmed with Samantha, who like Aaron was also a high performer in theclass: she had the eighth highest average performance on warm-ups among the 45 participants. The contentworked on during Day 6 involved making a game of “tag,” which involved students learning to use conditionalstatements (e.g., “if” blocks).Transcripts were created of all audible dialogue in the audio recordings. Each transcript was dividedinto turns, which were differentiated by either a new sentence or a distinctly new idea. Transcripts included fewindications of tone, but documented phrases interpreted as questions using a question mark.Analytical ApproachThe present study characterized an equitable collaboration as one where all group members have an equalopportunity to participate in the interaction, as well as to be positioned as having high intellectual status (cf.Cohen & Lotan, 1995). Prior research has used student talk as a measure of engagement in collaborative settings(see Barron, 2003; Engle & Conant, 2002; Langer-Osuna, 2011). As some have argued, researchers should becareful not to over-privilege talk, particularly in light of research showing that nonverbal behavior (e.g., eyegaze) is also a meaningful indicator of engagement (Sawyer, 2013). However, the lack of high-quality videoconstrained the possibility of such an analysis. Still, much can be learned about the equity in an interactionthrough quantitative and qualitative analysis of verbal communication. Overall, our analytical approach wasconsistent with Barron’s (2003) recommendation to emphasize the group itself as the unit of analysis.Analysis using mixed methods was conducted at three levels. The first level focused on the distributionof talk within dyads in three areas of interaction: total overall talk, across the driver/navigator participationstructure, and across certain classroom activities. In general, it was assumed that if the collaboration wereequitable, then the number of turns would be near equally distributed (i.e., 50-50). In addition to determining theoverall distribution of talk for the entire 90-minute interaction, transcripts were divided into six classroom“activities”: a) whole class; b) interacting with teachers; c) coding; d) designing; e) managing logistics; and f)off-task. Each turn in the transcript was tagged with one of these six activities, and then talk-distribution wasanalyzed for each activity. The rationale for this part of the analysis was that only examining overall talkdistribution might obscure inequities at a finer grain-size in activities like “coding,” which was particularlyrelevant to the problem solving process.The exception to the 50-50 benchmark was the distribution of talk within the driver/navigatorparticipation structure. That is, because navigators were expected to talk more given that this was the nature ofthe role, a 50-50 distribution of talk would not necessarily be desirable. Instead, the equity benchmark here wasthat the interaction would exhibit a “mirroring” effect, such that if talk distribution is 70-30 when Student A isnavigating and Student B is driving, then when the students switch roles (i.e., Student A is driving and StudentB is navigating) the distribution of talk should also switch (i.e., 30-70). This mirroring behavior could beinterpreted as evidence that students are honoring the intent of the participation structure, which was to promotefairness in their social interaction.The second level of analysis concerned the content of students’ talk. Based on a review of codingschemes in the collaborative learning literature, as well as a process of open coding informed by our field notesthat helped identify types of student talk that might be consequential for positioning vis-à-vis intellectual status,a coding scheme was developed that aimed to capture the quality of student talk. While the authors’ culturalinterpretations of students’ statements informed the development of scheme, the codes were designed todescribe the content of the talk rather than our perception of the likely effects. After multiple rounds ofrefinement on a subset of the transcripts, the codes stabilized and all of the turns were coded with the transcriptsdivided evenly between the first two authors. Each turn in the transcripts could be tagged with multiple codes.While some of the codes occurred with high frequency (e.g., “asking a question,” “issuing acommand”), other codes occurred with lower frequency (e.g., “complementing a partner,” “asking a teacher forhelp without consulting partner”) but were still considered potentially consequential for positioning. Highfrequency codes were analyzed to determine how a given type of statement was distributed in a dyad. ForICLS 2014 Proceedings497© ISLSexample, if one of the two students issued disproportionately more commands, then it might suggest an inequityin the collaboration. Due to space constraints, the findings presented in this paper focus on the two highestfrequency codes in the data: “student questions” and “commands” (subsequently described in greater detail).The third level of analysis involved a qualitative analysis of key sequences of interaction that were bothrepresentative of the interaction and that seemed consequential for positioning and learning. Qualitativeapproaches are particularly useful in revealing the processes by which overall interactional trends emerge(Sawyer, 2013). In this case, the focus was on pivotal moments in each dyad where students were positionedeither as competent doers of computer science or as having low intellectual status.FindingsThis section presents three levels of analysis: 1) distribution of talk; 2) content of talk; and 3) fine-grainedprocesses of positioning. Each level involves multiple strands of analysis, which were coordinated to generateand then progressively refine hypotheses about how equitable both dyads were in various facets of theirinteractions.Distribution of Talk within DyadsAn initial indicator of an equitable collaboration is whether the distribution of talk across the entire 90-minuteinteraction within dyads approached a 50-50 distribution. Figure 1 shows that while Jason engaged in fewerturns than Aaron overall (N=991; J:41%; A:59%), Jason and Samantha engaged in nearly the same number ofturns (N=1000; J:51%; S:49%). In terms of an initial hypothesis, these data suggest that the Jason-Aaron dyadmay have been less equitable than the Jason-Samantha dyad.Total Talk (N=991):Total Talk (N=1000):Jason	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  41%	  59%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Aaron	  Jason	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  51%	  49%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Samantha	  	  Figure 1. Distribution of talk within dyads.Distribution of Talk within Pair Programming Participation StructureA second indicator of an equitable collaboration in this context is whether dyads were respecting the norms ofthe driver/navigator participation structure. As described earlier, this would mean that: 1) navigators weretalking more often than drivers, and 2) that the distribution of talk would exhibit the “mirroring” effect (i.e.,when students switch roles the distribution of talk would also switch and be roughly equivalent).Figure 2 shows how the distribution of talk within each dyad compared when each student was actingas the navigator. Data indicate that the Jason-Samantha dyad satisfied both criteria of an equitable collaborationwithin this participation structure: the navigator always talks more, and the distribution of talk exhibits the“mirroring” effect (see Figure 2). When Jason was the navigator, he engaged in 56% of the turns (N=415;J:56%; S:44%); when Samantha was the navigator, she also engaged in 56% of the turns (N=353; J:44%;S:56%). This finding supports the hypothesis that the Jason-Samantha dyad was equitable.In contrast, the Jason-Aaron dyad did not satisfy either criterion. When Jason was navigating heactually spoke slightly less often than Aaron (N=341; J:49%; A:51%). And when Aaron was navigating, notonly did he engage in a greater proportion of turns (N=574; J:34%; A:66%), but roughly 200 more turnsoccurred overall. Altogether, these data suggest that Aaron was dominating the interaction, and lend furtherevidence to support the hypothesis that the Jason-Aaron dyad was less than equitable.Navigator - Jason (N=341):Navigator: Aaron (N=574):Jason	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  49%	  Navigator - Jason (N=415):Samantha (N=353):Jason	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  56%	  :Jason	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  34%	  51%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Aaron	  66%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Aaron	  	  Jason	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  44%	  44%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Samantha	  	  56%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Samantha	  	  Figure 2. Distribution of talk within pair programming participation structure.Distribution of Talk across Activity ContextsA third indicator of an equitable collaboration is how talk was distributed within the finer grain-sizes of activitythat students engaged in during the problem solving process. The analysis here focuses on two activity contexts:“coding” (e.g., generating new code, debugging) and “designing” (e.g., planning their project, making aestheticchoices about what their characters should look like). Not only were these two activities the most commonduring each dyad’s interaction, it was assumed that “coding” and “designing” would be especially relevant forpositioning and students’ opportunities to learn.ICLS 2014 Proceedings498© ISLSFigure 3 shows the distribution of talk when each dyad was engaged in coding. In the Jason-Aarondyad, the data show that Aaron dominated the interaction (N=492; J:34%; A:66%). Because “coding” waswhere much of the content of students’ work was generated, the imbalance in this activity context may havebeen particularly impactful in positioning Aaron as high-status (i.e., the one who knows the answers) and Jasonas low-status. In contrast, the distribution of talk in the Jason-Samantha dyad during coding was almost equal(N=485; J:48%; S:52%). Both data support the running hypotheses about the equity of each dyad’s interactions.Coding (N=492):Coding (N=485):Jason	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  34%	  66%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Aaron	  Jason	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  48%	  	  52%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Samantha	  Figure 3. Distribution of talk when coding.Figure 4 shows the distribution of talk when each dyad was engaged in project design. Interestingly,the analysis reveals that this is one context where Aaron did not dominate the interaction (N=328; J:48%;A:52%). This complexifies the current hypothesis about the Jason-Aaron dyad in that it shows that there was atleast one part of the interaction that did appear equitable. In the Jason-Samantha dyad, the data show that Jasonactually spoke more than Samantha during this phase of problem solving (N=163; J:55%; S:45%). However,because “designing” involved the aesthetics—as opposed to the content—of students’ projects, it is likely that itwas less consequential than “coding” in positioning students as academically capable or “smart.” Still, it isnoteworthy that Jason engaged in a greater proportion of turns during this particular phase of problem solving.Designing (N=328):Designing (N=163):Jason	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  48%	  52%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Aaron	  	  Jason	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  55%	  45%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Samantha	  Figure 4. Distribution of talk when designing.Content of Talk in DyadsComplementing the previous analyses, the content of student talk was also analyzed to shed light on the natureof students’ interactions. This section focuses on the two codes that occurred most frequently: “commands” and“questions.” In the next section some of the less frequent—but potentially consequential—codes are discussed.Note that while in a colloquial sense "commands" have a typically pejorative connotation, theoperational definition used here was more neutral and referred to any turn in which one student directs her/hispartner to execute a particular action. Still, issuing many directive statements may indicate a lack of respect forthe intellectual capacity of that individual to contribute. Figure 5 shows the number of commands issued bystudents in each dyad. In the Jason-Aaron dyad, Aaron issued nearly 100% of the commands (N=123; J:5%;A:95%). This finding adds strong support to the hypothesis that their interaction was inequitable. While thepattern was not as pronounced in the Jason-Samantha dyad, Samantha did disproportionately issue commands atroughly a 2:1 ratio relative to Jason (N=71; J:35%; S:65%). However, the total number of commands was lessoverall compared with the Jason-Aaron dyad (71 vs. 123 commands). This is the first indicator that the JasonSamantha collaboration may not have been as equitable as the analysis has indicated.Issuing a command (N=123):Issuing a command (N=71):J	  95%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Aaron	  Jason	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  35%	  	   65%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Samantha	  Figure 5. Distribution of commands.In addition to commands, the act of asking questions to a partner is also relevant to positioning becauseit presumes that the partner can answer it. In other words, asking a partner a question can be seen as activelypositioning that person as competent and, alternatively, not asking a partner a question can be seen as passivelypositioning that person as less competent. Figure 6 shows that in both dyads, Jason asked more questions thanboth Aaron (N=42; J:67%; A:33%) and Samantha (N=41; J:68%; S:32%) by almost identical 2:1 ratios. Anenvironment where students are asking each other questions may still be equitable if question-asking isreciprocal. However, because question-asking was imbalanced in both dyads, it bolsters the hypothesis that theJason-Aaron dyad was generally inequitable, and it further challenges the hypothesis that Jason-Samantha wasan equitable collaboration.Asking a question (N=42):Asking a question (N=41):Jason	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  67%	  	   33%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Aaron	  Jason	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  68%	  	   32%	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Samantha	  Figure 6. Distribution of questions.ICLS 2014 Proceedings499© ISLSProcesses of PositioningKey Sequences in the Jason-Aaron DyadThe preceding analysis showed that Jason asked more questions than Aaron, and that Aaron frequentlycommanded Jason. Based upon our assumptions that questions positively position the partner who is asked, andthat commands negatively position the partner who is being commanded, these data suggest that the JasonAaron partnership was inequitable. The qualitative analysis presented here demonstrates both how Jason ispositioned as not competent through the use of commands, and also highlights how Jason’s interactions withAaron were consequential for his opportunities to learn.A typical pattern in the Jason-Aaron dyad was a “command and clarify” routine: when Aaron wasnavigating that he would issue commands to Jason, and Jason would intermittently ask clarifying questions. Todemonstrate this pattern, consider the following sequence of turns in which Aaron provides instructions to Jasonto find a “When Space Key Pressed” block from the “Control” tab in the Scratch user interface, and to changethe “space” key to the letter “D” key.168169170171172173174175176177178179Jason:Aaron:Jason:Aaron:Jason:Jason:Aaron:Aaron:Aaron:Jason:Aaron:Aaron:So what next?When “D” key pressed.“D”…what?Control tab.Oh…here?Just press “D”?Don’t just press “D,” go to the Control tab.“When Space Key Pressed” [block]…do you see that?Space key pressed.This?Yeah, drag it out.Change it to “D.”With Aaron issuing repeated directives and Jason responding with clarifying questions, Aaron ispositioned as the “competent” partner and Jason is positioned as having low intellectual status. This inequitabledynamic relates to Jason’s opportunities to learn. For example, there was evidence that Jason was not alwaysengaging with the content of Aaron’s commands, even when Aaron’s commands would not produce the correctsolution. Following the exchange detailed above, the students are attempting to write a program that willproduce a 5-pointed star. To produce this geometric shape, the sprite must turn 144 degrees at each vertex.Students had not encountered the problem before, so it was not surprising when Aaron initially suggested thatthe turning-angle be 108 degrees:190191192193194195Aaron:Jason:Jason:Aaron:Jason:Aaron:Turn one hundred eight degrees.Turn – one hundred and. [speaking aloud while typing on the keyboard]Eight.That’s one-eighty [pointing out that Jason typed in 180, not 108]Oh wait – you want one hundred and eight?Yeah.In this interaction, Aaron instructed Jason to use the number 108, but Jason instead types in 180.Although Aaron’s suggestion of 108 degrees will not successfully draw the shape, it is a reasonable estimate ofhow much the sprite should turn. In contract, turning 180 degrees is not reasonable because this would cause thesprite to face the opposite direction. Given students’ prior experiences with Scratch-based geometry on previousactivities that day and two days earlier on Day 2, we would expect that students could easily determine that 180degrees should not be used in creating the shape. Jason’s statement in line 194 (“Oh wait – you want onehundred and eight?”) suggests that either he did not perceive 180 as an unreasonable solution or did not feel hehad the authority to challenge Aaron. As a result, Aaron’s incorrect estimate was left unchallenged, therebyimpeding both students’ problem solving.There is further evidence that this type of uncritical execution of Aaron’s commands hindered Jason’sopportunities to learn, in particular. On the following day of class, Jason requested teacher help for a reviewproblem that Aaron and he had completed the previous day. Jason reported to the teacher that he did notremember how to solve the problem “I don't remember how to do it, [because] when we did—well I didn't do it,Aaron did. I was there but I didn't really like...” (lines 287-288). Unfortunately, audio recordings areunavailable from when they completed the task for the first time. Jason’s statement that he does not know howICLS 2014 Proceedings500© ISLSto solve the problem may be accurate or reflect his lack of confidence; however, both could plausibly haveresulted from the negative positioning he experienced during his collaborative work with Aaron.Key Sequences in the Jason-Samantha DyadWhile considering only the distribution of talk, the Jason-Samantha dyad appeared equitable. However,analyzing the content of talk revealed an imbalance between them, as Samantha issued more commands andJason asked more questions. These two patterns may have positioned Jason as less competent. The precedingsection discussed how Aaron overtly positioned Jason as not competent by directing his actions with commands.In the Jason-Samantha dyad, however, there were moments where positioning was more passive.For example, recall that on Day 6 students were programming a game of “tag,” where one sprite wouldearn points if it touched the other the sprite. On one occasion the curriculum asked students to write code for a“power-up,” which is a special sprite in the game of tag that would afford a player bonus powers if touched.When Jason and Samantha reached this part of the curriculum, Samantha immediately calls a teacher over forhelp without consulting her partner. Samantha did not understand the concept of a “power-up.” As the teacherexplains the power-up, Jason repeatedly interjects comments explaining the idea of a “power-up.” It appears thatJason could have been a resource to Samantha if she had asked him. After the exchange with the teacher,Samantha asks Jason: “You get it?” (line 127). This further indicates that she was not attending to Jason’scontributions, in that she did not realize that Jason understood the concept of a “power-up” all along. However,this question may still show some level of investment in her partner’s learning.There were also three occasions (lines 347, 366, 574) where Jason was driving but Samantha made abid to use the keyboard or mouse. In these moments, Samantha seemed impatient with how quickly Jason wastyping or perusing the Scratch interface. Recall that one of the purposes of the driver/navigator participationstructure was to fairly distribute access to the computer, which was highly valued by all students in the class.Only students in the driver role were supposed to use the keyboard and mouse. Thus, Samantha’s bid for thecomputer (i.e., to “drive”) can be interpreted as an implicit refutation of Jason’s ability to handle the computer.So although such moments in their interaction were infrequent, they may have served to position Jason as a lessthan equal contributor.Discussion and ImplicationsThis paper offered an analysis of how equity and inequity can emerge on multiple levels as students interact incollaborative learning situations. In the Jason-Aaron dyad, Aaron dominated the conversational floor andovertly positioned Jason as less capable of contributing to their joint problem solving. In contrast, the JasonSamantha dyad appeared more equitable (e.g., they tended to share the conversational floor). However, analysisrevealed subtle inequities in some of the more passive ways in which Samantha also positioned Jason as lesscompetent.The Jason-Samantha case, in particular, suggests that rather than conceptualizing equity as a binaryphenomenon (i.e., an interaction is deemed equitable or inequitable), it may be more useful to conceptualizeequity as contextual. That is, in any given interaction there may be situations where a student had more or lessaccess to the resources needed for learning. In fact, recall that even within the Jason-Aaron dyad, thedistribution of talk was roughly equal during the “designing” activity context. Although “designing” may not beas high-status as “coding,” it is possible that the opportunity for Jason to engage within this activity may haveprevented him from disengaging altogether from an interaction where his partner was dominating. A differentcomputer science classroom in which students had no opportunities for “designing” may have provided evenfewer opportunities for Jason to participate in his collaboration with Aaron.A limitation of this research is that it took place in the privileged context of an opt-in summer programfor high-performing students. But while the students in this study may not be representative, it is plausible thatthe mechanisms of positioning identified in this paper would also occur in other educational contexts. Anotherconsideration is that the analysis of positioning and equity presented here was confined mainly to the locallearning environment. However, social interactions between learners are also situated within broader societaldiscourses (e.g., gender, race) that also can affect how students are positioned, especially in technically orienteddomains where stereotypes about the capabilities of different groups exist (Shah, 2012; Langer-Osuna, 2011).Future research in this area should aim to account for how such discourses mediate student interaction.There is growing interest in the learning sciences in issues of equity. To date, though, the field has fewtools for measuring equity in a collaborative learning context. And indeed, there is no consensus standard bywhich researchers can definitively determine the degree to which a given learning situation was equitable. Still,the methodological approach presented here aims to contribute one way of operationalizing equity throughquantitative and qualitative measures. Efforts to specify what we mean by “equity” can only serve to facilitateprogress toward the long-term goal of creating learning environments that foster student agency and preserve allstudents’ opportunities to learn.ICLS 2014 Proceedings501© ISLSReferencesAbrahamson, D. & Wilensky, U. (2005). Collaboration and equity in classroom activities using Statistics asMulti-participant Learning Environment Resource (S.A.M.P.L.E.R). Paper presented at the annualmeeting of the American Educational Research Association, Montreal, Canada.Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.Boaler, J. (2008). Promoting ‘relational equity’ and high mathematics achievement through an innovativemixed-ability approach. British Educational Research Journal, 34(2), 167-194.Braught, G., Wahls, T., & Marlin Eby, L. (2011). The case for pair programming in the computer scienceclassroom. ACM Transactions on Computing Education, 11, 1–21.Cohen, E. G., & Lotan, R. A. (1995). Producing equal-status interaction in the heterogeneous classroom.American Educational Research Journal, 32(1), 99-120.Davies, B., & Harré, R. (1990). Positioning: The discursive production of selves. Journal for the Theory ofSocial Behavior, 20, 43–63.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20(4), 399-483.Esmonde, I. (2009). Mathematics learning in groups: Analyzing equity in two cooperative activity structures.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(2), 247-284.Hall, S. (1996). Who needs identity? In S. Hall & P. du Gay (Eds.), Questions of cultural identity (pp. 1-17).London: Sage Publications.Langer-Osuna, J. M. (2011). How Brianna became bossy and Kofi came out smart: Understanding thetrajectories of identity and engagement for two group leaders in a project-based mathematicsclassroom. Canadian Journal of Science, Mathematics and Technology Education, 11(3), 207-225.Margolis, M., Estrella, R., Goode, J., Jellison Holme, J., & Nao, K. (2008). Stuck in the shallow end: Education,race, and computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Nasir, N. S., & Hand, V. (2008). From the court to the classroom: Opportunities for engagement, learning, andidentity in basketball and classroom mathematics. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(2), 143-179.O’Donnell, A.. & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2013). What is collaborative learning? An overview. In C. E. HmeloSilver, C. A. Chinn, C. K. K. Chan, & A. O’Donnell (Eds.). The international handbook ofcollaborative learning (pp. 1-15). New York, NY: Routledge.Oakes, J. (2005). Keeping track: How schools structure inequality. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.Palinscar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehensionmonitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117–175.Sawyer, R. K. (2013). Qualitative methodologies for studying small groups. In C. E. Hmelo-Silver, C. A. Chinn,C. K. K. Chan, & A. O’Donnell (Eds.). The international handbook of collaborative learning (pp. 115). New York, NY: Routledge.Sfard, A., & Kieran, C. (2001). Cognition as communication: Rethinking learning-by-talking through multifaceted analysis of students' mathematical interactions. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 8(1), 42-76.Shah, N., Lewis, C. M., Caires, R., Khan, N., Qureshi, A., Ehsanipour, D., & Gupta, N. (2013). Buildingequitable computer science classrooms: Elements of a teaching approach. ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, 44(1), 263268.Shah, N. (2012). Mathematics learning in a racial context: Unpacking students’ reasoning about “Asians aregood at math.” In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.), The Future of Learning:Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2012) (Vol. 2, pp. 222226). Sydney, NSW, Australia: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Webb, N. M., & Farivar, S. (1994). Promoting helping behavior in cooperative small groups in middle schoolmathematics. American Educational Research Journal, 31(2), 369-395.Wortham, S. (2006). Learning identity: The joint emergence of social identification and academic learning. NewYork, NY: Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings502© ISLS