Productive Disciplinary Engagement:Examining Negotiation of Group Activity with Multiple FrameworksDebra Gilbuena, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, gilbuend@onid.oregonstate.edu,Marja-Liisa Makela, Centre for Learning Research, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, mllmak@utu.fiTuike Iiskala, Centre for Learning Research, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, tuiiska@utu.fiSimone Volet, Murdoch Univeristy, Perth, Australia, S.Volet@murdoch.edu.auSusan Nolen, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, sunolen@u.washington.eduMilo Koretsky, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, milo.koretsky@oregonstate.eduMarja Vauras, Centre for Learning Research, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, vauras@utu.fiAbstract: Productive engagement in meaningful activity is essential for learning andbecoming in practice. However, learning systems that support such engagement are complexand usually studied in single contexts making findings difficult to transfer. We detail researchamong four universities who study these systems in different contexts. We illustrate how eachuniversity examines the negotiation of group activity and how their different frameworks andmethodological approaches overlap, are complementary, and can be integrated.IntroductionProductive engagement in meaningful activity is essential for motivation and progress toward flexible, adaptiveexpertise in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). However, learning systems that supportengagement in this way are complex and difficult to scale. Such systems are usually studied and designed insingle contexts, so the knowledge gained is difficult to transfer to new settings. We report on joint researchamong universities from Australia (U1), Finland (U2), and the US (U3 and U4) who study these systems. Weaim to identify unifying themes and develop generalizable understandings about supporting productivedisciplinary engagement (Engle & Conant, 2002) in STEM and capture the kind of interaction likely to result indeep learning of concepts and incorporation of practices. We focus on group settings in authentic contexts,where students must integrate and flexibly apply those concepts and practices. Using a single data set, wecompare two frameworks: (1) metacognitive regulation (MR) and (2) negotiating a joint enterprise in “figuredworlds.” We examine how students engage and interact with one another as they work in groups.Negotiation of Group Activity in Productive Disciplinary EngagementEngagement has been defined generally as “active, goal-directed, flexible, constructive, persistent, focusedinteractions with the social and physical environments” (Furrer & Skinner, 2003, p. 149). Engagement isproductive when conceptual or practical progress on a problem is made over time and is disciplinary whenstudents use the discourse and practices of a discipline in their work together. We operationalize productivedisciplinary engagement as learners using the discourses and practices of the discipline in the projects to “getsomewhere” (develop a product, gain better understanding) over time.Framework 1: Metacognitive Regulation (MR)U1 and U2 use this framework with different methodological approaches; U1 applies co-regulation and U2applies socially shared metacognitive regulation (SSMR). Both share theoretical assumptions of MR (Volet,Vauras, Khosa, & Iiskala 2013) focusing on how students of a group jointly regulate their cognitive processes toprogress towards shared goals. The core idea is to understand MR and communication as students work togetherin student-led, challenging and collaborative learning systems. A group is a social system of multiple regulatingparticipants with both group and individual levels, making it necessary to consider self- and social regulatoryprocesses as integrated. The first approach, co-regulation, combines the constructs of social regulation andcontent processing as two dimensions of socially-regulated learning (Volet, Summers, & Thurman,2009). Socialregulation occurs on a continuum from the individual level to the preferred group level, labeled co-regulation.Content processing occurs on a spectrum from low to high level. Two orientations of cognitive engagementhave been identified: task co-production and knowledge co-construction (Volet et al., 2013). We use thesecategories to examine the flow of group activity from the viewpoint of MR. The second approach is referred toas SSMR, which refers to the students’ goal-directed consensual, egalitarian and complementary monitoring andregulation of joint cognitive processes in collaborative learning (Iiskala, Vauras, Lehtinen, & Salonen, 2011).This approach was utilized reliably to identify different foci and functions of SSMR (Iiskala et al., 2011). Thefoci and functions of SSMR are analyzed in this work.Framework 2: Negotiating a Joint Enterprise in “Figured Worlds”U3 examines how individuals within student groups negotiate to reconcile what the group is trying toICLS 2014 Proceedings1651© ISLSaccomplish together, i.e., their joint enterprise (Nolen et al., 2012; Wenger, 1998). In addition, this perspectiveincorporates “figured worlds” (Holland, Lachiocotte, Skinner & Cain, 1998; Jurow, 2005) as a way to examinethe social worlds in which students are simultaneously immersed. In our illustrative case, students are immersedin the “school world,” where they must satisfy instructor expectations, and the “engineering world,” i.e., theworld of practicing engineers. Each world has distinct values and roles, which sometimes conflict. The closer agroup’s joint enterprise is to what occurs in engineering practice, the more authentic the activity. In addition tonegotiating the joint enterprise, groups negotiate a division of labor and workflow. With regard to thenegotiation of group activity, this perspective affords investigation of the nature of a group’s joint enterprise, theroles students play in negotiation of that joint enterprise, the actions or moves students make during negotiation,and the influence of the negotiation process on the joint enterprise over the course of the project.MethodsU4 provided the context for the illustrative case. The project studied was delivered in a laboratory coursetypically taken by students in their final year of an undergraduate engineering program. The three week projectwas designed to engage students in solving a “real-world” engineering problem via the use of industrially-sizedvirtual equipment (Koretsky, Amatore, Barnes, & Kimura, 2008). One group of three students was chosen forstudy because of their high level of engagement as measured by the number of hours they dedicated to theproject. The group was audio-recorded and observed any time two or more members met. Analytical methodsconsistent with studies described above were used on transcripts of the audio-recordings.Preliminary Findings, Conclusions and ImplicationsComparing the frameworks and methodological approaches highlights benefits of each. This poster shows howthese different frameworks overlap and are complementary, each emphasizing a different aspect of negotiationin group activity. Their applicability to this new data set means that they can likely be applied, eitherindividually or in an integrative way, to new contexts.ReferencesEngle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20(4), 399-483.Furrer, C., & Skinner, E. (2003). Sense of relatedness as a factor in children's academic engagement andperformance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(1), 148-162.Holland, D., Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge,MA: Harvard University Press.Iiskala, T., Vauras, M., Lehtinen, E., & Salonen, P. (2011). Socially shared metacognition of dyads of pupils incollaborative mathematical problem-solving processes. Learning and Instruction, 21, 379-393.Jurow, A. S. (2005). Shifting Engagements in Figured Worlds: Middle School Mathematics Students'Participation in an Architectural Design Project. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(1), 35-67.Koretsky, M. D., Amatore, D., Barnes, C., & Kimura, S. (2008). Enhancement of student learning inexperimental design using a virtual laboratory. Education, IEEE Transactions on, 51(1), 76–85.Nolen, S. B., Tierney, G., Becherer, K., Cooper, S., Eng, S., & Ward, C. J. (2012). Engagement in What? TheNegotiation of Joint Enterprise in Project-Based Learning. Paper presented at the The Annual Meetingof the American Educational Research Association, Vancouver, BC.Volet, S., Vauras, M., Khosa, D., & Iiskala, T. (2013). Metacognitive regulation in collaborative learning:conceptual developments and methodological contextualizations. In S. Volet & M. Vauras (Eds.),Interpersonal regulation of learning and motivation: Methodological advances (pp. 67-101). New York:Routledge.Volet, S., Summers, M., & Thurman, J. (2009). High-level co-regulation in collaborative learning: how does itemerge and how is it sustained? Learning and Instruction, 19, 128-143.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Nos. EEC1261930 and EEC 1261892. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in thismaterial are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.We would also like to acknowledge all of the individuals who participated in the studies associated with thiswork and the people who supported this work with their time and help.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1652© ISLS