Connecting Learning and Becoming: Studying Epistemologies andIdentities as Interconnected, Dynamic SystemsEli Gottlieb, Mandel Leadership Institute, P.O. Box 10613, Jerusalem, 91105, Israel, eligo@mli.org.il (chair)Leslie Rupert Herrenkohl, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195, leslieh@u.washington.eduStanton Wortham, Catherine Rhodes, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104Email: stantonw@gse.upenn.edu, rhodesc@gse.upenn.eduMartin J. Packer, Martha Rocío Gonzalez, Universidad de los Andes, Bogota, ColombiaEmail: mpacker@uniandes.edu.co, mr.gonzalez269@uniandes.edu.coAnna Sfard, University of Haifa, Haifa, 31905, Israel, sfard@netvision.net.il (discussant)Abstract: This symposium brings together researchers from different countries, researchdisciplines and theoretical orientations, all of whom are engaged in the empirical study ofconnections between epistemologies and identities in educational settings. By comparing andcontrasting their conceptions, methods and findings we seek to identify common themes andchallenges, on the basis of which learning scientists might develop a more coordinatedagenda for future research. Specifically, we propose to examine the timescales of processesstudied, researchers' assumptions about the conceptual relations between epistemologies andidentities, and the extent to which particular kinds of interaction between epistemologies andidentities are local or universal.BackgroundA growing body of research suggests that people’s epistemological beliefs are related to their conceptions ofthemselves as individuals and as participants in communities (e.g., Gottlieb 2007; Herrenkohl & Mertl, 2011;Packer & Goicoechea, 2000; Wortham, 2006). However, the nature of these relations remains unclear. There areseveral reasons for this. First, few studies have focused explicitly on investigating the relations betweenidentities and epistemologies. More often, evidence of such connections has been a byproduct of studies focusedon other matters. Second, researchers of identity and epistemology come from a wide variety of disciplines andtheoretical orientations, and rarely agree on operational definitions or methods of data collection and analysis.Accordingly, much of what research can currently tell us about how epistemologies and identities are related iseither exceedingly vague or highly theory-laden.The aim of this symposium is to begin an inter-disciplinary conversation about how learning scientistsmight study the relations between identity and epistemology in ways more conducive to building a body ofcumulative knowledge and to guiding educational practice. We seek to do this by bringing together researchersfrom different countries, research disciplines and theoretical orientations, all of whom are engaged in theempirical study of connections between epistemologies and identities in educational settings. By comparing andcontrasting conceptions, methods and findings from these different research programs, we hope to generateinsights into common themes and challenges, on the basis of which learning scientists could develop a morecoordinated agenda for future research.Following outlines below of the four papers to be presented in the symposium, we suggest three themeson which the discussion might focus.Heterogeneous Resources for Ontological LearningStanton Wortham and Catherine Rhodes, University of PennsylvaniaThe social and natural worlds provide heterogeneous resources that contribute to learning and to pathwaysacross which people are constituted. In order to account for the learning pathways that any individual travels,analysts must determine which configurations of resources become relevant in a given case. Out of the manyresources that might be relevant to constituting an individual, a few generally become salient. We illustrate thiscontingent process by describing one young Mexican migrant in the U.S., sketching relevant aspects of familyinteractions, educational practices, local community characteristics and national discourses. This girl, herfamily, and other actors combine heterogeneous resources in contingent ways as they establish an emergingpathway across which she becomes a “good reader.”As established by significant bodies of work, learning is not just a matter of accumulating knowledge.Learning is ontological, in the sense that learners become different kinds of people as they learn. Just learning acertain type of knowledge or skill does not in itself determine the type of person a learner becomes, however.Across a pathway of events, people draw on various resources in constituting the learner as a person. Whatresources contribute to this constitution of persons through learning? How do we determine, in any given case,which of many potentially relevant resources are in fact crucial in constituting the person?ICLS 2014 Proceedings1247© ISLSThis paper addresses these questions, using an example of one immigrant girl (“Allie”) as she becomesa “good reader.” How do we know which of the various potentially relevant resources in fact contribute toAllie’s emerging personhood as she becomes a good reader? In accounting for any focal object or process, likeAllie becoming a good reader, many resources could be relevant. Many resources are potentially relevant toAllie’s case. For example, over a timescale of two centuries Mexico and the United States have developed acomplex, hierarchical relationship, which has led to migration policies and economic conditions that lead someMexicans to risk traveling without documents, and this has yielded stereotypes of Mexicans as less likely tosucceed. Over a timescale of two decades, recent Mexican migration to areas of the U.S. that have nottraditionally been home to Latinos has yielded more flexibility for migrants, because longstanding residentsunfamiliar with Latinos less often apply entrenched stereotypes and thus sometimes give immigrants more spacefor self-definition.The town where Allie lives has a distinctive history of immigration, such that it is more welcomingtoward immigrants than many others. Over a timescale of one decade, Allie’s family has developed its ownhistory of migration, and Allie’s ontogenetic trajectory differs from that of many children in similarcircumstances. It is relatively easy to imagine how these foregoing resources or processes might be relevant toAllie’s personhood as she becomes a good reader. But many other potentially relevant resources exist. Forexample, Spanish and English differ in their grammatical encoding of motion. Given that Allie speaks Englishand Spanish, this might be relevant, but it does not in fact seem to account for important aspects of her socialidentification in the same way as the previous ones. How do we rule out such potentially relevant resources,determining that they do not in fact contribute to a focal process or phenomenon?In this paper we draw on Silverstein (1992, 1993), Agha (2007), and Latour (2005) to answer thisquestion. Silverstein (1993) and Agha (2007) provide general accounts of how relevant context is established forsocial identification within and across events, as people mobilize heterogeneous resources from various scalesby deploying signs that point to relevant context and help constitute some focal object or process. Latour (2005)complements this account in useful ways, providing a comprehensive account of how heterogeneous resourcesin a network together make social identification and other processes possible. He argues that the social world isconstructed out of heterogeneous “assemblages.” For any focal phenomenon a “network” has been constructed,and this network is heterogeneous in both scale and type. Ideas, objects, and dispositions from different scalesare brought together.In Allie’s case, as illustrated below, it matters that she grows up in a town of the New Latino Diaspora,where stances toward Latino migrants are less entrenched than in areas of traditional Latino settlement. It alsomatters that she is Mexican and not some other nationality, because of the history of Mexican migrants in theU.S. over the past century and associated models of Mexicanness. These two patterns, as well as othersdescribed below, form part of the network of heterogeneous resources relevant to constituting Allie’s emergingpersonhood, despite the fact that they have themselves emerged over very different spatial and temporal scales(the New Latino Diaspora over the past twenty years and models of Mexicanness in the U.S. over at least twocenturies). A network is also heterogeneous in type. Material objects matter, like the spatial and educationalsegregation of residents in Allie’s town and the resources like books available to children from different groups.Ideas matter, like the models of personhood circulated in the media that represent Mexicans in certain ways.And embodied dispositions matter, like the pleasure Allie takes in reading a book and her facility inconversations about text.In Allie’s case, we argue that these particular resources are relevant to the person that she becomes asshe learns to be a good reader, while many other potentially relevant ones (e.g., facts about English and Spanishverbs) are not. Latour argues that no particular process, scale, or resource is always relevant. Even though theNew Latino Diaspora and the flexibility offered there is important to Allie, this particular context or resourcewill not be important to every Mexican student in Allie’s town. Some of her peers travel pathways similar tothose established by Latino children in areas of traditional Latino settlement. Social analysts should not “limit inadvance the shape, size, heterogeneity, and combination of associations” in the network (Latour 2005:11). Wemust account for how, in a given case, a heterogeneous group of resources is assembled in a contingent way andbecomes the relevant network to account for a focal process. In our case, the configuration of resources mostsalient for Allie forms a relatively distinctive network. Our job as analysts is to describe the network ofresources that become relevant to a focal case or class of cases. Different cases will have somewhat differentconfigurations of resources that account for the person that a learner is becoming. Analysts must avoid one-sizefits-all theories that limit relevant resources to only a few pre-established ones. We must instead do the detailedempirical work required to trace the networks of resources that matter in particular.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1248© ISLSDisentangling Identity and Epistemology to Study How They're ConnectedEli Gottlieb, Mandel Leadership InstituteBroadly speaking, an identity can be defined as the conception one has of oneself as a person. Under theinfluence of Erikson's seminal writings on the topic (e.g., Erikson, 1968), psychologists have traditionallyconceived of identity development as a process of reconciling and choosing between competing selfdescriptions. Individuals who have arrived at a coherent, integrated conception of self after a moratorium periodof actively “trying on” and choosing between competing self-descriptions are considered to have achieved amature identity. Those who have avoided such choices, or whose self-descriptions are inconsistent and unstable,are considered to possess foreclosed and diffuse identities, respectively (see, e.g., Marcia, 1966).Whereas an identity is a conception one has of oneself as person, an epistemology is a conception onehas of knowledge – what knowledge is, how it is acquired, and how it justified. Psychologists have conceived ofepistemic development as a process of coordinating the objective and subjective aspects of knowing (see, e.g.,Hofer & Pintrich, 1997; Kuhn, Cheney & Weinstock, 2000). At first, the objective dominates and all knowledgeclaims are assumed to be conclusively verifiable (absolutism). Subsequently, the subjective dominates andknowledge claims are treated as expressions of mere personal preference (multiplism). Finally, a balance isachieved in which neither aspect dominates and knowledge is seen as something that is constructed tentativelyby evaluating evidence for and against competing points of view (evaluativism).A growing body of evidence suggests that identity achievement is associated with evaluativism,moratorium with multiplism, and foreclosure with absolutism (see, e.g., Boyes & Chandler, 1992; Krettenauer,2005). These associations make theoretical sense, for the reconciliation of competing self-descriptions can beseen as a special case of the general activity of reconciling competing points of view. On the basis of suchconnections, psychologists have proposed that epistemic development constrains identity formation. Yet thereverse might also or instead be true, namely, that identity formation constrains epistemic development.I have presented elsewhere (e.g., Gottlieb, 2007; Gottlieb & Wineburg, 2012) various empiricalexamples in which a research participant's sense of himself as a person determined the epistemic stance headopted to a given controversy or cognitive task. I presented one such case in an interview study I conducted inreligious and secular schools in Israel to investigate how children and adolescents justify their religious beliefs(Gottlieb, 2007). In that study, I reported on the responses of Shlomo, a twelfth-grader at a religious school, tosuccessive, differently formulated questions about whether his belief in God might be mistaken. His pattern ofresponses showed that, though he was keenly aware that God might, in fact, not exist, he was not prepared toadmit that possibility – to the researcher or to himself. In a more recent study (Gottlieb & Wineburg, 2012), wepresented additional cases of people's identities shaping their epistemologies. Specifically, we showed that evenprofessors of history - who are highly trained readers of historical documents, and expert users of a variety ofsophisticated epistemological tools to assess provenance and credibility - move with great ease and comfortbetween reading as a critical investigator and reading as a committed community member who considerscritique inappropriate. In other words, in both these studies we found evidence of people adapting theirepistemologies to fit their identities, rather than the other way around.However, the question of how epistemic development and identity formation are related is not only anempirical question. It is a conceptual and methodological one too (cf. Chinn, Buckland & Samarapungavan,2011; Greene, Azevedo & Torney-Purta, 2008). The extent to which these processes are found to overlap orconstrain one another will depend on how each construct is defined and measured. Because many, commonlyused measures (e.g., Harter, 1999; Marcia, 1966; Schraw, Bendixen, & Dunkle, 2002) were developed withoutconnections between epistemology and identity explicitly in mind, they include several elements that areambiguously situated in a gray area between epistemology and identity.In this paper I review some of these instruments and pick out three causes for methodological concern:construct validity, a focus on the products of identity negotiation and epistemological reflection rather than onthe processes thereof, and cultural insensitivity. I conclude with suggestions of how to address these concerns.In particular, I recommend methods that observe people engaging actively in identity negotiation andepistemological reflection as opposed to recording self-reports after the fact. In addition, I argue for measuresthat are comparative, not only across age groups but also across social contexts.The Relationship between Expertise and Interest in Science LearningLeslie Rupert Herrenkohl, University of WashingtonThis presentation will make a case for a broad view of learning by building a model that addresses theinterconnections between interest, identity, and expertise using the work of Holland, Skinner, Lachicotte, &Cain (1998) as a starting point. Building on my recent book (Herrenkohl & Mertl, 2011), two case studies willexplore how this model plays out in one classroom of racially, ethnically, linguistically, and socioeconomicallydiverse fourth graders and their science teacher. Data collection took place in a public science{ XE "science" }ICLS 2014 Proceedings1249© ISLSand technology magnet school situated in the poorest quadrant of a Northeastern US city. Approximately eighthundred children attended the school. As a neighborhood magnet school, it welcomed children who lived in theneighborhood and also served students from throughout the city as part of a voluntary de-isolation plan. In 35classrooms from preschool through grade 6, about half of the students were children of color. About one quarterattended a Spanish bilingual program at the school. Approximately ninety percent of the students qualified forfree or reduced lunch. At the time of the study the school had been in operation almost two years.Data included videotapes and transcripts of classroom discussions in whole group and small grouplessons as well as audiotapes and transcripts of interviews with students and the teacher. Each case studyanalyzes how a particular student interacted with others over time to improvise his or her own experience andcontribute to the creation of the cultural resources within the classroom community. I trace how each studentdeveloped and refined interests, identities, motivations, affective orientations toward learning, and personal andsocial values about what is worth learning and if, how, and why one ought to put certain knowledge and skillsinto practice.The two focal cases provide different entry points to understanding the relationship between identityand epistemological and conceptual expertise. Over the course of the study, Raul’s confidence and ability toexplain his ideas served as a basis for improvisation within new classroom values and practices. He wasinstrumental in creating joint understanding of key terms, epistemological practices, and concepts. He also tookothers’ perspectives to help the class discuss conceptual and semantic sticking points. Christie, on the otherhand, began the study lacking confidence and was in the bottom three questioners in the classroom, yet sheexperienced one of the most dramatic personal transformations. Over the course of the study, Christie wentfrom assuming a defensive, resistant posture to a more confident engaged approach, developing strongerepistemological and conceptual understandings and developing a stronger identity as a capable student inscience. These cases present a different view of how the “same” classroom was experienced for each student.Each student created, along with their other classmates and teacher, opportunities for students in the classroomto experience, own and exercise new ways of being, knowing, and doing science together as a class. Theoreticaland practical implications of examining interest, identity, and expertise together to account for learning will bediscussed.Learning and Becoming in Practice: Constitution, and Learning to Be MuiscaMartin Packer and Martha Rocío Gonzalez, University of the Andes, BogotáIn this presentation we will propose that the focus of ICLS 2014 on “learning and becoming” should beunderstood as a call to focus on constitution. Elsewhere we have argued that educational research in general canand should become a science of constitution (Packer, 2010), and the same argument applies to the LearningSciences in particular.Scientific explanation is generally assumed to take causal form, but in fact all sciences search for bothcausal explanations and constitutive explanations. The term “constitution” has become widely used in the socialsciences but has rarely been defined with precision. We will build on recent work in the philosophy of sciencethat has clarified the nature of constitutive explanation, as distinct from but equal to causal explanation. Causalexplanations assume that two entities or events are independent of each other, that the cause precedes the effectin time, and that if the cause had not occurred the effect would not have occurred.Constitutive explanations, in contrast, deal with entities or phenomena in which a whole is made up ofparts, as a system with several levels of organization. Constitutive explanations answer questions about whatsomething is, and how it comes to be. They account for the properties of phenomena by reference to thestructures, or systems, in which they exist. The relationship between part and whole is a symmetrical andreversible relationship: a whole is constituted by the organized activities of its parts; a change in the parts ismanifest as a change in the whole; and a change in the whole is also a change in some or all of its componentparts.Both natural sciences and social sciences ask (and answer) both kinds of question, causal andconstitutive, but the role of constitutive questions has been largely ignored. Sometimes it has been suggestedthat causal accounts provide explanations while constitutive accounts provide only descriptions, but this isinaccurate: accounts of constitution are also explanations; they explain the characteristics of a phenomenon bydescribing a structure in virtue of which those capacities exist (Craver & Bechtel, 2007; Van der Smagt, 2006;Wendt, 1998).For example, in a microwave oven high frequency electromagnetic radiation causes the watermolecules in food to vibrate more rapidly. This vibration constitutes heat. The vibration is described on one,microscopic, level of observation and description, while heat is described on a second, more everyday, level. Weexplain their relationship when we say that “molecular vibration constitutes heat.”What, then, might be the form of constitutive explanations in the Learning Sciences, and what wouldbe the consequences of a focus on constitution?ICLS 2014 Proceedings1250© ISLSThe Learning Sciences have been defined as the study of teaching, learning and development insettings outside the laboratory. When the influence of setting is treated as causal it is presumed that setting andpsychology are separate; that there are human psychological characteristics upon which setting then operates.Setting is assumed to be the cause of variations among human psychological characteristics. When, however, wetreat the role of context in human psychology as constitutive, we are suggesting that human psychologicalfunctions can be best understood as aspects of setting; that they would not exist if it were not for the setting, andthat setting and psychology should be described as two separable levels.We have argued that a sociocultural approach to educational research requires a nondualistic ontology:it must assume that a scientific study of ‘the mental’ as a material phenomenon is possible (Packer &Goicoechea, 2000). This follows the lead of Vygotsky, who based his proposal for a revolutionary new culturalhistorical psychology on his diagnosis of dualism as the root of a crisis in the discipline of psychology, andargued that the way forward was to resolve this dualism by the radical move of cutting away idealisticapproaches and advancing materialist approaches (Vygotsky, 1927/1997).This amounts to what has been called a “radical realism,” in which “there are not two worlds [mentaland material] that must somehow be shown to be connected by the ingenuity of philosophers, but one: thesubject is located in objective reality” (Bakhurst, 1991, p. 115-6). In this analysis, humans are enmeshed in amaterial and social world. Each of us is thrown into a world that predates our existence and that offers possibleways to be. By participating in a form of life we become skilled in the methods by which it is sustained,primarily through embodied expertise and habitus. Our primary way of understanding both ourselves and theentities we deal with is a practical grasp of the possibilities in social practices. In interaction with others interaction that is fundamentally negotiated and improvised rather than governed by rules or roles - wecontinually renew the order of a form of life. One can distinguish, consequently, three interrelated aspects ofconstitution: the order of a form of life, the work of ordering by which that order is produced and reproduced,and the formation of the orderers, the participants who continually carry out this work.We will illustrate these rather abstract points by describing a study currently undertaken by one of mystudents. The Muisca were the indigenous people living, when the Spanish conquistadors arrived, in a territoryof 18,000 square miles centered on what is currently Bogotá, Colombia. They had an advanced civilization, witha confederation of states, an economy based on agriculture, mining, metalworking and manufacturing, and asophisticated worldview. They have been declared a “lost civilization,” their language “extinct.” A 1943 censusrecorded only 525 surviving members.Since 1989, however, a process of reconstruction of the Muisca people has been taking place. Key tothis reconstruction is the creation of kindergartens in which children will learn again how to be Muisca. Tostudy this process of constitution we are conducting research in one of the three kindergartens, documenting theeducational practices in which the explicit focus is not only knowing but also becoming.Any such educational curriculum faces a chicken and egg problem. How to bootstrap the recreation, thereconstitution, of a culture, a way of life, a way of being, that has largely been forgotten? Consequently, ourproject is a collaborative one: we are keen to avoid the risks and costs of colonialist research design; we intendthat our findings will contribute to the ongoing design of instructional practices. The question, “¿Cómo serMuisca?” (“How to be Muisca?”), is both our research question and the practical concern that guides everydaypractice in the institution (an application of “Sacks’ gloss”; Garfinkel & Wieder, 1970).This might sound like a concern with “identity,” but we consider this concept to be inappropriate forchildren of preschool age. Instead we are viewing kindergarten practices through the conceptual lens of asemiotic ontology (Kockelman, 2005; 2010), in which ontogenesis is a matter of deepening levels of semiosis:interpretation of signs as affordances, instruments, conventional actions, and enacted roles. Children learn theculturally appropriate ways to employ material artifacts (such as a drum), the sanctioned forms of action inconventional situations (such as a greeting), the rules and laws that govern enactment of a social status (such aselder), and so on. These are levels of residence, of a way of being in the world, that together constitute a modernMuisca.Themes for DiscussionThree themes in particular seem to stand out as fruitful starting points for comparison between these studies.The first such theme is timescales. As Wortham and Rhodes note in their contribution above, there are manyresources that are potentially relevant to making a person who she is. But to determine which of these resourcesis more or less crucial to her becoming who she is in particular, we need to consider her participation inprocesses of various timescales. In Wortham and Rhodes's study, these include processes of Mexican-USrelations that take place over centuries and practices of segregation and differential allocation of resources thattake place in a particular town over several years. In Herrenkohl's study, on the other hand, the timescale is asingle school year, over the course of which different students respond differently to the "same" classroomresources and develop distinctive ways of being and knowing. To develop a more coordinated agenda forstudying connections between identities and epistemologies, we need to ask ourselves which timescales are mostICLS 2014 Proceedings1251© ISLSrelevant to the kinds of learning we seek to foster, and which kinds of research design have greatest potential toelucidate interactions between learning and becoming that take place at different timescales.A second theme is the conceptual relations between identities and epistemologies. Packer and Gonzalezappear to argue for a view of identities and epistemologies as constitutive of one another, or at least for the viewthat they are both aspects of what it means to participate in a particular form of life. Gottlieb, on the other hand,argues that epistemologies and identities are conceptually distinct. While he allows that, in practice, they areoften related to one another in a variety of important ways, he insists that these relations are contingent ratherthan necessary. Neither Herrenkohl nor Wortham and Rhodes address these conceptual relations explicitly intheir papers. However, the research questions they pursue and the ways in which they report their findingssuggest that each of them considers the relations between identity and epistemology to combine elements ofconstitution with elements of causality. A more detailed elaboration of these positions and the identification ofkey areas of agreement and disagreement between them is another goal of the symposium. This discussion isunlikely to produce a common conceptual framework on which all learning scientists can agree. However, itshould provide researchers with a more finely tuned vocabulary and an initial mapping of positions that can helpset future studies of relations between identities and epistemologies on a more explicit and coherent conceptualfooting.A third theme is the local nature of identities and epistemologies, and the corresponding variety ofinteractions between them. Each of the papers in the symposium reports on empirical studies conducted in andaround formal educational settings. Yet, each of these educational settings is itself situated within a distinctivecultural, linguistic and instructional ecology. Between Muisca kindergartens in Colombia, religious high schoolsin Israel, and ethnically diverse public schools on the east and west coasts of the United States, great differencesexist in the language, traditions, and cultural expectations governing what it means to learn and to become aperson. By discussing relations between identities and epistemologies against this backdrop of cultural diversity,we hope to gain insight into which features of these relations are local and culture-specific, and which featuresrecur across cultures.ReferencesAgha, A. (2007). Language and Social Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Bakhurst, D. (1991). Consciousness and revolution in Soviet philosophy: From the Bolsheviks to EvaldIlyenkov. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Boyes, M. C., & Chandler, M. (1992). Cognitive development, epistemic doubt, and identity formation inadolescence. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 21, 737-763.Chinn, C. A., Buckland, L. A., & Samarapungavan, A. (2011). Expanding the dimensions of epistemiccognition: Arguments from philosophy and psychology. Educational Psychologist, 46(3), 141-167.Craver, C. F., & Bechtel, W. (2007). Top-down causation without top-down causes. Biology and Philosophy,22(4), 547-563.Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York: W. W. Norton.Garfinkel, H., & Wieder, L. (1970). Two incommensurable, asymmetrically alternate technologies of socialanalysis. In J. C. McKinney & E. A. Tiryakian (Eds.), Theoretical sociology: Perspectives anddevelopments (pp. 337-366). New York: Appleton-Century-Croft.Gottlieb, E. (2007). Learning how to believe: Epistemic development in cultural context. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 16, 5-35.Gottlieb, E., & Wineburg, S. (2012). Between veritas and communitas: Epistemic switching in the reading ofacademic and sacred history. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(1), 84-129.Greene, J. A., Azevedo, R., & Torney-Purta, J. (2008). Modeling epistemic and ontological cognition:Philosophical perspectives and methodological directions. Educational Psychologist, 43(3), 142-160.Harter, S. (1999). The construction of the self: A developmental perspective. New York: Guilford Press.Herrenkohl, L.R. and Mertl, V. (2011). How students come to be, know, and do: A case for a broad view oflearning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Hofer, B. K., & Pintrich, P. R. (1997). The development of epistemological theories: Beliefs about knowledgeand knowing and their relation to learning. Review of educational research, 67(1), 88-140.Holland, D., Lachicotte, D., Skinner, D. C., & Cain, C. C. (1998). Identity and Agency in Cultural Worlds.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Kockelman, P. (2005). The semiotic stance. Semiotica, 2005(157), 233-304.Kockelman, P. (2010). Semiotics. In R. Wodak, B. Johnstone, & P. E. Kerswill (Eds.), The Sage handbook ofsociolinguistics. Sage.Kuhn, D., Cheney, R., & Weinstock, M. (2000). The development of epistemological understanding. CognitiveDevelopment, 15, 309–328.Krettenauer, T. (2005). The role of epistemic cognition in adolescent identity development: Furtherevidence.Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 34(3), 185–198.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1252© ISLSLatour, B. 2005. Reassembling the social. New York: Oxford University Press.Marcia, J. E. (1966). Development and validation of ego-identity status. Journal of personality and socialpsychology, 3(5), 551-558.Packer, M. (2010). Educational research as a reflexive science of constitution. In W. R. Penuel & K. O'Connor(Eds.), Learning Research as a Human Science (pp. 17-33). National Society for the Study ofEducation Yearbook, 109(1).Packer, M. J., & Goicoechea, J. (2000). Sociocultural and constructivist theories of learning: Ontology, not justepistemology. Educational Psychologist, 35(4), 227-241.Schraw, G., Bendixen, L. D., & Dunkle, M. E. (2002). Development and validation of the Epistemic BeliefInventory (EBI). In B. K. Hofer, & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.) Personal epistemology: The psychology ofbeliefs about knowledge and knowing (pp. 261-275). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence ErlbaumWortham, S. E. F. (2006). Learning identity. New York: Cambridge University Press.‫‏‬Silverstein, M. 1992. ‘The indeterminacy of contextualization: when is enough enough?’ in A. DiLuzio and P.Auer (eds.): The contextualization of language. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John BenjaminsPublishing Co.Silverstein, M. 1993. ‘Metapragmatic discourse and metapragmatic function’ in J. Lucy, (ed.): ReflexiveLanguage: Reported Speech and Metapragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Van der Smagt, T. (2006). Causation and constitution in system dynamics: Modeling a socially constitutedworld. Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 23(4), 513-524.Vygotsky, L. S. (1997). The historical meaning of the crisis in psychology: A methodological investigation. InR. W. Reiber & J. Wollock (Eds.), The collected works of L. S. Vygotsky: Vol. 3. Problems of thetheory and history of psychology (pp. 233-343). New York, NY: Plenum. (Original work published1927)Wendt, A. (1998). On constitution and causation in international relations. Review of International Studies,24(5), 101-117.Wortham, S. E. F. (2006). Learning identity. New York: Cambridge University Press.‫‏‬ICLS 2014 Proceedings1253© ISLS