Promoting Science Identification and Learning throughContemporary Scientific Investigations UsingPractice-Focused InstructionKatie Van Horne, University of Washington, katievh@uw.eduAbstract: With major policy documents making ‘the practice turn’ in science education, thispaper foregrounds how learners come to engage in scientific practices through immersion inlearning environments that build upon prior interest and identity and focus on these strands oflearning in relation to conceptual and epistemic knowledge development as youth participatein disciplinary practices. Scientific practices, conceptualized as a subset of social practices, arearrangements of comprehensible and comprehensive ways of knowing and doing. The linksand separations between the social practices present in learning environments serve tostructure the nexus of practices and allow for the tracing of engagement, participation andlearning (Bell, et al., 2012b; Dreier, 2009). I report on analysis of students’ practice-relatedartifacts.Introduction and RationaleThe Framework for K-12 Science Education (NRC, 2012) calls for the focus on science and engineeringeducation to be learning in practice. The release and subsequent state-level adoption of the Next GenerationScience Standards (NGSS; NGSS Lead States, 2013) bring forth to need to understand how all youth learnthrough practice. What types learning environments support learning in practice? What resources do studentsand teachers need to support their engagement in practice-focus instruction? This shift to focus on scientificpractices in science education can be used to support an educational equity agenda. Broad inequities in scienceachievement exist for youth from non-dominant communities. And yet, all youth should be to use science andscientific thinking in their everyday lives and, if they choose, in pursuit of science, technology, engineering, andmathematics (STEM) careers. Sociodemographic diversity in the STEM fields do not mirror the diversity of oursociety—although we know that broadening participation in STEM will improve the scientific knowledge that isproduced (NSF, 2008). There are broad-scale challenges associated with improving opportunities to learn for allyouth, especially those coming from non-dominant communities.In learning environments, specifically schools, this means promoting powerful, inclusive sciencelearning experiences for youth. Sociocultural and sociocognitive theories of learning (Vygotsky, 1986) haveidentified educational design principles that can be productively used to cultivate powerful learningenvironments. We know from sociocultural research that all significant learning involves identificationprocesses as people participate in social practices (Lave & Wenger, 1991). This perspective on learning – oftenreferred to as “the practice turn” in science studies foregrounds how learners come to engage in scientificpractices.Theoretical Framework: Designing from Multiple Structures of Social PracticePractices are collective actions that exist within a nexus of contexts that people and artifacts travel across andthey are affected by the instructional and historical natures of those contexts. Practices have norms, tools, andresources and are interconnected in localized networks that change and are altered by participants over time.Dreier’s theory of social practices situates practices in the in the complex interactions of people in the socialworld, across the contexts of their lives (Dreier, 2009). People live and participate in multiple diverse contextsand these contexts are socially and materially arranged to allow for particular practices to occur within them,together the contexts are separated or linked from other practices in a “comprehensive structural nexus of socialpractice” (Dreier, 2009, p. 196). This work maintains a focus on social practices in learning experiences.Students’ participation is contextualized within in four sets of partially aligned and competing bundles of socialpractice present in the learning environment: (1) contemporary professional scientific practices, (2) schoolpractices, (3) youth and community practices, (4) the practices of relevant social domains. The frameworkapproaches practices as patterns of activity that are influenced by the contexts of the performers, the goal of theinteraction in which the practice takes place, and the interactions with other practices (Rouse, 2007).Methods and DataThis study is design-based research analyzing one project-based unit that is part of the year-long introductoryBiology course. The educational intervention consists of a yearlong introductory Biology course designedaround five project-based instructional units delivered on a social media technology platform. During thebeginning stages of development, units were piloted individually in a collaborative co-teaching model withICLS 2014 Proceedings1613© ISLSresearchers in the classroom each day. This analysis is of the pilot of the DNA barcoding project that lies withinthe eight-week long genetics unit. The study consists of four analyses: (1) quantitative analysis of pre- and posttest scores and student-reported engagement data, (2) analysis of practices over the course of the unit, (3)analysis of student work, and (4) two case studies of groups of students across the cascade of practices thatunfolds in the unit. A subset of the analysis of student work is presented in this poster. The analysis is from thefull Spring 2012 data corpus for this unit that includes: student work and class performance data, approximately31 hours of video, student artifacts from 11 groups (4 students per group), one student focus group, andinterviews with four students and one teacher. This enactment of the unit took place with five biology classes ina public, urban high school in the Pacific Northwest.Analysis and FindingsAnalysis of student work occurred through coding based on key constructs from the literature (e.g.,performances of scientific practices, statements of relevance), as well as other written statements I identified asimportant to performance of practices (e.g., instances of connections between practices). Analyzing theconceptual theme representations allows us to understand the prevalence of the practices as mirrored in thestudent artifacts. I interpreted the patterns of indicators present for student engagement in scientific practices,school practices, everyday practices, and their referencing of relevant social domains.The curriculum was designed to engage students in specific epistemic practices of science in ways thatwere motivated by the investigation they were conducting. The scientific practices that students clearly engagedin as they completed the two documents were Planning and Carrying Out, Investigation and Obtaining,Evaluating, and Communicating Information, and Constructing Arguments from Evidence. Not surprisingly,this strongly fits with the instructional design focus of the unit. Unlike traditional school science investigations,however, these practices co-occurred and students employed the outcomes of one practice to inform theirengagement in another practice. For example, students decided what type of investigation they would pursue,agreed on a focus to that investigation, obtained and evaluated information related to their investigation,reflected on how that information informed or brought up questions or concerns about their investigation, andcontinued to search for and cite information in their proposals for continued funding.Conclusions and Scholarly Significance of the WorkBy engaging in extended investigations that required participation in the epistemic practices of science, studentswere able to engage in a sensible ‘cascade of disciplinary practices’ (Bell et al., 2012a). There were significantlinkages and separations between the bundles of practices in play in the learning environment. This workcontributes to helping understand how to take the practice turn in ways that are personally compelling to youthand connect them to more authentic forms of work of professional science. This is a new instructional model forthe field that cultivates powerful learning environments in formal education and explicitly focuses on scienceidentification.ReferencesBell, P., Bricker, L., Tzou, C., Lee, T., & Van Horne, K. (2012a). Exploring the Science Framework: Engaginglearners in scientific practices related to obtaining, evaluating, and communicating information. ScienceTeacher, 79(8), 31–36.Bell, P., Bricker, L. A., Reeve, S., Zimmerman, H. T., & Tzou, C. (2012b). Discovering and SupportingSuccessful Learning Pathways of Youth In and Out Of School. In B. Bevan, P. Bell, R. Stevens & A.Razfar (Eds.), LOST Opportunities: Learning in Out of School Time (pp. 119-140). London: Springer.Dreier, O. (2009). Persons in structures of social practice. Theory & Psychology, 19(2), 193-212.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.National Science Foundation. (2008). Broadening participation at the National Science Foundation: Aframework for action. Washington, D.C.: National Science Foundation.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next generation science standards: For states, by states. Washington, DC: Achieve,Inc.Rouse (2007). Social practices and normativity. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 37, 46-56.Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1614© ISLS