Teaching about Confidence Intervals:How Instructors Connect Ideas Using Speech and GestureElise Lockwood, Oregon State University, Department of Mathematics, elise314@gmail.comAmelia Yeo and Noelle Crooks, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Department of Psychology,ayeo@wisc.edu, nmcrooks@wisc.eduMitchell J. Nathan and Martha W. Alibali,University of Wisconsin–Madison, Wisconsin Center for Education Research,mnathan@wisc.edu, mwalibali@wisc.eduAbstract: This work investigated how university-level statistics instructors use gestures alongwith speech to connect ideas when teaching about confidence intervals. We identifiedsegments of classroom discourse in which instructors connected ideas, and coded themodalities they used to communicate those links. Most linked ideas were expressed multimodally, typically in speech and gesture.IntroductionStatistical reasoning is a critical skill for many career paths in STEM fields, and it is also essential in many otheraspects of life for citizens in modern society. As in any mathematical domain, one hallmark of conceptualunderstanding in statistics is understanding connections among ideas. Course work in statistics at the highschool and college levels seeks to foster students’ building a rich, interconnected knowledge base to supporttheir reasoning and problem solving.But, what factors affect whether students grasp connections among ideas? Recent research has targetedteachers’ instructional communication as one important factor. In mathematics and statistics instruction,teachers frequently highlight relationships among inscriptions, concepts, and procedures. In doing so, teacherstypically use speech, and along with that speech they often produce spontaneous gestures, defined asmovements of the hands and arms that are part of speaking. Teachers’ gestures contribute to instructionalcommunication in a variety of ways; they express emphasis, guide students’ attention to features of theinstructional context, and convey information (Alibali, Nathan & Fujimori, 2011). Gestures are ubiquitous ininstructional communication, and research on gesture in instructional settings, including both naturalistic andexperimental settings, is burgeoning (e.g., Flevares & Perry, 2001; Goldin-Meadow, Kim & Singer, 1999;Rasmussen, Stephan & Allen, 2004; Richland, Zur & Holyoak, 2007; Roth, 2001).In this study, we investigate how university-level statistics instructors use gestures along with speech toconnect ideas in introductory statistics courses. In particular, we focus on instruction about confidence intervals(CIs). There have been many calls for an increased focus on confidence intervals, both in statistics instructionand in reporting of research findings (e.g., APA, 2009). However, CIs are difficult to understand, and statisticsstudents often hold misconceptions about CIs (e.g., Garfield & Ben Zvi, 2008). The research presented in thispaper highlights potentially effective ways to make conceptual connections about CIs using speech and gesture.Students’ Difficulties with Confidence IntervalsUndergraduate students perform poorly on assessments of CI understanding (e.g., Castro Sotos, Vanhoof, Vanden Noortgate & Onghena, 2007). Additionally, knowledge of CIs does not improve significantly over thecourse of a typical introductory statistics course (e.g., Delmas, Ooms, & Chance, 2007). Difficulties with CIspersist even beyond college; researchers in many domains have trouble making inferences from CIs (Cumming,Williams, & Fidler, 2004), and often incorrectly interpret CIs (e.g., Coulson, Healey, Fidler & Cumming, 2010).One reason for these difficulties may be inadequate or incorrect links between CIs and other statistical conceptsand representations (e.g., Cumming et al., 2004).Teachers Use Gestures to Connect Ideas in Instructional CommunicationIn this work, we explore how statistics instructors connect ideas in lessons about CIs. We focus not only on theconnections that instructors make verbally, but also on the connections they make using spontaneous gestures. Alarge body of research demonstrates that gestures contribute to communication (for reviews, see Hostetter,2011; Kendon, 1994). Moreover, experimental studies suggest that students benefit more from lessons withgestures than from lessons without gestures (e.g., Church, Ayman-Nolley & Mahootian, 2001; Cook, Duffy &Fenn, 2013; Singer & Goldin-Meadow, 2005; Valenzeno, Alibali & Klatzky, 2003). Students demonstrate betteruptake of instructional information, more generation of new forms of reasoning, more generalization to newproblem types, and greater retention of knowledge from lessons with gestures. Thus, teachers’ gestures can havea substantial influence on students’ learning. There is also evidence that teachers regularly express linksICLS 2014 Proceedings1042© ISLSbetween ideas multi-modally. In a recent analysis of 18 middle school mathematics lessons, drawn from 6teachers, it was reported that when teachers linked ideas, they expressed both (or all) of the linked ideas multimodally in 90% of cases (range 65%-100%) (Alibali, et al., 2014).Research QuestionsThe primary aim of this research was to characterize how statistics instructors connect ideas during instructionabout CIs. We investigated whether instructors typically used multiple modalities (e.g., speech, gesture orwriting/drawing) to express the linked ideas, or whether they sometimes expressed linked ideas in a singlemodality. In light of past research showing an abundance of multi-modal linking in mathematics lessons(Alibali, et al., 2014), we hypothesized that instructors would tend to express linked ideas multi-modally.Note that we construed the notion of “linked ideas” broadly, to include inscriptions that aretraditionally used in statistics (e.g., equations, graphs of distributions), and also to include verbal expressionsand pictorial and gestural depictions of mathematical or statistical entities (e.g., a diagram drawn on the board orin the air). We focused not only on links across different external representations (e.g., between an equation andgraph), but also on links within a single representation (e.g., links between two elements within the same graph).A secondary aim of this research was to investigate the range of ways instructors used gestures toconnect ideas. We focused on the types of gestures (in particular, pointing vs. depictive gestures). People oftenuse gestures to indicate objects, inscriptions, or locations in the physical world via pointing. They alsocommonly use gestures to depict or represent actions, objects or events. We predicted that instructors would useboth of these types of gestures in communicating key ideas in statistics instruction; for example, they mightpoint to elements of a graph when referring to those elements, or they might represent the boundaries of a CIusing depictive gestures, to evoke a mental image of an interval in their students’ minds.In focusing on teacher’s communicative behaviors in statistics instruction, this work addressesauthentic practices in a key domain of student learning. Past research suggests that teachers use gestures to helpscaffold students’ understanding, particularly for material that is challenging for students (e.g., Alibali, et al.,2013). We suggest that better understanding of instructor practices in connecting ideas will yield insights intohow best to organize such practices for optimal student learning.MethodsWe videotaped four university-level instructors as they taught about confidence intervals in introductorystatistics courses. Three of the instructors were employed at a large public university in a mid-size MidwesternUS city, and one instructor was employed at a mid-sized public university in a large Midwestern US city. Thevideotapes were transcribed and analyzed using Transana video analysis software. Although other parts of thelessons were viewed for context, for the purposes of this study, only segments of the lessons explicitlyaddressing CIs were analyzed. Since different instructors organized the lessons in different ways, the overallduration of the CI portions varied. We recorded the word count and length of each of these sections.Identifying Linking EpisodesTo analyze the data, one member of the research team first viewed the video segments and wrote narrativedescriptions of what occurred. Next, this researcher and a second member of the research team went through thetranscripts and video (using Transana) and identified linking episodes. Linking episodes were defined assegments of discourse in which instructors explicitly made connections between two or more different ideas orrepresentations. These ideas or representations included representations of key statistical concepts, such asconfidence interval, sample mean, and population distribution. A linking episode was a segment of discourse inwhich links between such statistical representations were set up or described. Within each linking episode, theresearchers identified the target link(s). A target link was the portion of the discourse in which the link betweenthe ideas or representations was directly expressed. Some linking episodes contained more than one target link,either because the instructor explicitly stated the link multiple times, or because the instructor stated linksamong multiple ideas or representations in varying subsets (e.g., for a linking episode that connected ideas A, B,and C, the instructor might first state the target link between A and B, and then that between B and C, for a totalof two target links).The two researchers worked together to come to consensus on the portions of the lesson that wereconsidered linking episodes and which segments within those episodes were considered target links. Threepotential linking episodes were excluded from analysis because the researchers could not come to consensus,either that a particular episode contained a link or that a segment of a broader linking episode was a target link.Identifying the Modalities in which Linked Ideas Were ExpressedWe recorded the modalities instructors used to express each of the linked ideas in each target link. Each linkedidea could be expressed in speech, gesture, writing or drawing, or in multiple modalities. Gestures were definedas movements of the hands or arms that co-occurred with speech (e.g., spreading both hands apart while sayingICLS 2014 Proceedings1043© ISLS“the confidence interval is a range”). For target links that contained at least one idea expressed in gesture, wecoded the gestures using an adaptation of McNeill’s (1992) gesture coding scheme. Gestures were classified aspoints, depictive gestures, or writing gestures. Points were defined as hand movements that indicated a referent,usually with the index finger. Depictive gestures were defined as gestures that represented semantic features ofthe referents via handshape or motion trajectory (e.g., holding both hands apart with palms facing one another toshow the range of a CI). Writing gestures occurred when the instructor made markings on the board whilespeaking that either directed attention to particular piece of information (e.g., using chalk to mark a dotrepeatedly on the symbol µ) or emphasized the relationship between two or more things that were on the board(e.g., drawing a line from the mean (µ) to the upper or lower limit of the CI). We included writing gestures as aseparate category because these actions seemed similar to hand gestures that occurred with speech andqualitatively different from writing to put content (e.g., equations or figures) on the board.ResultsHow Many Links Did Instructors Produce?There was substantial variability across instructors, both in the amount of time they spent on CIs and in thenumber of links they produced during instruction on CIs. Time spent on CIs ranged from 16:54 (min:sec) to37:59, with an average of 25:03. The number of links expressed ranged from 5 to 27 links, with an average of15.5. Because different instructors spent different amounts of time on CIs, we also consider these findings interms of the rate of links per 10 minutes of instruction. The instructors produced from 2.96 to 11.70 links per 10minutes of instruction, with an average of 6.57. By definition, each link connected two or more ideas; somelinks incorporated as many as 5 distinct ideas. Averaged across instructors, the mean number of ideas expressedper link was 2.68 (range 2.5 – 3.0).Did Instructors Express Most Links Multi-Modally?We next examined whether instructors tended to use multiple modalities to express the linked ideas, or whetherthey sometimes expressed linked ideas in a single modality. Given past findings on multi-modal linking inmiddle-school teachers (Alibali, et al., 2014), we hypothesized that statistics instructors would tend to expresslinked ideas multi-modally. Table 1 presents the distribution of links for each instructor, classified according tothe modalities in which each of the linked ideas was expressed. The upper portion of the table includes links inwhich at least one of the linked ideas was expressed in a single modality, and the lower portion includes links inwhich both (or all) of the linked ideas were expressed multi-modally. Overall, in 55% of links, all of the linkedideas were expressed multi-modally. Note that this value is much lower than the comparable value of 90% forthe middle-school lessons (Alibali, et al., 2014). There was substantial variation across instructors in theproportion of links they expressed multi-modally, from a low of 40% to a high of 100% (mean = 62%).Table 1: Target links produced by Instructors A through D, classified in terms of the modalities in which thelinked ideas were expressed.Modalities in which linked ideas expressedABCDBoth/all in speech aloneAll in either speech alone or gesture aloneSpeech alone, gesture alone and speech+gestureSpeech alone and speech+gestureSpeech alone and speech+gesture andspeech+writing or speech+gesture+writingGesture alone and speech+gesture orspeech+gesture+writing0101120160000000202002100Total uni-modal links141202Both/all in speech+writingBoth/all in speech+gestureSpeech+gesture and speech+writingSpeech+gesture and speech+gesture+writing11020242015040210Total multi-modal links138103What Types of Gestures Did Instructors Use to Express Linked Ideas?Instructors used different types of gestures to express linked ideas. Depictive gestures were most commonoverall (58% of the 253 coded gestures), followed by points (32%) and writing gestures (10%). Instructors oftenICLS 2014 Proceedings1044© ISLSmixed gesture types within the same link; 45% of target links included gestures of multiple types, while 23%included pointing gestures only, 19% included depictive gestures only, and 3% included writing gestures only.The four instructors varied in their gesture patterns; one produced more than four times as many pointinggestures than depictive gestures, while the other instructors produced more depictive gestures than pointinggestures. These differences in gestural styles could be related to individual differences in the instructors’ use ofother visual representations in instruction.As an example of a linking episode in which the linked ideas were expressed in depictive gestures,consider Figure 1, which presents a target link in which the instructor connected point estimates to intervalestimates. The specific words that accompanied each individual gesture are marked in square brackets in theutterances quoted below. Just prior to this segment, the class had worked through an example in which the meanvalue was 21.73. As the instructor began the discussion of CIs, he explained that the point estimate was thismean, saying, “And so our point estimate in this case is going to be the mean of the sample. So that's whereyou're going to start with the confidence interval, giving that [point estimate]. That's your best guess.” With thisutterance, he put his fingers (of both hands) together in front of him, representing a point (Figure 1, first panel).He went on to note, however, that the mean is an overly precise estimate, and that another sample would notnecessarily yield the same value (21.73) again. Then he introduced the idea of a CI, saying, “And so what we dowith the confidence interval [is just to widen that], [make] a little bracket. And that becomes our confidenceinterval.” With this utterance, he simultaneously extended both hands downward at 45-degree angles, ending byrepresenting an interval “bracket” (Figure 1, second and third panels). Thus, in this example, the instructorlinked point estimates and interval estimates using depictive gestures that expressed each concept, and that alsoexpressed the notion of widening. This series of gestures could help students understand the quantitativerelations between point and interval estimates, by presenting a visuospatial representation of the key ideas beinglinked. The visual representations the instructor expressed in gestures could clarify the verbal labels and supportstudents’ understanding of how point estimates and interval estimates are related.This instructor returned repeatedly to the idea captured by these gestures throughout the lesson, and infact, he repeated this basic set of gestures three additional times, producing what McNeill and Duncan (2000)termed a gestural catchment – a set of gestures in which some physical features of the gestures, or the entiregestures, are repeated. Catchments function to increase cohesion of the discourse—in, this case, perhaps, tofoster a cohesive understanding of the relations between point estimates and interval estimates.Figure 1. Target link in which both linked ideas (point estimate and interval estimate)were expressed in depictive gestures.DiscussionStatistical knowledge is indispensable in many ways in modern society, from helping researchers in the learningsciences to conduct sound studies, to making culturally and politically responsible citizens. Among statisticaltopics, CIs are of central importance, but students often have misconceptions about them. This research bridgesstatistics education, embodied cognition, and gesture studies, and in so doing contributes to a broaderperspective on teaching practices, and a specific focus on aspects of such practices that might affect studentlearning. Specifically, this work documents that instructors use gesture, as well as speech and writing, toconnect ideas multi-modally in instruction on CIs.Past research in other mathematical domains has suggested that teachers’ gestures serve to scaffoldstudents’ understanding of central concepts in the lessons (e.g., Alibali et al., 2013). One reason gestures maysupport students’ comprehension and learning of instructional material is because they offer an alternative,visuo-spatial format for expressing ideas. Statistics involves many visuo-spatial representations (such as numberlines and graphs of distributions) so gesture is a potentially valuable communicative modality in this domain.Although the statistics instructors in this study expressed a majority of links multi-modally, they usedmany fewer multi-modal links than the middle school teachers studied in previous work (55% of links forstatistics instructors vs. 90% for middle school teachers) (Alibali, et al., 2014). Many factors might account forthis difference. Younger students may benefit more from teachers’ gestures than older students (Hostetter,2011), and teachers may recognize this implicitly and adjust their use of gestures to match their students’ needs.Alternatively, differences in content may account for some of the difference.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1045© ISLSIn sum, we have shown that gesture is pervasive in college-level instruction on CIs, and that it is usedto convey important information about connections among ideas. This work paves the way for future studiesthat will test the implications of variations in instructors’ linking for students’ learning about CIs. It is our hopethat ultimately, this line of inquiry will lead to empirically based recommendations regarding effective modes ofcommunicating links among ideas in this important STEM domain.ReferencesAlibali, M. W. & Nathan, M. J. (2012). Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning: Evidence fromstudents’ and teachers’ gestures. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21, 247-286.Alibali, M. W., Nathan, M. J., Church, R. B., Wolfgram, M. S., Kim, S., & Knuth, E. J. (2013). Gesture andspeech in mathematics lessons: Forging common ground by resolving trouble spots. ZDM –International Journal on Mathematics Education, 45, 425-440.Alibali, M. W., Nathan, M. J., & Fujimori, Y. (2011). Gestures in the mathematics classroom: What’s the point?In N. L. Stein & S. W. Raudenbush (Eds.), Developmental cognitive science goes to school (pp. 219234). New York: Routledge, Taylor & Francis.Alibali, M. W., Nathan, M. J., Wolfgram, M. S., Church, R. B., Johnson, C. V., Jacobs, S. A., & Knuth, E. J.(2014). How teachers link ideas in mathematics instruction using speech and gesture: A corpusanalysis. Cognition and Instruction, 32(1), 65-100.American Psychological Association (2009). Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association(6th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.Castro Sotos, A. E., Vanhoof, S., Van den Noortgate, W., & Onghena, P. (2007). Students’ misconceptions ofstatistical inference: A review of the empirical evidence from research on statistics education.Educational Research Review, 2, 98–113.Church, R. B., Ayman-Nolley, S., & Mahootian, S. (2004). The role of gesture in bilingual education: Doesgesture enhance learning? International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 7, 303–319.Cook, S. W, Duffy, R. G., & Fenn, K. M. (2013). Consolidation and transfer of learning after observing handgesture. Child Development, 84(6),1863-1871.Cumming, G., Williams, J., & Fidler, F. (2004). Replication and researchers’ understanding of confidenceintervals and standard error bars. Understanding Statistics, 3(4), 299-311.Coulson, M., Healey, M., Fidler, F., & Cumming, G. (2010). Confidence intervals permit, but do not guarantee,better inference than statistical significance testing. Frontiers in Psychology, 1, 1-9.Delmas, R., Garfield, J., Ooms, A., & Chance, B. (2007) Assessing students’ conceptual understanding after afirst course in statistics. Statistics Education Research Journal, 62(2), 28-58.Flevares, L. M., & Perry, M. (2001). How many do you see? The use of nonspoken representations in firstgrade mathematics lessons. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93, 330-345.Garfield, J., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2008). Developing students’ statistical reasoning: Connecting research andteaching practice. Emeryville, CA: Key College.Goldin-Meadow, S., Kim, S., & Singer, M. (1999). What the teachers’ hands tell the student’s mind aboutmath. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 720-730.Hostetter, A. B. (2011). When do gestures communicate? A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 137(2), 297315.Kendon, A. (1994). Do gestures communicate? A review. Research on Language and Social Interaction, 27,175-200.McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.McNeill, D., & Duncan, S. D. (2000). Growth points in thinking-for-speaking. In D. McNeill (Ed.). Languageand gesture: Window into thought and action (pp. 141-161). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Rasmussen, C., Stephan, M., & Allen, K. (2004). Classroom mathematical practices and gesturing. Journal ofMathematical Behavior, 23, 301–324.Richland, L. E., Zur, O., & Holyoak, K. J. (2007). Cognitive supports for analogies in the mathematicsclassroom. Science, 316, 1128-1129.Roth, W-M. (2001). Gestures: Their role in teaching and learning. Review of Educational Research, 71, 365392.Singer, M. A., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Children learn when their teacher's gestures and speech differ.Psychological Science, 16, 85-89.Valenzeno, L., Alibali, M. W., & Klatzky, R. L. (2003). Teachers’ gestures facilitate students’ learning: Alesson in symmetry. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 28, 187-204.AcknowledgmentsThis research was funded by a grant #0909699 from the National Science Foundation. We thank Steve Jacobsand Breckie Church for their contributions to this research.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1046© ISLS