Personas as a Powerful Methodology to Design TargetedProfessional Development ResourcesAdrian Madsen and Sarah B. McKagan, American Association of Physics Teachers, College Park, MD 20740Eleanor C. Sayre, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506Matthew Martinuk and Alexander Bell, Cognition Technology, Vancouver, BC V5N3Z2Email: {amadsen, smckagan}@aapt.org, esayre@ksu.edu, {sandy, alex}@cognitiontec.comAbstract: Scaling and sustaining educational innovations is a common problem in thelearning sciences. Professional development resources around educational innovations that arepersonalized to appeal to the needs and motivations of different types of faculty offer apossible solution. The method of developing “personas” to represent key types of users iscommonly employed in user-interface design and can be used to produce personalizedresources. Personas are fictional named archetypes of users encompassing generalizations oftheir key characteristics and goals that emerge from interviews. This method is especiallypowerful because personas succinctly package information into the form of a person, who iseasily understood and reasoned about. Herein we describe the creation of a set of personasfocusing on the needs and motivations of physics faculty around assessment and teaching. Wepresent the personas, a discussion of how they inform our design and how the method can beused more broadly.IntroductionA common issue in the learning sciences is the scaling and sustaining of educational innovations. Educators andresearchers continually focus on creating new curricula and teaching methods, but many promising innovationsare not as effective when implemented by different teachers in new settings (Penuel, Fishman, Haugan Cheng,& Sabelli, 2011) so faculty stop using them (Henderson, Dancy, & Niewiadomska-Bugaj, 2012). The primarystrategy used in science professional development at the university level is to disseminate educationalinnovations as finished products (Henderson, Finkelstein, & Beach, 2010). This strategy assumes that successfulimplementation does not depend on the details of the particular faculty members, students and institutions. Itdoes not leave room for the faculty member to play a meaningful role in the improvements or take into accounttheir unique environment (Henderson et al., 2010). This is problematic as faculty value the uniqueness of theirpersonal styles, skills and preferences when choosing a teaching method (Henderson & Dancy, 2008). It may bethat there is too much focus on getting faculty to use the educational innovation “as is” and not enough focus onthe individuality of the faculty and their environments.One way to address scale and sustainability is through personalized professional development designedto take into account the diverse needs, motivations and environments of teachers and faculty who are potentialor current users of educational innovations. We believe that personalized professional development resourceswill increase implementation and continuing use of these innovations because they target the things that facultymembers actually care about. We are specifically designing a professional development website, the PhysicsEducation Researcher (PER) User’s Guide (www.perusersguide.org), to support faculty use of curricular andassessment innovations in physics at the university level. Our aim is to understand the needs, motivations andenvironments of different types of faculty, prioritize which types of faculty our site will be designed for anddesign our website in a way that speaks to each and meets real needs.We propose that the method of creating “personas” is a powerful way to understand different types offaculty members who are potential or continuing implementers of educational innovations. This method isprimarily used in the user-interface design process where designers create new technology products to match theneeds of potential users (Cooper, 2004; Jacobs, Dreessen, & Pierson, 2008). The creation and use of personas isa well-established research technique where rich sets of qualitative data about users’ goals and experiences aresynthesized into user archetypes called “personas.” These personas are generalizations of key characteristics andgoals of potential users. Personas are described as “fictional, detailed archetypical characters that representgrouping of behaviors, goals and motivations observed and identified during the research phase” (Calde,Goodwin, & Reimann, 2002). They are usually named and assigned a picture to help them feel like real people.Personas as a method has roots in ethnography (Blomberg & Burrell, 2009) as well as human computerinteraction (Sears & Jacko, 2007).A common problem in the design process (we use the term “design” in the engineering sense) is havingtoo vague an idea of who the users are. Without clarity, it is impossible to communicate about the specific needsand goals of the users and design a resource or experience to meet these. This is referred to as the problem of the“elastic user” who stretches and changes as the needs and constraints of the project change (Cooper, 2004). Toaddress this problem, one could design for a specific user, but this produces a product that is too narrowlyICLS 2014 Proceedings1082© ISLSfocused (Jacobs et al., 2008). Instead one could compile information on many users in the form of a report onkey demographics and characteristics of users. The detailed nature of these reports makes them cumbersome touse (Pruitt & Adlin, 2010) and they are not naturally reasoned about by the human mind (Grudin, 2006).In order to help designers understand, communicate about and effectively design for a variety of users,personas are used. These clearly defined representations of people package a large amount of information into asuccinct format that is easy to understand and gives the design team something concrete to refer to and discuss(Pruitt & Adlin, 2010; Yström, Peterson, Von Sydow, & Malmqvist, 2010). Personas help the designers becomeuser-centered and avoid self-centered designs (Pruitt & Adlin, 2010). Personas are an especially powerfulcommunication tool because we as humans are innately equipped to generate and engage with representations ofpeople, as opposed to statistical summaries, which are more difficult for us to engage with (Grudin, 2006). Thepersonas do not represent individual users but contain key differentiating characteristics from an amalgamationof users. This allows designers to focus on important characteristics and not get sidetracked by superfluousdetails. The abstraction of personas away from the interviewees upon which they are based also ensures theanonymity of participants, which is especially important when focusing on sensitive issues that participantswould not discuss unless anonymity were guaranteed. Further, there are cases where even though participantsare not identified outright, their uniqueness creates an anonymity set too small to protect their identity. Creatingpersonas for these kinds of participants ensures their protection. Finally, personas are referred back tothroughout the entire project to ensure that the product does not depart from the needs of the actual users.There are several limitations of the method of personas. Because personas blend togethercharacteristics of many users, it is hard to tell which and how many users each persona actually represents(Chapman & Milham, 2006). There is a propensity for designers to base their understanding of users onstereotypes and not the actual users (Turner & Turner, 2011). This can be mitigated by closely coupling data tothe persona creation. Personas are difficult to validate, as they emerge from an interaction of the specific set ofusers interviewed, the questions discussed and decisions by the design team (Chapman & Milham, 2006). Thedesigners make conscious decisions about what aspects of the users to include in the personas based on whichaspects they understand are important to the final product. It is likely that given a similar topic but different setof users and designers, different personas would emerge. That being said, validity can be established with expertreview (Yström, Peterson, Sydow, & Malmqvist, 2009). The effectiveness of the final product for the intendeduser base is an additional measure of validity.In this paper we detail our methodology, describe the personas that emerged from our interviews anddiscuss their usefulness in designing professional development resources around educational innovations.Methodology: Creation of PersonasWe used semi-structured interviews to learn about faculty members’ and department heads’ current practicesand needs around assessment in physics. We interviewed 13 physics faculty and 11 physics department heads inonline interviews. Video was used in most. We recruited faculty members from a list of participants from aprofessional development workshop for new faculty held several years earlier. We sent faculty an emailinvitation to participate. We subsequently received recommendations from current participants and the projectstaff for other faculty who might be willing to participate and invited them. We recruited department heads froma list of participants from a different professional development workshop held the previous summer. A sufficientnumber of these department heads agreed to participate, so no additional invitations were needed. Our overallsample included eight participants from undergraduate serving public institutions, six from undergraduateserving private institutions and 10 from research institutions.As part of our interview protocol, we asked participants about their background, school anddepartment, current teaching practices and use of assessment, needs around assessment and how our onlineresources might meet their needs. Our interview team included two user interface designers (one is a formerphysics education researcher) and a physics education researcher. During most of the interviews, one teammember engaged with the interviewee while the others listened and took notes. The interviews were recordedand after each interview, the team members individually wrote down the key points they noticed, primarilyattending to the user’s motivations and goals, tasks that they commonly completed around assessment, attitudesand beliefs, needs, pain points and constraints. These items were often discussed amongst the team membersbefore the next interview. After several interviews, the team identified a few characteristics that varied amongthe interviewees and strongly influenced their teaching and assessment practices. For example, the interviewees’level of “buy-in” to educational innovations and knowledge of these resources varied significantly and had astrong impact on their use of research-based materials. We plotted the participants on these two axes and foundgroupings of participants, which helped in the initial development of the personas. As the interviews progressed,we continued to identify key differentiators and used a constant comparison protocol to determine if they weremeaningful. As we reached saturation, we developed an initial profile for each persona and tested these to see ifthey fit the actual users we had interviewed.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1083© ISLSAfter we had completed all the interviews, one team member re-listened to most of the interviews andtook additional notes on goals, motivations and needs, writing down key illustrative quotes. These quotes wereused to create a document synthesizing the tasks, behaviors and attitudes of each persona. These quotes andsynthesis were used to once again modify the personas. Finally, we discussed the current version of the personasas a team and made additional changes based on evidence presented in the discussion.Using the final versions of the personas, we ranked each on the variety of differentiating characteristicsidentified during the persona construction process, e.g., the degree to which faculty valued evidence or intuitionto guide their teaching and assessment practices. These rankings helped fill out the important characteristics ofthe personas. With a rich understanding of the personas, we created task flows and outlined associated painpoints. Task flows are detailed lists of steps describing common tasks users complete around the aim of theproject, in our case, common tasks around teaching and assessment. Examples include finding a new researchbased assessment or teaching method or comparing the results of an assessment. Within each task flow, weidentified “pain points” discussed by users. Pain points are any inconvenience, confusion or frustration thatusers encounter when performing a specific task, for example, uncertainty on how to interpret the results of anassessment or difficulty finding appropriate data to compare one’s results to.Finally, the design team met with the larger group of project stakeholders to prioritize the personaswith respect to the design of the website. They discussed their own goals for the website and the likelihood thata particular persona would benefit from the site’s offerings in order come to a consensus decision on whichpersonas to design the site for.Results: The PersonasFive personas emerged from our interviews (Table 1). In order to discuss these personas most naturally, theywere given names and assigned pictures. We also chose key quotes from the interview transcripts to help usgrasp who each persona represented and outlined their goals and motivations as related to assessment andteaching. Table 2 contains rankings of the personas on key characteristics that differentiate them from oneanother. Tables 1 and 2 are used together to get a full picture of what constitutes each persona. Thedemographics of the personas are not meant to be a meaningful characteristic. We recognize that these do notreflect the demographic distribution of US physics faculty.After creating the personas, we outlined the key task flows and pain points that each would have wheninteracting with our online resources. For example, a common task flow for Diane, the pragmatic satisficer, is tosearch for a research-based assessment, run the assessment, analyze and interpret the results and compare theresults with others. Her pain points include a concern that students are not taking it seriously, too much time isrequired to analyze the results and it is difficult to find data from other institutions for comparison. Several othertask flows and associated pain points emerged for Diane during the interviews. This information gives the teama rich sense of who Diane is and her wants and difficulties, which allows us to design our online resource tomeet her stated needs as well as infer solutions to other needs that users like her may not have voiced.After review and discussion of the personas and our own goals for the site, the stakeholder teamprioritized who the site will be designed for. We believe that we can have the most impact on scaling andsustaining educational innovations if we provide resources to faculty who are already motivated to improvestudent learning. We feel our impact would be lessened if we focused on convincing skeptical faculty to usethese innovations. Further, faculty who are already successful at using innovations don’t need our help as muchas those with little experience. So we prioritized in order from most to least important, Raphael the motivatednovice, Tim the seeker, Diane the pragmatic satisficer, Marge the proto-researcher and Paula the skeptic.Analysis and DiscussionUnderstanding who we should design for, their task flows and pain points, and prioritizing these personas tellsus a lot about how to design our online resources so they are targeted and personal. For example, differentpersonas thrive with different levels and kinds of information about educational innovations. Raphael is brandnew to using educational innovations and doesn’t have a lot of time, so he needs simple practical informationand ready-to-go teaching and assessment materials. He also needs resources on how to face obstacles he willencounter when using these new methods which will support him in persisting in his use of the innovations. Onthe other hand, Tim has experience using educational innovations and wants lots of details about the researchvalidation and theoretical underpinnings of the innovation. He would also like information on how thisinnovation compares to other innovations he is familiar with. This level of detail will help him intelligentlychoose the most appropriate innovation for his own environment. Paula has a low buy-in to the value ofeducational innovations but cares about student learning, so she needs resources to help her understand howeducational innovations can improve learning before being interested in the details of a new innovation.There is rarely a professional development situation where only one persona is represented. Further, anindividual faculty member may have characteristics from several personas. To address this, different aspects ofthe professional development resources should be designed to appeal to the personas based on the prioritizationICLS 2014 Proceedings1084© ISLSdecided on by the stakeholder team. This is in contrast to the common practice of providing one type ofprofessional development resource that might appeal to only one persona or contain so little or so muchinformation that it benefits no one at all. We briefly discuss how we personalized our website based on thepersonas. The needs of Raphael were our top priority, so we designed a simple home page with very basic butenticing information and a jump bar with links to articles answering his commonly asked questions. From thehome page, we provided links to more detailed pages so that Diane can, for example, compare her students toothers using a database of assessment results to get the number she cares about. We also provided links from thehome page for Tim leading him to detailed information about the research validation for each innovation andrecommendations for new innovations to try. We believe design choices like these will help faculty who identifywith a given persona easily find what they need to implement or continue using educational innovations.We believe the method of personas is useful whenever researchers seek to design a professionaldevelopment resource or experience aimed at scaling or sustaining educational innovations. Personas encouragethe design team to focus on the users and transform a large amount of detailed information about individualsinto digestible outlines of fictional people who can be easily be understood and discussed. This method alsoprovides a framework for how to design professional development targeted at different types of users and fills inthe details of who the users are and what needs or motivations they have that the innovation can satisfy. With anincreased focus on the users and not just the innovations themselves, we believe more educators will take upnew innovations and continue to use them.Table 1: Descriptions of five personas emerged from interviews with physics department heads and faculty.These personas represent user archetypes, but no persona exactly represents any one user. (Names and picturesare included to help communicate about the personas as if they were real people.)RoleKey QuoteMotivations and Goals• Unconvinced that research-basedtechniques offer anything more thantraditional/current methods• Assessment to reaffirm validity ofcurrent teaching methods• External pressures for assessmentPaula the Skeptic"The entire assessmentmovement seems toignore that we arealready assessing ourstudents."Raphael theMotivated Novice"... make it useful for the • Thoughtful teacher who cares aboutstudents. I mean at thestudent learningend of the day, that's all I • Traditional background or new toreally care about."teaching• Acknowledges challenges withtraditional methods• Time-pressuredDiane thePragmatic Satisficer"The ability for faculty tocompare what they aredoing with other facultywould be really usefuland spur them on toimprove their teaching."• Interested in the result of assessment:the number• Gives assessment to compare results• Wants to know what teachingmethods “work”• Prefers summary informationTim the Seeker"We're driven by data &cause & effect. If the datashows that the studentsare getting more out ofthe course, then that givesyou reason to change."• Generally curious and interested instudent learning improvement• Asks questions which lead to change/improvement• Wants to find suitable existing tools• Internally motivatedMarge the ProtoresearcherICLS 2014 Proceedings"It's hard to argue that• Has questions or needs beyond thoseyou don't want data about already answered by educationalwhat your students areresearchlearning in your class."• Wants to assess new aspects ofstudents understanding / development• Needs to do more analysis of results1085© ISLSTable 2: Ranking of personas on characteristics that emerged in user interviews. P = Paula the Skeptic, R =Raphael the Motivated Novice, D = Diane the Pragmatic Satisficer, T = Tim the Seeker, M = Marge the Protoresearcher, PER = physics education research.High PER knowledgeM	  T	  D	  High PER buy-inT	   M	  D	  R	  Reformed teacherM	  T	  D	  Evidence-basedM	  T	  Teacher responsibility forlearningP	  Low PER knowledgeP	  Low PER buy-inR	  P	  Traditional teacherD	  R	  P	  Intuition-basedT	   M	  D	  R	  P	  Student responsibility forlearningR	   P	  D	  Cares about numerical resultP	  Confident in own opinion/skillsR	  Low influence over teachersCares about meaning of resultsM	  T	  Seeks expert opinionD	   M	  T	  High influence over teachersM	  T	  R	  D	   P	  ReferencesBlomberg, J., & Burrell, M. (2009). An ethnographic approach to design. In A. Sears & J. A. Jacko (Eds.),Human-Computer Interaction: Development Process (pp. 71–94). Boca Raton: CRC Press.Calde, S., Goodwin, K., & Reimann, R. (2002). SHS Orcas : The first integrated information system for longterm healthcare facility management. In CHI ’02 Case Studies of the CHI2002 | AIGA ExperienceDesign Forum (pp. 2–16). New York: ACM.Chapman, C. N., & Milham, R. P. (2006). The personas’ new clothes: methodological and practical argumentsagainst a popular method. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 50th AnnualMeeting, 50(5), 634–636.Cooper, A. (2004). The inmates are running the asylum: Why high-tech products drive us crazy and how torestore the sanity. Indianapolis: Sams - Pearson Education.Grudin, J. (2006). Why personas work: the psychological evidence. In J. Pruitt & T. Adlin (Eds.), The personalifecycle: Keeping people in mind throughout the product design (pp. 643–663). Burlington: MorganKaufmann.Henderson, C., & Dancy, M. H. (2008). Physics faculty and educational researchers: Divergent expectations asbarriers to the diffusion of innovations. American Journal of Physics, 76(1), 79–91.Henderson, C., Dancy, M., & Niewiadomska-Bugaj, M. (2012). Use of research-based instructional strategies inintroductory physics: Where do faculty leave the innovation-decision process? Physical Review SpecialTopics - Physics Education Research, 8(2), 020104. doi:10.1103/PhysRevSTPER.8.020104Henderson, C., Finkelstein, N., & Beach, A. (2010). Beyond dissemination in college science teaching: Anintroduction to four core change strategies. Journal of College Science Teaching, 39(5), 18–25.Jacobs, A., Dreessen, K., & Pierson, J. (2008). “Thick” Personas – Using ethnographic methods for personadevelopment as a tool for conveying the social science view in technological design. ObservatorioJournal, 5, 79–97.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Haugan Cheng, B., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development atthe intersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331–337.Pruitt, John, & Adlin, T. (2010). The Persona Lifecycle: Keeping People in Mind Throughout Product Design.Burlington: Morgan Kaufmann.Sears, A., & Jacko, J. A. (Eds.). (2007). The human-computer interaction handbook: fundamentals, evolvingtechnologies and emerging applications (2nd ed.). New York: Taylor and Francis.Turner, P., & Turner, S. (2011). Is stereotyping inevitable when designing with personas? Design Studies, 32(1),30–44.Yström, A., Peterson, L., von Sydow, B., & Malmqvist, J. (2009). Using personas as a mediating tool in thedevelopment of engineering programs. In Proceedings 2: a Utvecklingskonferensen för Sverigesingenjörsutbildningar.Yström, A., Peterson, L., Von Sydow, B., & Malmqvist, J. (2010). Using Personas to Guide Education NeedsAnalysis and Program Design. In Proceedings of the 6th International CDIO Conference. Montréal.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1086© ISLS