Shared Epistemic Agency and Agency of Individuals,Collaborative Groups, and Research CommunitiesCrina Damşa, University of Oslo, PO Box 1092 Blindern, 0317 Oslo, Norway, crina.damsa@iped.uio.noAbstract: This paper aims to clarify the concept of shared epistemic agency, with itsconstituting aspects, and to examine research that illustrates how these are expressed indifferent settings that involve knowledge construction. Building on theoretical works fromlearning sciences, educational psychology and sociology, shared epistemic agency is conceivedas a complex phenomenon that emerges in a dynamic way, and is defined as a capacity thatenables groups to carry out collaborative knowledge-based activities that lead to a sharedoutcome. A comparative analysis of empirical studies of agency shows different waysepistemic agency is expressed in the context of individual and collaborative groups’ learningand research communities’ knowledge work. This discussion foregrounds the idea that creatingintellectual interdependence, which is deemed necessary to co-construct knowledge, is aneffort that can be assigned both to individuals and groups, but also to how the structuralcontext affords and facilitates this interdependence.IntroductionIn recent years, constructive views of learning and knowledge work have put forward the argument thatprocesses of knowledge construction require a particular type of engagement and conduct from participants(Bereiter, 2002; Valsiner & Van der Veer, 2000). In this context, the discussion about agency has emergedstronger; consequently, there is more interest in research concerning what agency means and how it is expressed.This paper addresses the notion of shared epistemic agency and how agency that is related to learning andknowledge work is being expressed at the levels of individual, collaborative groups, and research communities. Iargue for the thesis that epistemic agency can have a shared nature and is expressed differently in variouscontexts. In support of this, I first conduct a conceptual discussion of shared epistemic agency, by analyzing theconstituting aspects of the notion. Ultimately, I aim at a synthesizing definition of shared epistemic agency.Second, I provide examples of empirical studies, which investigated epistemic agency in the contexts of learningand knowledge work. This analysis is used to create a better understanding and to provide an illustration of howepistemic agency, and shared epistemic agency in particular, is expressed in different settings.Before diving into the theoretical analysis, I present an example of two contrasting groups of students.Their characteristics were identified based on empirical analyses conducted in various research studies ofcollaborative learning.Figure 1. Contrasting collaborative groupsIn all likelihood, this appears familiar to anyone who has been teaching in higher education. If we were tochoose, probably the majority of us would prefer to work with groups such as Group A. While that is clear, havewe thought in depth what is, in fact, happening in these groups? What makes the collaboration productive andmeaningful? What drives it? Is it individual intellectual qualities, or the interest for the knowledge content, or forthe final grade? I address some of these issues in the following discussion, with a particular focus on what drivesthese groups to engage in collaboration the way they do. I associate that with shared epistemic agency, which isviewed as the “capacity that enables groups to carry out collaborative knowledge-based activities that lead to ashared outcome” (Damşa, Kirschner, Andriessen, Erkens, & Sins, 2010, p. 154)ICLS 2014 Proceedings440© ISLSThe “Question” of AgencyA quick look at the concept of agency, and how it has been theorized, shows that many of the present-dayconceptions of human agency can be traced back to ideas of the Enlightenment. Original postulates referred toagency in terms of human freedom, in reaction to deterministic views of the religious morality of the time(Biesta & Tedder, 2006; Martin, 2011). Accordingly, people were conceived as willful beings, with capacity forindependent judgment and autonomous action. Philosophical perspectives depicted agency in terms of anantagonistic relationship between a non-rational, normative action (based on Kantian ideas) and a rational–instrumental or utilitarian action (elaborated by American pragmatism and Continental phenomenology). Agencythat emerges from the former reflects a moral will, in which actors (individual or collective) pursue free, moralaction. On the opposite end, an individualistic conception pictures agency as rational but instrumental action.This is focused on agency serving an utilitarian purpose, the means to achieve an interest, or a material necessity.So, on one end, we have a focus on a self-legislating morality that can lead to good deeds, and on the other end,on purposeful thinking and action that serves the achievement of (individual) goals.Within sociology, a vast discussion has unfolded with regard to whether agency is possible, how itshould be conceptualized, and what are the conditions in which it emerges (see Figure 2 for a graphicalrepresentation of trends in sociology). Action, structure, and habitus were used as flagship notions. Discussionsin the 70s and 80s commonly opposed agency to social structure and defined it as “the ability of actors to operateindependently of the constraints of social structure” (Biesta & Tedder, 2006, p. 6). Later, Giddens (1991) andBourdieu (1990) generated accounts that attempted to overcome this structure/agency dualism. Essentially,Giddens considered structure as a product of patterns of action, emerging from human activity but beingconstrained by rules. Bourdieu’s view stressed that patterns, or habitual action, originate in the past, but thenbecome structure and shape new, future activity and things in the world. Reactions to Gidden’s view emphasizedthat agency is not just patterned action but action that breaks with patterns and defined rules and involvesthought and reflexivity. A more recent conceptualization was put forward by Emirbayer and Mische (1998) in aseminal work within social theory. Essentially, these authors argue that the focus of previous conceptualizationsis too much on judgment, routine, and structure, and not enough on the creative potential of agency.Figure 2. Sociological perspectivesA Relational–Pragmatic PerspectiveTo frame their conceptualization, Emirbayer and Mische state clearly that it is necessary to take distance fromstrict individualistic or holistic stances. The former are mainly represented by psychological theories, whichfocus on the ego as the main driver of decision-making and of the way to achieve an individual interest. Thestructural and cultural theories account for the latter. These emphasize the prevalence of structure and routinizedaction as following from this already established order. Emirbayer and Mische argue for a conception of agencythat focuses on the dynamic interplay between routine, judgment, interest, and action. They further argue thatagency can only be captured in its full complexity if it is situated within the flow of time and takes into accountrelational and structural aspects toward which participants can assume different orientations. Participants can beoriented toward the past, the future, and the present at any given moment, and while they move among thesedifferent contexts and timeframes, they also change their relationship to each other and to the context.Following this re-conceptualization, an analytic distinction is possible between three dimensions ofagency (Emirbayer & Mische, 1998). The iterational dimension is manifested in the participants’ ability torecall, select, and apply taken-for-granted schemas of action developed through past activities. The agenticaspects do not simply lie in knowing such schemas but in how actors selectively recognize, locate, andimplement such schemas. This refers mainly to how people capitalize on the existing body of knowledge andpractices. The projective dimension indicates how agency implies orientation toward the future. This highlightsthe idea that people are able to challenge, reconsider, and reformulate their ideas, projects, and plans. ThisICLS 2014 Proceedings441© ISLSassumes that people do not merely repeat past routines. They distance themselves from the established ways ofaction, can invent new possibilities for thought and action, and generate alternative responses to problems. It isabout constructing images of “where they think they are going, where they want to go, and how they can getthere (ibid., p. 984). Finally, the practical–evaluative dimension responds to the demands and contingencies ofthe present. This is about contextualizing experiences and knowledge to address problematic situations. Itinvolves momentary judgment and deliberation and decision-making, about both means and ends of action. Thiscapacity for practical evaluation enables participants to pursue their projects in ways that may challenge andtransform the existing structures and action. Given this, agency is re-conceptualized “as a temporally embeddedprocess of social engagement, informed by the past (in its habitual aspect), but also oriented toward the future (asa capacity to imagine alternative possibilities and outcomes) and toward the present (as a capacity tocontextualize past habits and future projects with the contingencies of the moment)” (ibid., p. 963).It is interesting to note that Emirbayer and Mische emphasize that an understanding of agency is onlycomplete when it is able to account for the interplay between structure and agency. For them, agency is adimension that is present in all empirical instances of human action, and there exist only actors who engageagentically with their structuring environments. This implies that all social action is shaped by the temporal–relational contexts of action and by the dynamic element of agency. This dynamic element itself leads to socialaction never being completely determined or structured.Conception of Knowledge and LearningIn parallel, agency has emerged also as an interesting notion in the discussion concerning learning andknowledge work. The major epistemological shift that poses that knowledge is, in fact, not given but constructedassigned the individual and the environment completely different positions and roles in the knowledge processes.This shift and the discussion in itself brought about new concepts and the need to better understand theindividual and the collective and their roles and interplay in the context of knowledge-bound activities. Withinthe sociocultural framework, Valsiner (1996) proposed a bi-directional constructive model that applies also tolearning and knowledge. In this model, human actions and the social or cultural environment are given meaningby the participants through symbolizing activities. Accordingly, the individual is in an active process of relatingto the environment and other individuals. The individual receives and transforms the information from/about theworld into internalized personal knowledge, in the fashion Vygotsky (1978) described it. But the process is notunidirectional. Once the individual has constructed some form of personal knowledge, this becomes externalizedin various forms—actions, artifacts, language; it then enters the communication with other individuals. Throughthis iterative process, knowledge is exchanged, adjusted, and elaborated. It is a co-construction process that cangenerate ideas, knowledge, and, ideally, development.Commonly agreed upon, also by theoretical approaches such as the sociocognition or situated cognition,is that this co-construction process calls for conduct that renders possible the emergence of new ideas, insights,or knowledge (Greeno, 2006). Two aspects have been acknowledged as essential in this regard. One is the needfor active involvement with the knowledge content, often framed in terms of productive engagement (Engle &Conant, 2002). Holding a belief about knowledge and simply memorizing given knowledge is a passive strategy,or lack of strategy. Participating actively involves re-constructing the meaning of this knowledge. An illustrativeexplanation is given by Bereiter (2002), in his elaboration of the belief and design modes in knowledge building,an approach that specifies deliberate activities for building knowledge in interaction. In a belief mode, learnersattempt to understand given knowledge. In a design mode, a more participative and productive stance allowsengaging with knowledge. Bereiter talks about productive knowledge, which allows the learners to use, question,and elaborate it, and proves as a stepping-stone toward new conceptualizations. A second aspect is what Valsinerand Van der Veer (2000) call “intellectual interdependence”. Through this, individuals involved in sharedcontexts influence and guide each other. The individuals monitor one other’s orientations and actions, modifytheir own intentions, and act in accordance. This generates the necessity of a relationship at the social-relationallevel. It is based both on social mechanisms of engagement, through means that mediate the interaction and onan individual’s availability to be part of this relationship. Knowledge co-construction is realized throughinteraction and by using mediating means, among which communication with others is most important. In otherwords, this type of interactional achievement is realized in productive moment-to-moment interaction, in which acertain degree of intersubjectivity is required.Intersubjectivity has been, traditionally, conceived as a collection of individual subjectivities orlifeworlds (Rommetveit, 1992), in the phenomenological sense, which describe a person’s subjectivelyexperienced world. He asserted that the social communication process starts from the assumption of sharedunderstanding based on individual understanding, moves toward overcoming the mutual misunderstanding andresults in joint, novel understanding. Matusov (1996) argues, however, that intersubjectivity cannot be viewed asa set of overlapping subjectivities or understandings, but rather as the coordination of contributions in jointactivity. According to Crook (2013), intersubjectivity involves bringing states of knowing and doing incoordination with another person’s; it involves togetherness, as he frames it. One of the important questionsICLS 2014 Proceedings442© ISLSMatusov brings to the fore is “how can the diversity of individual goals, ideas, actions unite people in activity?”While using different ways to express it, both Matusov and Crook suggest three stages in the emergence ofintersubjectivity. Searching for common background and mutual “mindreading” is a first stage and involvescoordinating with others about common goals and interests. An intermediate stage is about creating commonground for engagement, based on explicit communication among the participants. This involves a sharedunderstanding, but which is by no means equal to intersubjectivity. This prepares for the final stage, of jointactivity. The common ground and shared states drive joint action toward an outcome. In this way,intersubjectivity becomes leverage for productive interaction and the expression of agency in a shared manner.Agency of the Epistemic KindAgency appears as a suitable concept that can depict what drives individual and collective learning andknowledge work, and within the field of the learning sciences, it has been conceived in different ways.Productive agency, coined by Schwartz (1999), emphasizes the means and the way to arrive to aproduct. The underlying principles are grounded in Marxist ideas, namely, that any activity can be considered ashaving a product of some sort. In learning contexts, the main intended products are increased learner knowledgeand understanding. Also, individual self-efficacy beliefs that drive one’s behavior toward achieving a goalinspired this notion. Then, epistemic agency; etymologically, the term epistemic refers to knowledge, therefore,epistemic agency is considered the type of agency that entails acquiring knowledge. In education, the term wascoined by Scardamalia (2000), as a synonym for collective cognitive responsibility, in the context of knowledgebuilding activities. It implicates students’ willingness to see themselves as members of a community and to takeresponsibility for their own learning, but also for the advancement of the community’s knowledge. Inaccordance, students demonstrate their epistemic agency through goal-setting, self-evaluation, and long-rangeplanning. Finally, Pickering (1995) put forward the notions of conceptual and disciplinary agency, as anexpression of different facets of accountability in intellectual practices. Disciplinary agency involves the use ofaccepted methods and procedures that are established in the practice of the domain. When individuals use anestablished method, agency is turned over to the discipline. In carrying out the method, a mathematician makeswhat Greeno calls “forced moves”, and the individual’s agency is limited to performing patterned actions,according to accepted practice. Conceptual agency involves the individual making choices and judgments aboutthe appropriateness of methods and interpretations. Mathematicians can exercise conceptual agency when theyengage in decision-making, exploration, and strategizing; they carry out free moves, in Greeno’s terms. Theconclusion that emerges from this quick overview is that most of these forms of epistemic agency have, in thestrict sense, a focus on the individual. Eventually, Schwartz states that “agency develops through interaction, notonly action” (2005, p. 50). But while the claim is that the collective is important in how the agency is played out,the individual expression of agency is prevalent.These conceptualizations tend to take distance from the individualistic view and assign moreimportance to how knowledge is constructed and emerges through interaction with the structure, environment,and peers. But the notion of epistemic agency alone does not capture this shared nature in its full complexity.Conceiving shared epistemic agency as a construct based on intersubjectivity, which emerges from intellectualinterdependence among individuals, seems paramount. Shared epistemic agency expresses this intersubjectivenature, together with the productive features that lead toward knowledge being materialized into tangible, sharedknowledge objects. Furthermore, it captures the dynamic interplay between individual agency and thesurrounding structure, as it happens within a temporality that also influences how this agency unfolds and isbeing expressed. It becomes an evolving, constructed entity.Agency in Different SettingsIndividual AgencyIn the second half of the previous century, the majority of the approaches in research on learning emphasized theindividual cognitive aspects, the way learners could become efficient in individually processing information, andin monitoring and regulating this process (Bereiter, 2002). The concept of agency was framed within thistheoretical context, with an emphasis on pragmatic aspects of the process. Ideally, the cognitive activity was tobe organized through clear goal orientation and self-regulation. This is the closest we get to epistemic agency,which was equaled to self-efficacy and was assessed from a normative perspective. The unit of analysis in thesestudies was the individual belief and action.Within this theoretical context, Bandura’s (2001) theory of social cognitive learning generated studieson self-efficacy and self-regulation of learning at various educational levels. This research was strongly focusedon the qualities necessary for a learner to be efficient and successful in control of his own knowledge acquisitionprocess. In studies such as by Pajares (1996), agency was seen as being expressed through clear goal-orientationand self-efficacy beliefs in relation to the academic performance. Bandura (1990) identified agency throughacting upon intentions and reflecting on action and Boekaerts and Corno (2005) through strategies of selfICLS 2014 Proceedings443© ISLSregulation in classroom learning. Another line of research was generated by the self-determination theory, inwhich agency is equaled to autonomy. Deci and Ryan (2000) considered goal and action as insufficient fordefining agency; values attached to beliefs and actions were needed too. Epistemic agency here is aimed atachieving individually set goals and places cognitive performance at the core of the notion, with much lesserattention given to knowledge and how that plays a role in the process.Epistemic Agency: Individual within CollectiveIt is essential to acknowledge an area of research that situates epistemic agency between the individual andcollaborative planes. This research accounts for the social but still allocates agency to the individual. Theindividual is expected to contribute to the community’s knowledge or some collective outcome. This could becalled the individual–collective perspective. The unit of analysis is the individual action but in naturalconnection to the collective activity.A relevant set of studies follows Scardamalia’s (2002) conceptualization of epistemic agency inknowledge building, wherein participants must contribute ideas to the advancement and improvement of thecommunity’s knowledge. Epistemic agency is defined as the responsibility taken by individuals for contributingto a collective set of ideas and to refining this knowledge through notes and comments. Most of the studies wereconducted in the context of classroom-related inquiry-based learning. Epistemic agency was followed as the wayfor learners to direct and sustain their contribution to the pool of knowledge generated by the class. A study byvan Aalst and Chan (2007) on the knowledge-building activities of secondary school students interpretedepistemic agency as being about further inquiry for understanding, since the ideas produced needed to be refinedin order to be a meaningful contribution. Following knowledge-building ideas, Hakkarainen and colleagues(2004) designed and investigated networked learning. Their thesis was that agency is collectively constructed byindividual actors that build and maintain an epistemic network. Students who share, facilitate sharing, andinquire further act as epistemic agents, who pursue collective epistemic goals and take responsibility forcollective knowledge advancement. Analyzing students’ social networks, Palonen and Hakkarainen (2000)concluded that students considered to be epistemic agents brokered knowledge and supported communicationand information flow among members of the group. Also in this research, epistemic agency is placed in acollaborative space, but it is mainly expressed through individual actions that contribute to the collective goals.Finally, studies on disciplinary engagement also touched upon the notion of agency of an epistemicnature. In Greeno’s (2003) study of authoritative and accountable learning, the thesis is that participants expressconceptual agency in domains, activity settings, and environments that facilitate that learning. This conjecture isconsistent with analysis by Engle and Conant (2002), who identified aspects of productive disciplinaryengagement in classroom discussions about biological concepts. Lastly, the notion of conceptual and disciplinaryagency is transposed in a study of classroom competence in mathematics by Gresalfi and colleagues (2008). Intheir analysis of short episodes of discussion on mathematical concepts, agency is depicted based on whether astudent initiates an idea, agrees with, elaborates on, questions, or disagrees with what someone else initiated, orrefrains from responding. The most relevant conclusion is related to the role of the task, which can determine orinfluence students as they move productively through the task or resist being engaged in it. Again, agency isframed in relation to what that task involves in terms of content knowledge and strategies, at the individual level.Shared Epistemic Agency of Collaborative GroupsA more specific conception of the interplay between individual and collective thought and action is provided bythe sociocultural approach. As discussed previously, social input and individual action are intertwined, and thisinterplay can be empirically sought-after in the moment-to-to moment interaction. In general, this type of tightcollaborative activity has been organized in small group learning or project-based work. In small group settings,the changes in orientation and action course, both of the individual and the group, are more detectable (Damşa &Ludvigsen, under review). As is assumed theoretically from this perspective, agency involves a close dynamicinterplay between structural elements (of the instructional settings) and active individual participation; and also,between patterned activities and actions that might have creative value. The unit of analysis in this case is thegroup-level action, in which individual and collective actions are presumed to blend in naturally.Charles and Shumar’s (2009) study of student groups solving math problems in a virtual environmentprovides a good example of how shared agency can be enacted at the discursive level. The findings show aninterplay between the individual and the group, in which group members managed their trajectory as a team.They also constructed meaning through dialog, bridged problem-solving episodes, and capitalized on jointlycreated artifacts. The authors think that the virtual chat, which is liberated from the social constraints of aphysical space, encourages individuals to be agentic and to act like mathematicians. The epistemic aspect ofagency is accounted for by the actions focused toward the mathematical domain—the shared aspect, through theintersubjectivity created by the group interaction in a coordinated manner.Research by Damşa et al. (2010) and Muukkonen-Van der Veer (2010) focused on identifying anddesigning scenarios for collaborative construction of knowledge. Joint work aimed at generating new ideas andICLS 2014 Proceedings444© ISLSelaborating and materializing them into shared knowledge objects was a central feature of the design. The typeof agency considered to be necessary for such collaborative accomplishments is of a shared nature. Empirically,these studies searched for expressions of agency at three levels. First, in verbal interaction, agency was identifiedin the way groups raised awareness on a lack of knowledge, created shared understanding, and generated ideas.Second, they looked for how groups followed up on their verbal discussions and elaborations and used these inthe construction of their shared knowledge objects. Third, these studies analyzed how groups made and followedup plans and how they coordinated their actions. The studies identified groups that displayed shared epistemicagency but also groups that encountered problems in both dealing with the knowledge content and theircollaborative process. What follows is an example of verbal interaction that shows how a group discussesconcepts that are central to their collaborative project. The excerpt below shows actions that indicate: lack ofunderstanding, creating shared understanding, elaborating on an idea, and coordinating future actions. This is anexample of how epistemic actions that indicate agency can be traced in momentary interaction of Group A.Excerpt 1. Agency in momentary interaction (based on Damşa & Ludvigsen, under review)When followed in time, throughout the course of the whole project, these actions can be indicative of a group’sshared epistemic agency. There is a clear joint approach in this group’s work, and data has the potential toshowed how they consciously sustained this joint strategy when dealing with the knowledge involved and whenorganizing their process. This group’s joint approach supported both productive collaboration that allowedknowledge co-construction and the emergence of shared epistemic agency.Epistemic Agency in Research CommunitiesThe theories underlining the conceptualization and the research of agency in knowledge communities are mainlyof a sociocultural or sociomaterial nature. The individual is viewed as part of a structure, in which content,strategies, and methods are often customary. This system can involve collaborative practice, but it can alsoimpede them. Agency can be expressed in the individuals’ actions aimed at contributing to a) the knowledgedomain or b) in them finding a way to navigate, in a productive manner, within the complicated structures oftheir domain practice. In general, the unit of analysis is individual action embedded in the larger structures orculture, but it can also be the collective action of a group within the community.Studies by Knorr Cetina (1999) elaborate on epistemic agency as being part of the epistemic culturesemerging in different professional domains. In her empirical work, she analyzed how scientific groups functionwithin particular epistemic cultures and touched upon agency as an aspect that plays a role in knowledge beingconstructed. Two of her laboratory studies, on the CERN atomic physics lab and the molecular biology lab,provide interesting illustrations of how scientific practice can develop. The analysis was focused on howphysicists and biologists understand scientific work, the use of instruments and social structures (includingorganization of the lab). Three main conclusions can be drawn based on the findings. The first one is thatepistemic agency contributes to the development and expansion of the domain’s body of knowledge. The studiesshowed mainly how knowledge and epistemic objects emerge from scientific practices that draw upon individualand collective expertise. The knowledge generated in this way adds to the existing knowledge structures, in anincremental manner. This is the productive aspect of the epistemic agency, expressed on a scale of extendedtemporality. Second, Knorr Cetina shows that epistemic agency is formed in distinct ways in different epistemiccultures. She uses the notion of “machineries of knowledge construction” to depict the way actions and agencyare shaped in a particular knowledge domain. It is a situated and contextualized process. In the case of the atomicphysics lab, work was distributed in time and across sites. The characteristics of the methods within the domainof quantum physics also determined the work strategy. Epistemic agency was expressed in the way theICLS 2014 Proceedings445© ISLScommunity kept the focus on shared goals and pursued that, despite the physical distance and other emergingproblematic aspects. In the biology lab, where the group was smaller and the work took place in a confinedspace, agency was expressed more in relation to the social relationships and the material resources of the lab.And finally, Pickering’s distinction between conceptual and disciplinary agency is applicable here. We seescientists working within the established boundaries of disciplinary practice but also some searching foralternative methods and strategies, attempting the free moves. But there is a certain specific logic to the interplaybetween agency and structure in this case. The structure here is represented by the existing knowledge domainand also by the set of scientific methods, procedures, and instruments. A scientist can choose to be compliantwith the established methods of the domain and community or take a different path and bring in new ideas. Thefinal conclusion is that “knowledge-centered practices” are forms of creative and constructive practices that gobeyond routine and habits, and epistemic agency typically emerges when confronting non-routine problems.ConclusionsThis paper attempted to clarify the notion of shared epistemic agency, with its constituting aspects, and toexamine empirical research that illustrates how these are expressed in different knowledge activities and settings.The theoretical analysis led to a depiction of shared epistemic agency as a complex phenomenon that emerges ina dynamic way. It can be viewed as a capacity that enables individuals, groups, or collectives to makeappropriate judgments, to make plans and to pursue these through purposeful action, in order to achieve theconstruction of knowledge. A set of features emerged as characteristic of this notion. Productivity is expressedby following established ways of working with knowledge or by attempting new and creative strategies,methods, or interpretations. The sharedness refers to the social–relational aspects of the processes of knowledgeco-construction. Theoretically, it is assumed that creating a strong intersubjective layer supports themanifestation of shared epistemic agency and the co-constructive process. Finally, the temporality refers toagency as an emerging entity, which unfolds through successions of intertwined thought and action. It combinesthe focus on past experiences and practices, with how these can be employed to attend to problems in the presentand to create plans of action that aim at constructive processes projected in the future.In practice, the studies analyzed showed that the shared epistemic agency is a complex construct, whichis expressed empirically in different ways, depending on the context, its temporality, and the nature of theconstructive activities. At the individual level, epistemic agency can be expressed in relation to individual work,but also in connection to collective work to which the individual might be expected to contribute actively. Thepurposive and productive aspects of agency are emphasized here, with the main focus on individualunderstanding of knowledge that is fed back into the collective knowledge. At the level of research communities,the iterational aspect of agency has a strong presence, since the knowledge and established practices are createdthrough cumulative efforts and serve the community as a pool of options. Research communities are goodexamples of a dynamic interplay between structure and agency, since science and research are typically markedby creative–constructive actions geared toward the future. In order to build on the existing pool of knowledge,scientists might find creative ways to navigate within the structural context. In collaborative groups, sharedepistemic agency is expressed in stronger terms. The way intersubjectivity is created can influence how agencyunfolds in time and how its productive aspects are expressed. For example, when intersubjectivity is achieved,the joint resources bring about the intellectual interdependence that can afford sophisticated solutions andoutcomes. One interesting point to make here is that technology mediation, as shown in Charles and Shumar’s(2009) study, might open up new alternatives for shared agency to manifest itself.Within this context, the interplay between structure and agency has specific characteristics. Ininstitutionalized learning settings, individual students or groups are expected to acquire and master knowledgeset by curricular demands. But they are also provided with a rich set of structural resources through thecurriculum, which supports the knowledge construction process. Creative and alternative solutions arewelcomed, but are not necessarily the standard way of work. In the research community, however, the stakes arehigher when scientists engage in creative or innovative actions that break away from customary practices; but therewards can be just as high. Individuals and groups that express epistemic agency and engage constructively withthe knowledge domain and practice are the ones bringing science forward. In an ideal depiction, structure feedsinto agency and allows the individual the freedom to choose a particular type of relationship with the contextualstructure. Attempting to create intellectual interdependence is an effort that can be assigned both to individualsbut also to how structural contexts afford and facilitate this interdependence. Regardless, understanding thenotion of shared epistemic agency and creating the appropriate strategies to activate it is a complex challenge, towhich further analytic work must provide the necessary input.ReferencesBandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 1–26.Bandura, A. (1990). Perceived self-efficacy in the exercise of control over AIDS infection. Evaluation &Program Planning, 13, 9–17.ICLS 2014 Proceedings446© ISLSBereiter, C. (2002). Education and Mind in the Knowledge Age. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Biesta, G., Tedder, M. (2006). How is agency possible? Towards an ecological understanding of agency-asachievement.Retrieved Oct 10 2013, from www.tlrp.org/project%20sites/LearningLives/papers/.pdfBoekaerts, M., & Corno, L. (2005). Self-Regulation in the Classroom: A perspective on Assessment andIntervention. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 54(2) 199–231.Bourdieu, P. (1990). The Logic of Practice. Stanford, Ca.: Stanford University Press.Charles, E. S., & Shumar, W. (2009). Student and team agency in VMT. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Studying Virtual MathTeams (ch. 11, pp. 207–224). New York, NY: Springer.Crook, C., (2013). Varieties of togetherness in learning – and their mediation. In M. Baker, J. Andriessen & S.Jaarvela (Eds.) Affective Learning Together. Routledge /Taylor & Francis Group: Oxford, UK.Damşa, C. I., Kirschner, P. A., Andriessen, J. E. B., Erkens, G., & Sins, P. H. M. (2010). Shared epistemicagency – An empirical study of an emergent construct. Journal of the Learning Sciences,19(2), 143–186.Damsa, C.I. & Ludvigsen, S. R. (under review). The collaborative construction of what? Learning throughinteraction and co-construction of knowledge objects in teacher education.Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits: Human needs and the selfdetermination of behavior. Psychological Inquiry, 11, 227–268.Emirbayer, M., & Mische, A. (1998). What is agency? American Journal of Sociology, 103, 962–1023.Engle, R., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement.Cognition and Instruction, 20, 399–483.Greeno, J. G. (2003). Situative research relevant to standards in mathematics education. In J. Kilpatrick, W. G.Martin, & D. E. Schifter, (Eds.). A research companion to Principles and standards for schoolmathematics. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.Greeno, J. G. (2006). Authoritative, accountable positioning and connected, general knowing: Progressivethemes in understanding transfer. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15 (4), 539–550.Giddens, A. (1991). Modernity and Self-identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age. Stanford, CA:Stanford University Press.Gresalfi, M.S., Martin, T., Hand, V., & Greeno, J.G. (2008). Constructing Competence: An Analysis of StudentParticipation in the Mathematics Classrooms. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 70 (1), 49–70.Hakkarainen, K., Lonka, K. & Paavola, S. (2004) How Can Human Intelligence Be Artificially AugmentedThrough Artifacts, Communities, Networks? Paper at the Conference on Motivation, Learning, andKnowledge , IKIT and Karolinska Instituted, June, Stockholm, Sweden.Knorr Cetina, Karin (1999). Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge. Cambridge, MA: HarvardUniversity Press.Martin, J. (2004). Self-Regulated Learning, Social Cognitive Theory, and Agency, Educational Psychologist,39(2), 135–145.Matusov, E. (1996). Intersubjectivity without agreement. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 3(1), 25–45.Muukkonen-van der Meer, H. (2010). Perspective on Knowledge Creating in Higher Education (Unpublisheddoctoral dissertation). University of Helsinki, Finland.Pajares, F. (1996). Self-efficacy beliefs in achievement settings. Review of Educational Research, 66, 543–578.Palonen, T., & Hakkarainen, K. (2000). Patterns of interaction in computer-supported learning, In B. Fishman &S.O’Connor (Eds.), 4th Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 334–339). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Pickering, A. (1995).The mangle of practice: Time, agency, and science. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.Rommetveit, R. (1992). Outlines of a dialogically based social-cognitive approach to human cognition incommunication. In A.H. Wold (Ed.), The Dialogical Alternative: Towards a Theory of Language andMind (pp. 19–44). Oslo: Scandinavian University Press.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith(Ed.), Liberal Education in a Knowledge Society (pp. 67–98). Chicago: Open Court.Schwartz, D. (1999). The productive agency that drives collaborative learning. In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.)Collaborative learning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 197-218). NY: Elsevier .Schwartz, D., & Okita, S. (2004). The Productive Agency in Learning by Teaching. Retrieved March 18, 2008,from http://aaalab.stanford.edu/papers/Productive_Agency_in_Learning_by_Teaching.pdfvan Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. K. (2007). Student-directed assessment of knowledge building using electronicportfolios. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16, 175–220.Valsiner, J., & Van der Veer, R. (2000). The Social Mind: Development of the Idea. New York, NY: CambridgeUniversity Press.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Wertsch, J. V. (1991). Voices of the Mind: A Sociocultural Approach to Mediated Action. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings447© ISLS