Creating Material Representations of Practice at the Boundary ofProfessional Development and Classroom PracticeScott McDonald, Pennsylvania State University, smcdonald@psu.eduJessica Thompson, University of Washington, jjthomps@uw.eduLarge-scale observational studies in American science classrooms have documented there is a general focus onactivity rather than sense-making discourse and that teachers seldom press for explanations (e.g. Banilower,Smith, Weiss, and Pasley, 2006). Reform efforts to impact teachers’ activity in classroom have largely focusedon standards and curricula designed to encourage and support enactment of sense-making pedagogies in thescience classroom. Standards and curricula are tools that largely focus on the planning phase of the teachingprocess, without being designed to have intentional support for the individual reasoning of learners in localcontexts. There has been little research focusing on the local creation or revision of tools of enactment teachersuse to support their students’ science explanation making. In this study we report on a yearlong professionaldevelopment project with teams of middle and high school teachers who focused on the practice of supportingstudents in generating evidence-based explanations.The teachers engaged in iterative design cycles as they modified tasks, tools, and classroom talk(Sohmer, Michaels, Connor and Resnick, 2009) with a goal of supporting their students in generating evidencebased explanations. Their work was done in the context of job-embedded professional development (PD) withstudio-days. During Studio Days, multiple role-actors (classroom teachers, coaches, researchers, and universitystaff) collaborate to provide real-time feedback within current lessons. Our analysis focuses on the way twokinds of tools, formative enactment tools and face-to-face tools, act as reification and stabilization for thepractices of supporting their students in generating evidence-based explanations.Theoretical FrameworkThe analytical frame we use to examine the teachers’ activity during studio days is professional vision. Goodwin(1994) described professional vision as “the discursive practices used by members of a profession to shapeevents in the phenomenal environment they focus their attention upon” (p. 606). In particular it consists of threepractices: highlighting – marking as salient specific phenomenon in a complex context; coding – transformingmaterials being attended to into objects of knowledge; and producing material representations (inscriptions).These practices allow groups to structure and organize the social world around them into professionallymeaningful patterns of practice.Goodwin’s (1994) notion of professional vision has been used as a way to conceptualize teacherlearning (e.g Lobato, Rhodehamel, and Hohensee, 2012). Much of this literature, especially that of noticing hasfocused on highlighting and, to some extent, coding (van Es and Sherin, 2008). That is, the focus is on whatteachers attend and respond to in the complex activity of a classroom. One practice in Goodwin’s framework,the production and articulation of material representations, has received little attention in the literature onteacher learning. This study examines teachers collaboratively creating and revising particular materialrepresentations of practice (formative enactment tools and face-to-face tools) as a way of understanding theirenacted professional pedagogical vision (PPV). Using the analytical lens of PPV, and specifically materialrepresentations of practice, can provide insight into how teachers make intentional changes to tools that supporttargeted learning experiences for students.Formative and Face-to-Face ToolsThe goal of each Studio Day is the co-creation of tools, tasks and talk that support students in creating evidencebased explanations of scientific phenomena (Windschitl, Thompson, Braaten and Stroupe, 2012). For teachersand others attending studio days this means engaging in multiple rounds of co-planning, co-teaching, and codebriefing. This involves: 1) unpacking scientific content and developing a shared understanding of differentlevels of a scientific explanation students might supply, 2) debriefing how students are learning using formativetools such as a Rapid Survey of Student Thinking (RSST), and 3) developing/refining face-to-face tools thatteachers provide to students support for their written explanations of scientific phenomena. As an initial step weused activity theory to analyze the function of formative and face-to-face tools in terms of their relationship tothe object of work, subjects and roles, and rules governing actors/routines (Engestrom, 2004).• Formative tools (e.g. RSST, see Figure 1)o Object of work: Understand and unpack students’ ideas and support modification of face-toface toolo Subjects and Roles: Group of teachers and coaches, video of productive conversation betweenstudents and student work samplesICLS 2014 Proceedings1615© ISLSRules that govern interactions among actors/routines: Gathering students ideas (partialunderstandings, alternative understandings, everyday language and everyday experiences)without engaging in “repair talk,” ways of fixing lessonsFace-to-face tools (e.g. electrolysis model, see Figure 1)o Object of work: Mediating students’ productive conversations and written explanationso Subjects and Roles: Students, teachers, explanation of a scientific phenomenono Rules that govern interactions among actors/routines: Students’ ideas are consideredresources for explanation building, some parts of the scientific explanation (e.g. why levelexplanations) are more important that othero•Figure 1. Iterative revision of face-to-face electrolysis model mediated by the RSST toolDiscussionThe role of tools in professional development and student learning has been under theorized and underexamined in the context of large-scale pedagogical reform. We believe that framing teachers work with tools interms of professional pedagogical vision, with particular focus on material representations of practiceforegrounds the importance of tools as a way of improving practice, both within and across activity systems.This analytical frame allows for the investigation of how these tools are mutually reinforcing across professionaldevelopment and classroom contexts. By foregrounding material representations of practice, we can better seehow tools contribute to the reification and stabilization of practices. In particular, we can differentiate betweenmeaningful iterative mutually reinforcing tool systems from less productive version, such as:• nominal appropriation of tools and routines without adoption of the purpose of generating and revisingscientific ideas• well intentioned tools that don’t fully support students in generating and revising scientific ideas• adoption of tools independent of mutually reinforcing, iterative routines outside of a tool systemEducational reform efforts have invested massive amounts of resources into professional developmentand curricular materials. Reframing the activity of teachers as they engage with these curricular materials inprofessional development contexts to focus on how they develop and use tools and systems of tools allows us todifferentiate productive uses from lethal mutations. Focus on PPV with particular attention to materialrepresentations of practice has the potential to expand practice-based theory of teacher and student learningacross contexts.ReferencesBanilower, E., Smith, P. S., Weiss, I. R., and Pasley, J. D. (2006). The status of K–12 science. D. Sunal and E.Wright (Eds.), The impact of the state and national standards on teaching in the United States: Resultsfrom a national observation survey. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.Engestrom, Y. (2004). New forms of learning in co-configuration work. Journal of Workplace Learning, 16,11–21.Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606–633.Lobato, J., Rhodehamel, B., and Hohensee, C. (2012). "Noticing" as an alternative transfer of learning process.The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(3), 433-482.Sohmer, R., Michaels, S., Connor, M. C. O., and Resnick, L. (2009). Guided construction of knowledge in theclassroom: The troika of talk, tasks, and tools. In Transformation of Knowledge Through ClassroomInteraction (pp. 105–129). London: Routledge.van Es, E. A. and Sherin, M. G. (2008). Mathematics teachers’ “learning to notice” in the context of a videoclub. Teaching and Teacher Education, 24(2), 244–276.Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., Braaten, M., and Stroupe, D. (2012). Proposing a core set of instructionalpractices and tools for teachers of science. Science Education, 96(5), 878-903.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1616© ISLS