Reflective Decision Making within the Discourse of UrbanElementary Engineering ClassroomsChristopher G. Wright, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, cwrigh48@utk.eduKristen Wendell, University of Massachusetts – Boston, Boston, MA, Kristen.wendell@umb.eduPatricia Paugh, University of Massachusetts – Boston, Boston, MA, patricia.paugh@umb.eduAbstract: The emergence of engineering in K-12 education has promoted the need forresearch on discursive practices associated with successful pre-college engineering.Specifically, elementary students need support for engaging in collaborative, reflectivedecision-making during engineering design activities. In this poster, we describe an initialphase of work that looked to identify connections between elementary students’ reflectivedecision-making linguistic practices and students’ community/home-based linguistic practices.IntroductionIn this work, it is our intent to help students and teachers become aware of the disciplinary discourse practices ofengineering design, and how these intersect with their “everyday,” or personal discourse practices. Elementarystudents’ engagement in engineering is not a new phenomenon, but the National Research Council’s recentFrameworks for K-12 Science Education (2012) and the Next Generation Science Standards (Acheieve, Inc.,2013) derived from the Frameworks brings urgency and importance to the task of exposing young students tothe practices and big ideas of engineering. This study specifically focuses on promoting and supportingstudents’ reflective decision-making in collaboration with others (NRC, 2012; Schön, 1987). The NationalResearch Council (2012) writes, “Engineers, too, make decisions based on evidence that a given design willwork; they rarely rely on trial and error.” Reflective decision-making by a group of people requires tools forinteraction, including ways of communicating engineering ideas and ways of thinking like an engineer (Atman,Kilgore, & McKenna, 2008).This poster focuses on Phase One of a larger study and should be considered work in its early stages ofdevelopment. Specifically, we highlight work with teacher researchers in identifying the practices and linguisticpatterns associated with reflected decision-making in elementary students’ engineering planning and design. Thesignificance of this work is:• Advancing educators’ knowledge of how to identify and build upon intellectual and linguistic resourcesthat students bring to engineering design processes.• Empowering educators to support young students’ development of a reflective stance towardengineering design, in preparation for a society that increasingly demands technological literacy of itscitizens.Theoretical ApproachThis study utilizes a “resources perspective” (Hammer & Elby, 2003) for recognizing the intellectual andlinguistic practices that children from urban communities bring to engineering design processes. A variety ofchallenges associated with urban schools have often led to the portrayal of students in ways that are consistentwith a “deficit perspective” on performance (Varelas, Kane, & Wylie, 2010). In contrast, educators andresearchers who adhere to a “resources perspective” (e.g., Bang & Medin, 2010; Emdin, 2011) argue thatnumerous characteristics of urban communities, schools, and students can be interpreted as resources rather thanchallenges or deficits.Methodological ApproachesFor this study, we utilized a case study approach (Yin, 2009) in order to recognize elementary students’reflective discourse practices during a pre-engineering unit focused on motion and design. Specifically, thelinguistic practices utilized within a group of four, 4th grade African American boys while engaged in the designof miniature drag racing vehicles were examined for this study. The full research team, which includeseducational researchers and classroom teachers, convened twice a month in order to examine and analyzecollected data, including video recordings and transcribed classroom conversations from four classroominteractions. Audio recordings and field notes from these research meetings also served as additional datasources. We identified patterns and themes from the corpus of data via discourse analysis (Gee, 2001) groundedin the particular analytic approach of microethnographic study of classroom cultural practices (Bloome, Carter,Christian, Otto, & Shuart-Faris, 2005).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1507© ISLSPreliminary FindingsPreliminary coding of transcribed class sessions and team meetings has raised two themes of ongoing interest tobe investigated further in the microanalysis. The first is the role of power within the design team’s negotiations.We find that design proposals, decisions, and suggestions for redesign are communicated via a synthesis ofengineering-specific language and everyday, personal expressions, and that engineering specific language playsa role in elevating the status of students’ ideas. We are exploring this theme by asking how does theappropriation of specific everyday or discipline-specific discourse by participants shape the exchange andadoption of ideas. The second theme that has emerged is the distribution of physical manipulation of materialswith other linguistic modes as contributing to the design activities and reflection (Aurigemma,Chandrasekharan, Nerssian, & Newstetter, 2013). In what way does physical manipulation of materialscontribute or distract in shaping the discourse along with other linguistic resources? A detailed microanalysis oftranscripts from classroom engineering experience will allow our research team to explore which interactions ofmultiple resources (everyday and disciplinary language, physical manipulation) result in design changes orreflections.Relevance to Conference Theme: “Learning and Becoming in Practice”This work contributes to the conference theme through its specific focus on cultivating ways of recognizing andbuilding upon students’ intellectual and linguistic resources. Developing ways for recognizing students’strengths is accomplished by integrating three focal domains for inquiry -- big ideas in engineering design anddiscourse, students’ sense-making, and issues of race, culture, and language. By supporting inquiry throughstructured settings of professional work and resources for documenting and analyzing practice in engineering,we look to contribute to the theoretical and practical knowledge-base for pre-college engineering activities inelementary school settings.ReferencesAchieve, Inc. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards. Retrieved from http://www.nextgeneration.org/nextgeneration-science-standards/.Aurigemma, J., Chandrasekharan, S., Nerssian, N., Newstetter, W. (2013) Turning experiments into objects:The cognitive processes involved in the design of a lab-on-a-chip device. Journal of EngineeringEducation, 102(1), 117-140.Atman, C., Kilgore, D., & McKenna, A. (2008). Characterizing design learning: A mixed-methods study ofengineering designers’ use of language. Journal of Engineering Education, 97(3), 309-326.Bang, M., & Medin, D. (2010). Cultural processes in science education: Supporting the navigation of multipleepistemologies. Science Education, 94(6), 1008-1026.Bloome, D., Carter, S., Christian, B., Otto, S., & Shuart-Faris, N. (2005). Discourse analysis and the study ofclassroom language and literacy events: A microethnographic perspective. Mahwah, NJ: LawrenceErlbaum Associates.Emdin, C. (2011). Dimensions of communications in urban science education: Interactions and transactions.Science Education, 95(1), 1-20.Gee, J.P. (2011). How to do discourse analysis: A toolkit. New York, NY: Routledge.Hammer, D., & Elby, A. (2003). Tapping epistemological resources for learning physics. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 12(1), 53-90.National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 education: Practices, crosscutting concepts, and coreideas. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.Schön, D. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner: Toward a new design for teaching and learning in theprofessions. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, Inc., Publishers.Varelas, M., Kane, J., & Wylie, C. (2011). Young African American children’s representation of self, science,and school: Making a sense of difference. Science Education, 95(5), 824-851.Yin, R.K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, Inc.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1508© ISLS