From Playing a Game to Solving an EquationShulamit Kapon, Faculty of Education, University of Haifa, 199 Aba Khoushy Ave., Mount Carmel, Haifa3498838, ISRAEL, shulamit.kapon@edu.haifa.ac.ilAbstract: Although the potential of digital games as instructional resources is well known,facilitating deeper learning from games is acknowledged to be a considerable challenge. Thispaper argues that examining transfer from the realm of a digital game to the realm of adiscipline as a case of analogical reasoning can be productive when trying to understand andlater design scaffolds that connect the knowledge representations embedded in games toformal disciplinary knowledge representations used at school. This claim is supported through(1) an analysis of the design of a multiplatform commercial educational game Dragon Box 5+,aimed at teaching children to solve algebraic equations; and (2) tracking the experiences ofseveral players. The transfer from procedures in the game to algebraic procedures is exploredas a case of analogical reasoning, specifically addressing central sub-processes such asretrieval, mapping, evaluation of inferences, and the role of prior knowledge in theseprocesses.IntroductionDigital games are considered to be a powerful medium for learning (Aldrich, 2004; Gee, 2003). However, somestudies of game-based learning as an instructional resource in the formal disciplines suggest that the linksbetween the game world and formal disciplinary knowledge required in a school-based context are notstraightforward (Holbert & Wilensky, 2012; Kebritchi, Hirumi, & Bai, 2010).Clark et al. (2011) and Habgood and Ainsworth (2011) showed that digital games that integrate thesubject matter with a game idea in which the external representation of the learning content is explicitlyexplored through the core mechanics of the game are more efficient in creating this link. Clark et al. termed this"conceptually-integrated games" whereas Habgood and Ainsworth called it "intrinsically integrated games", andboth acknowledge the challenge of transfer from the game world to formal disciplinary-based reasoning.Holbert and Wilensky (2012) attributed the transfer problem to the incongruence of the epistemologicalframings (Hammer, Eleby, Scherr, & Redish, 2005). More specifically, the set of expectations that a student hasabout a real-world or school-based situation that requires disciplinary- based reasoning is very different from theset of expectations in the game world. Based on this explanation they suggested that when the appropriateformal representations are integrated into the player interface, the likelihood for transfer increases since theplayers are implicitly encouraged to connect different epistemological framings.The present paper suggests a complementary explanation. As in Holbert and Wilensky's paper, thetheoretical approach employed is the Knowledge in Pieces epistemological perspective (e.g., diSessa, 1993;diSessa & Sherin, 1998; Wagner, 2006); however, following Kapon and diSessa (2012), the transfer from therealm of the digital game to the realm of the discipline is theoretically explored as a case of analogicalreasoning. Central sub-processes of analogical reasoning such as retrieval, mapping, evaluation of inferences,and the role of prior knowledge are examined in the context of playing an educational digital game. Thetheoretical claims will be illustrated through an analysis of an award-winning commercial educational digitalgame entitled Dragon Box Algebra 5+ (WeWantToKnow), and examples from players' experiences (7 children,5th, 6th and 7th grades). The 7th graders who played the game played after learning to solve linear equations inschool. The 5th and 6th graders played before a formal presentation of algebra.Theoretical FrameworkAnalogies and analogical reasoning have been studied from a wide range of perspectives. A core focus ofattention has been the ways in which analogies foster understanding in some new situation or domain (thetarget) by comparing it to a more familiar one (the source/base) (Gentner, 1983; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989).Several models suggest that spontaneous analogical transfer is more likely to occur when the target sharesmultiple features with the source analogue (Falkenhainer, Forbus, & Gentner, 1986; Holyoak & Koh, 1987) andthat this process is mediated by pragmatic goals (Holyoak & Thagard, 1989; Keane, 1996). These modelscohere with the design principles of conceptually integrated games, in which the degree of similarity ofrepresentations and actions between the realm of the game and realm of the discipline is by definition increased.The ability to apply relational knowledge across different contexts is a powerful learning mechanism.In analogical reasoning this transfer takes place when relations from a familiar source domain are mapped ontorelations and objects in the target domain, allowing the individual to analogically infer new relations or objectsin the target domain (Dunbar, 1995; Gentner, 2010; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989). However, spontaneous retrievalof a relevant, appropriate, and productive source for an analogy is not trivial, and often superficial similarityICLS 2014 Proceedings1062© ISLSplays a major role in analogical retrieval rather than deep relational structures (Gentner, Rattermann, & Forbus,1993; Gick & Holyoak, 1980). The issue of retrieval seems highly germane to the development of links betweenthe game world and formal disciplinary knowledge required in a school-based context. After all, why should astudent even consider an activity in a game setting as similar to an activity in a formal disciplinary context?Studies of students who reason through instructional analogies show that the evaluation of theplausibility and applicability of an analogical inference is not just a question of the degree of similarity andpragmatic considerations. Rather, these studies suggest that the learner’s knowledge in the target domaindirectly affects the acceptance or rejection of this explanation (Brown & Clement, 1989; Kapon & diSessa,2012). Kapon and diSessa (2012) argued that learning through analogy always involves a bootstrapping processwithin the target domain. Drawing and elaborating on the model of p-prims (diSessa, 1993), they suggested thatwhen reasoning through instructional analogies, students activate particular knowledge elements, termedexplanatory primitives, or e-prims, in light of which they assess the plausibility of the analogical inference.Differences between individuals accepting or rejecting the suggested analogical inferences were explained bydifferences in the repertoire of cued knowledge elements and a dynamic assessment of their applicability to thetarget domain. Thus, it is reasonable to expect that prior knowledge in general and in the target disciplines inparticular will affect the analogical transfer from the realm of the game to the realm of the discipline, not only interms of retrieval but also in terms of the evaluation of inferences.The GameThis paper analyzes a commercial educational digital game that aims to teach children to solve algebraicequations. Dragon Box 5+ (WeWantToKnow) is an award-winning multiplatform commercial game. Playersstart with a two sided game board, a box and some cards. The goal is to get the box alone on one side of thegame board by cancelling out negative cards, adding cards to both sides, placing cards below or next to a groupof cards. Gradually the cards are replaced by numbers and variables, and actions in the game start to look likeaddition, division and multiplication operations (see Figure 1). The game has 5 chapters with 20 problems("levels") each. As the game progresses, instead of getting the box alone the player solves (at least in terms ofrepresentations) algebra equations for x. During the game the player gets constant feedback.Tap	  it	  Drag	  the	  card	  on	  top	  of	  its	  twin	  You	  can	  place	  a	  card	  next	  to	  another	  card	  Figure 1. The game board as the game progresses. On the left are the instruction that appear on the screen.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1063© ISLSTracking Players' ExperienceData on players' experience were collected by graduate students enrolled in a seminar taught by the author. Aconsiderable part of the seminar dealt with the notion of transfer of learning from multiple perspectives. Sevengraduate students (5 math teachers, 1 science teacher, and 1 psychologist) participated in the seminar. Eachgraduate student worked with one child (5th-7th grade) who volunteered to participate in the study. Each child(N=7) met with the graduate student five times (25-50 minutes each). During each meeting the child played andcompleted one chapter and the grad student observed. The computer screen (game board and in the corner, avideo webcam of the child) and all the conversations were recorded. The students were instructed that if thechild asked for assistance during the game they should only use "game language" unless the child explicitlyused mathematical terms. A short semi-structured interview took place, after each chapter. The interviewerasked the child to return to one or two levels, solve them again and explain how he or she solved them. Noquestions were asked during the game to avoid interrupting the flow (Czikszentmihalyi, 1990). Additionalquestions were asked to probe whether the child made connections to the mathematical meaning. Theinterviewers also took field notes regarding difficulties on specific levels, requests for assistance, etc. All thesessions (play and interview) were transcribed including a time stamp and a description of the child's actions oneach level. Particularly difficult levels were identified based on the relative time spent on the level, the numberof repetitions needed to get it right, and explicit requests for assistance.Analogy from the Realm of the Game to the Realm of AlgebraThe next subsections discuss central terms and sub-processes in analogical reasoning, such as mapping, surfaceand relational similarities, retrieval, the source of the analogy, and the role of prior knowledge in the evaluationof the analogical inference, as they come to bear on the design and player experience of Dragon Box 5+.Relational SimilaritiesAt the design level, Dragon Box presents an analogy with rich relational similarities. The player's actions in thegame as well as the rules that are enforced with the constant feedback given to the player are isomorphic to theactions and rules used when solving linear algebraic equations. (1) When adding a card (equivalent toarithmetic addition) to one side of the game board, the player is graphically reminded to add the same card tothe other side. In algebraic equations the rule is to add variables and numbers to both sides of the equation. (2)When placing a card next to (equivalent to arithmetic multiplication) or below (equivalent to division) anothercard, the player is graphically reminded to do so to all groups of cards on both sides of the game board. Again,when we multiply or divide one side of an equation by a number or variable, we should do the same to the otherside of the equation, and this means multiplying or dividing every component on each side of the equation withthe same number or variable. (3) The player receives feedback after completing each level: (a) the box is alone- equivalent to success in isolating the variable; (b) right number of moves - equivalent to success in efficientlysolving the equation with a minimal number of steps; (c) right number of cards - equivalent to cancelingredundant numbers and variables (e.g., cancelling -2+2). In fact one might even be tempted to think that theactions in the game and the algebraic actions are isomorphic production rules (Anderson, 1987).Analogical TransferDespite the rich relational similarities in the structure of the actions in the game to algebraic procedures, veryfew students spontaneously ascribed mathematical meaning to their activities, and those who did so ascribedonly partial meaning (e.g., treating the equivalent to addition in the game as addition, but not seeing theequivalent to multiplication in the game as multiplication). The literature on analogical reasoning suggestsseveral explanations for the spontaneous failure of analogical transfer: (1) The students did not understand thesource of the analogy (as in Clement, 1993). (2) The students were unable to retrieve the relevant information(as in Gentner, Loewenstein, Thompson, & Forbus, 2009). (3) Based on their prior knowledge about games andalgebra the students failed to see the game situation and the algebraic situation as similar, and thus rejected theentailed analogical inferences (as in Brown & Clement, 1989; Kapon & diSessa, 2012). In the followingsections I discuss each explanation in the context of the game and its pedagogical implications. Note that thechildren were fully engaged in the game and enjoyed it. They often wanted to play an extra chapter after eachsession, they were happy to meet with the graduate student for the next session, and said that the game was fun.Thus the difficulty to ascribe mathematical meaning to the actions in the game cannot be attributed to affect.An Accessible Source for the AnalogyThe game has five chapters, and the rules of the game are gradually presented in the first three. As the studentsmove through the chapters, the symbolic representations gradually transform into formal symbolic algebraicrepresentations (see Figure 1). The fact that the participants completed chapters 4 & 5 relatively quicklycompared to the time spent on chapters 1, 2 and 3 suggests that they had mastered the procedures of the game,and that they were almost unaware of the transformation in the symbolic representations. Hence the studentsICLS 2014 Proceedings1064© ISLSfully understood the source of the analogy. Moreover, the time the children spent playing the entire game andsuccessfully completing all 5 chapters (e.g., 100 exercises) ranged from a total of 1 to a total of 1.6 hours, whichis much faster than the time it generally takes students to master the equivalent math rules in a classroomcontext. This suggests that the procedures of the game can be considered as a productive source of the analogy.RetrievalSuperficial similarity plays a major role in analogical retrieval; i.e., the retrieval of a base for analogy is easier ifit shares similar objects, similar properties, and a similar general theme with the target, although the structure ofrelations are what makes the analogy a powerful cognitive tool. As the students move through the chapters, thesymbolic representations gradually transform into formal symbolic algebraic representations (see Figure 1). Theobservations indicated that the children were almost unaware of the transformation in the symbolicrepresentations; namely they treated them implicitly without thinking about their mathematical meaning. Forinstance, in the game each "night card" has a "day card" with opposite coloring. Dragging a night card over aday card cancels it (one gets a green whirlwind card, which when clicked over disappears). During chapter 1,level 12, suddenly instead of a drawing on a card, the player sees the letter "a" on a card and "-a" on anothercard. All the children treated the "-a" card as a "night card" and dragged it on the "a" card, but the 5th and 6thgraders did not use the words "positive" or "negative". For instance one of the children said in the interviewafterwards that "it just looked like the most appropriate thing to do", but she did not regard the green whirlwindas "zero". The three 7th graders did better than the younger students in this respect, but the ascribedmathematical meaning was nevertheless limited for them as well.Scholarly work on learning from games suggests that external scaffolds are required to facilitate deeperlearning from games (e.g., Barzilai & Blau, 2014; Honey & Hilton, 2010). The literature on analogicalreasoning suggests that explicit alignment may facilitate analogical encoding, and subsequent retrieval of therelevant schema in other relevant situations (Gentner, Loewenstein, & Thompson, 2003). Thus explicitlyaligning the actions and rules of the game with the corresponding algebraic actions and rules might prove to bea productive scaffold.Evaluation of Analogical InferencesLet us examine two excerpts from the interviews: (1) A 5th grader, who had not been introduced yet to formalalgebraic representations, was interviewed after completing chapter 1. He was asked how he knew that if hedragged the "-a" over "a" he would cancel both cards and get the green whirlwind. He pointed to the "-" signand said: "it symbolizes opposites". After a minute he stopped, looked at the interviewer, smiled and said "well,it doesn't really make sense to put a minus before a letter, why would they do that?" (2) A seventh grader wasinterviewed after successfully completing all 5 chapters. She was asked by the interviewer who pointed to thefraction line on the game board, "what is the meaning of the line?" Her answer was: "It separates both parts.....at first I thought it was a fraction line." When the interviewer asked why she decided it was not, she answered:"because a fraction line actually contains things, this divided by that, and if you divide them...., it's equal tosomething, and I cannot see anything here that is a division."The two examples illustrate how the students' knowledge in arithmetic and algebra affected theirevaluation of the analogical inference, a finding that is consistent with prior work on students' reasoning and theevaluation of instructional analogies. This work (Brown & Clement, 1989; Kapon & diSessa, 2012) suggeststhat a carefully planned discussion of meaning should be integrated into the explicit alignments suggestedabove.A Concluding RemarkThis paper argues that examining transfer from the realm of a digital game to the realm of the discipline as acase of analogical reasoning can be productive when trying to understand and later design scaffolds that connectthe knowledge representations embedded in games to formal disciplinary knowledge representations used atschool. The claim was illustrated through an analysis of the design of a commercial computer game (DragonBox 5+) and the experiences of a few players.One may question the generalizability of the claim made here. It is possible that the analogicalmapping between the procedures in the game and the disciplinary procedures are applicable only to Dragon Box5+. The strong analogy in the game was indeed what attracted my attention to it in the first place. However,even simulation games do not reproduce an activity identical to what they simulate, and the construction ofcorrespondence relations between the real world and the game requires some degree of analogical reasoning.ReferencesAldrich, C. (2004). Simulations and the future of learning: An innovative (and perhaps revolutionary) approachto e-learning. San Francisco, CA: Wiley.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1065© ISLSAnderson, J. R. (1987). Skill acquisition: Compilation of weak-method problem situations. Psychologicalreview, 94(2), 192.Barzilai, S., & Blau, I. (2014). Scaffolding game-based learning: Impact on learning achievements, perceivedlearning, and game experiences. Computers & Education, 70, 65-79.Brown, D. E., & Clement, J. (1989). Overcoming misconceptions via analogical reasoning: Abstract transferversus explanatory model construction. Instructional Science, 18(4), 237-261.Clark, D. B., Nelson, B. C., Chang, H.-Y., Martinez-Garza, M., Slack, K., & D’Angelo, C. M. (2011). ExploringNewtonian mechanics in a conceptually-integrated digital game: Comparison of learning and affectiveoutcomes for students in Taiwan and the United States. Computers & Education, 57(3), 2178-2195.Clement, J. (1993). Using bridging analogies and anchoring intuitions to deal with students’ preconceptions inphysics. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30(10), 1241-1257.Czikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York, NY: HarperColllinsPublishers.diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10(2&3), 105-225.diSessa, A. A., & Sherin, B. L. (1998). What changes in conceptual change? International Journal of ScienceEducation, 20(10), 1155-1191.Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific reasoning in real-world laboratories. In R. J.Steinberg & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight (pp. 365–395). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1986). The structure-mapping engine. Urbana-Champaign, IL:University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Department of Computer Science.Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York, NY: PalgraveMacmillan.Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7(2), 155-170.Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the Mind: Analogical Processes and Symbol Systems. Cognitive Science,34(5), 752-775.Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003). Learning and transfer: A general role for analogicalencoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2), 393-405.Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Forbus, K. D. (2009). Reviving Inert Knowledge: AnalogicalAbstraction Supports Relational Retrieval of Past Events. Cognitive Science, 33(8), 1343-1382.Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993). The roles of similarity in transfer: Separatingretrievability from inferential soundness. Cognitive psychology, 25(4), 524-575.Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem solving. Cognitive psychology, 12(3), 306-355.Habgood, M. J., & Ainsworth, S. E. (2011). Motivating children to learn effectively: Exploring the value ofintrinsic integration in educational games. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(2), 169-206.Hammer, D., Eleby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005). Resources, framing, and transfer. In J. Mestre(Ed.), Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective. Greenwich, CT: Information:Age Publishing.Holbert, N. R., & Wilensky, U. (2012). Designing Video Games that Encourage Players to Integrate FormalRepresentations with Informal Play. Paper presented at the The Future of Learning: The 10thInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2012), Sidney, Australia.Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer. Memory & Cognition,15(4), 332-340.Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13(3),295-355.Honey, M. A., & Hilton, M. (2010). Learning science through computer games and simulations. Committee onScience Learning: Computer Games, Simulations, and Education, National Research Council, USA:National Academies Press.Kapon, S., & diSessa, A. A. (2012). Reasoning Through Instructional Analogies. Cognition and Instruction,30(3), 261-310.Keane, M. T. (1996). On adaptation in analogy: Tests of pragmatic importance and adaptability in analogicalproblem solving. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Section A, 49(4), 1062-1085.Kebritchi, M., Hirumi, A., & Bai, H. (2010). The effects of modern mathematics computer games onmathematics achievement and class motivation. Computers & Education, 55(2), 427-443.Wagner, J. F. (2006). Transfer in pieces. Cognition and Instruction, 24(1), 1-71.WeWantToKnow. DragonBox Algebra 5+. from http://www.dragonboxapp.com/AcknowledgmentsI am grateful to the graduate students who helped track the players' experience: Hana Almog, Sokaina Awawde,Inbal Ben Arie, Angela Halloun, Lilach Hershkowitz, Areefa Kasim Ali, Hanan Tarabieh.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1066© ISLS