Learning and Thinking in Practice:Complex Systems Thinking “In the Wild”Izabel Duarte Olson (Chair), Ananda Marin, Douglas Medin, Northwestern University,izabel@u.northwestern.edu, amarin@northwestern.edu, medin@u.northwestern.eduAlon Hirsh, Sharona T. Levy, Faculty of Education, University of Haifahirsha65@gmail.com, stlevy@edu.haifa.ac.ilMegan Bang, Priya Pugh, Megan McGinnity, University of Washingtonmbang3@uw.edu, pkpugh@uw.edu, megancmcginty@gmail.comDiscussant: Uri Wilensky, Northwestern UniversityAbstract: Research in the field of learning sciences demonstrates that various forms ofknowledge are created through participation in diverse but often undervalued communitypractices (Nasir, Rosebery, Warren, & Lee, 2006). However, knowledge created in practice isnot traditionally explored in research about complex systems thinking (Duarte Olson,Forthcoming). This session seeks to recognize and capitalize on the wealth of complexsystems knowledge learned through everyday practices in informal contexts. We presentarguments that are grounded in research taking place in four different communities—withBrazilian samba schools, triathletes, Native Americans, and environmental educators. Thegoal of the symposium is to discuss (1) how complex systems thinking can be developedthrough different practices in informal environments, and (2) how an under-representation ofdiverse samples and phenomena may eschew our understanding of complex systems thinking.Symposium OverviewThe learning sciences community has long suggested that knowledge arises from engagement with culturalpractices both within and outside of school settings (Bang, Medin, & Atran, 2007; Nasir et al., 2006) However,most studies on complex systems, focus on how students think about scientific concepts learned in formalenvironments (Duarte Olson, Forthcoming), with very few papers specifically targeting knowledge of complexsystems acquired in informal contexts (Bang et al., 2007; Duarte Olson, Submitted; Olson, 2013). The body ofresearch on complex systems thinking is valuable and informative, however work on how individuals constructcomplex knowledge in everyday or out-of-school contexts is necessary for the design of more equitable learningenvironments. Although the knowledge gained from community participation is often analogous to that taught inschools, it is sometimes undervalued (Nasir et al., 2006). Despite the lack of research on everyday knowledge ofcomplex systems, this knowledge is necessary because informal learning practices developed within family andcommunity systems are conducive to systematic and reliable scientific knowledge and important for thedevelopment of skills for science (National Research Council, 2009). Moreover identifying this knowledge asscientific could create new paths for diverse communities to embrace STEM careers.This session is aimed at demonstrating how community practices are an asset and a locus of complexknowledge development. We take on the challenge of discussing how complex systems knowledge can bedeveloped in informal settings with four different studies taking place in diverse community settings. Althoughthe studies approach distinct complex systems, all of them have the same overarching theme: How complexsystems can be learned through engagement with a practice. These practices include engagement with theCarnival parade in Rio de Janeiro Brazil, biking in groups, play between children and parent dyads, and teachingclimate change. Each of the studies also utilized a wide range of methodologies, ranging from agent basedmodeling to ethnographic methods, to examine how different practices across 4 different communities afford theconstruction of complex systems knowledge.Taken together, the five papers illustrate a wealth of knowledge and a variety of practices cocreatedwithin the diverse communities represented. In the first session, we will discuss how expert samba practitionersunderstand auto-regulation through their understandings of the relationship between samba school and theaudience. We focus on how experience with the samba parade shapes more complex understandings of autoregulation. The second session explores how a community of triathletes used agent-based models to understandthe complex phenomena of drafting to increase comprehension and performance. The third session illustrateshow Native American children and parents reason about ecological relations that appear in spontaneous play.Finally, the fourth session discusses how a professional development course on climate change can have aprofound impact on teachers’ understanding of this complex phenomenon. With this, we hope to create a venueto discuss (1) how informal contexts foster the development of complex systems thinking, (2) issues of cognitivediversity in thinking about complex systems, (3) how to use this knowledge to inform design in the LearningSciences.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1372© ISLSBecoming Samba: Understandings of the Process of Auto-Regulation throughthe Relationship between Audience and SchoolIzabel Duarte Olson and Ananda MarinEscolas de samba (or samba schools) are community-based organizations in Brazil. These schools spend anentire year preparing for the samba parade, which occurs yearly during the carnival. They start the year bychoosing a theme and creating a samba enredo (a theme song). The theme song is usually practiced all yearalong with any choreographies needed to perform it. The climax is the samba parade, which happens yearlyduring the Carnival. During this event, schools are judged and ranked with an overall winner. Eighty percent ofthe school’s success is judged by its “harmony” or the way that the members are in synergy with the rhythm, thetheme song, themselves, and the audience. Although Rio de Janeiro is a very segregated city, samba schools area democratic space bringing together working-class and middle-class communities, diverse races and creeds.Figure 1. The Samba Parade in BrazilEven though the carnival is purposeful and planned, it is a great site for studying complex systemsthinking in the wild as the symbiotic relationship interconnecting audience, school, and each individual member,is what makes a school an overall winner. Moreover, the samba parade is a cultural phenomenon where anenormous amount of complex coordination happens among dancers and mediating structures found in theparade (Hutchins, 1995). Mediating structures are external tools that help one navigate an activity. In the sambaparade these structures include the floats, the audience, the section directors, and the beat coming from theinstrumental section. Initial fieldwork suggests that there is an unending concern to preserve the emerging unityof the school through coordination among its participants. This coordination among participants allowsinformation to be propagated through these mediating structures with the goal of creating a symbiotic unity inthe school, which they call harmony. The result is described as a live organism.Understanding this live organism requires a decentralized understanding of these coordinationprocesses. With that, the carnival parade could be considered one of the largest participatory simulations in theworld. This symposium presentation will explore expert practitioners understandings of the auto-regulationprocess that results from the schools relationship with the audience. More specifically, we will explore the roleof their practice in constructing those understandings. During the parade, the audience functions as a means offeedback. The way the public reacts informs the component of the school’s performance, allowing thecomponents of the school (e.g. each individual floor component, section directors) to adjust their actions. Duringfieldwork, the way the audience reacted greatly shaped what happened on the parade floor. For example, if theaudience was animated, the components fed into the audience’s reactions and grew. In instances where theaudience was cold, the components sensed that and became equally cold.In previous research, the first author investigated working-class and middle-class individualsunderstandings of socio-economic mobility. Mobility practices were found to distinctly shape people’sunderstandings of complex phenomena (Duarte Olson, Submitted) as navigating different contexts correlatedwith more evidence of complex systems thinking. We believe practice also shapes expert Samba practitionersunderstandings of the samba parade in Rio de Janeiro. Our hypothesis is that our informant’s roles and years ofpractice will be correlated with their understandings of the relationship between audience and school.Methods: PopulationIn-depth interviews were conducted with 52 individuals who had a high degree of involvement with one ofRio’s samba schools. A high degree of involvement was established by how many years they have beenparticipating in the carnival. At least five consecutive years of participation in the parade were necessary toestablish a high degree of involvement with the school. Twenty-three participants were women, while twentynine were men. The mean age of participants was 46 years old with an average 25 years of experience in thesamba world. As perspective-taking is important for complex systems thinking (Duarte Olson, Submitted)participants had purposefully different roles to see if one’s role affects their understanding of the parade.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1373© ISLSSamplingThe sampling was purposive. Initial contact was established with several section directors from samba schools,including Salgueiro, Unidos da Vila Isabel and Beija Flor. Based on these initial contacts, potential participantswere found through word of mouth and a snowball sampling technique. Participants were not paid for theirinterviews.Materials and ProcedureParticipants were initially contacted through a referral. Then, if the person agreed, they were later interviewed intheir homes, the school, or another location of their preference. The interview instrument consisted of fourteenopen-ended questions that examined how individuals reasoned about the relationship between harmony andevolution, audience and school, and the overall interconnectedness of the school. The present research willexamine responses to the fourth question in this interview: “Does the audience have a role in the parade? If so,why do you think that?”.CodingThe interviews were transcribed in Portuguese and later translated to English. The goal of the analysis was tounderstand how experience (indexed by years) and the participant’s role shape complex knowledge of apractice. To accomplish this goal, the responses were divided into clauses and a code was assigned to each one.As there were differences in the length of the responses, the raw data was normalized by dividing the codeclause count by the total number of clauses in each response. Five codes attended to the relationships eachparticipant noted (e.g. Influences from public to school: If the public embraces the school, the school grows orInfluence from one component to school: “But that singer sang so well he exhilarated the school”). One codeattended to participants’ use of emergent concepts. For example, “We become samba” notes the emergence of acharacteristic that goes beyond the schoolResultsUnderstanding the idea of emergence in Samba seems to be correlated with the amount of experienceparticipants have (indexed by years of practice), but not with their actual roles. We ran a 2-way ANOVA withyears of practice and role as an independent variable, and the emergence code as a dependent variable. We got amain effect for years of practice (F(1, 25) = 2.916, p = .1). This is evident in the way this 63 year-old woman,who has been in the samba world for 50 years, talks about the relationship between the school and the audience:“The audience moves the school, the school moves the audience, together we become samba.” She sees sambaas an emergent property of the synergy between school and audience. These two are linked together in such away that there is no samba if one of the pieces is taken away.When speaking about this relationship, participants often noted how each component of the paradeaffects one another. Participants with more experience, quantified by years of practice, were also more likely tomention more types of influences. A 2-way ANOVA found a main effect for years of practice (F(1, 25) = 5.43,p = .03), but not role. The more years of experience a component had, the more types of influence the personmentioned. Take Alan’s response, who is 33 and the leader of the instrumental section at a major school ofsamba in Rio. Alan has been in the Samba world since age 1: “If the public is with you, they sing, if the sambais good, if the school is in a good moment, if the public embraces the school, it is easier. The judges think: Well,I can’t go against this school, because the majority is with them”. Alan, who is an experienced sambapractitioner, talks about 4 different relationships when explaining the role of the audience. Most oftenparticipants with less experience noted one or two relationships. For example, Ary, a 58-year-old who hasparticipated in the parade for 8 years only notes a one-way relationship between audience and school: “Theirrole is of motivation […].”The role of participants was not correlated with their understanding of their practice. Maybe becauseduring rehearsals there is not much distinction between roles, unless you are part of one of the more specializedsections (e.g. instrumental section). Therefore, the interaction that is consistent six months out of the year ismore crucial in shaping your knowledge of samba than what happens in 30 minutes during the parade floor.However, experience was predictive of people’s understandings of emergence and the number of relationshipspeople mentioned in their response. Practitioners that had more experience (indexed by the number of years inthe practice) were more likely to mention emergence and more relationships. This paper shows the importanceof practice in learning complex systems thinking knowledge and invites the learning sciences community tolook for more that are the locus of complex systems knowledge development.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1374© ISLSCollaborating while Competing: Conceptual and Motor Learning WhileInventing Drafting Tactics with Agent-Based Models of the Aerodynamics ofBicycle DraftingAlon Hirsh and Sharona T. LevyCan a constructionist complex systems approach support better understanding and performance in sports? In thispaper, we describe research into young triathletes’ invention and execution of new drafting tactics usingcomputer models based on a complex systems approach. The tension between cooperation and competitioninvoked while biking in groups within a triathlon competition is problematized as a substrate for learningregarding the aerodynamics of collective motion through air. The present study presents a curious finding thatruns contrary to well-established motor learning theory (Schmidt & Wrisberg, 2008) that claims that conceptuallearning precedes and promotes motor learning: how learning through constructing collaborative tactics forovercoming air resistance via a complex systems perspective enhanced athletes’ biking performance but nottheir conceptual understanding of the very same topic.The study involves a model-based triathlon training program, Biking with Particles, concerningaerodynamics of biking in groups (drafting). A conceptual framework highlights several forms of access tounderstanding the complex system (micro, macro, mathematical, experiential) and bidirectional transitionsamong these forms, anchored at the common and experienced level, the macro-level (Levy & Wilensky, 2009).The goal was to explore whether using agent based models of bikers and air particles to learn about draftingcould be used to enhance athletes' understanding and performance. Motor learning and conceptual learning ofthe aerodynamics of drafting were compared.Triathlon and DraftingThe triathlon is a multisport event, which was established some 30 years ago. The three disciplines in the eventare swimming, cycling and running. A triathlete performs the three sports in the specified sequence andstrategizes effort and speed to obtain maximum effect in minimum time. The distance in each sport isdetermined by age. In the adult category the distance for swimming is 1500m, cycling 40km and 10km forrunning. In the current study, our participants were youth and performed 50% of the adult requirements incompetitions. The term drafting is mostly used in the field of physiology and biomechanics of sports to name themovement of closely packed individuals aimed at aerodynamic protection (Hausswirth & Brisswalter, 2008). Apeloton is a large group of cyclists that are riding together to create a network that spreads energy resourcesamong the cyclists. A peloton is usually created spontaneously. One of the main reasons for losing energyduring cycling is due to friction with the air. The aim of drafting is to reduce this friction. Little research hasbeen conducted into the impact of drafting in triathlon on physiological factors.Cooperation/CompetitionDrafting is used to gain energy advantages in moving through the air (Hausswirth & Brisswalter, 2008). Thephenomenon of drafting offers unique insights into the delicate balance between competition and cooperationamong collectives. On one hand, drafting offers up to 40% savings on energy expenditure, rising with thebiker’s speed (McCole et al., 1990). On the other hand, the group speed may slow a biker down too much; inwhich case, a smaller group may “break-away” usually around a bend in the road. Thus the persistent questionfor a given cyclist is “stay or break away”. Furthermore, the answer can change at any given moment. In atriathlon (sequenced as swimming, biking then, running), biking at a less than maximal rate and minimumenergy expenditure is particularly advantageous in saving energy for the last leg of the competition.Conceptual/Motor LearningThis study examines both conceptual learning and changes in performance. Performance is viewed through themotor program construct (Schmidt & Wrisberg, 2008). The motor program is an abstract representation ofmovement, used to describe cognitive processes in movement planning that include both pre-programmedmovements and responses to environmental stimuli. This construct is central in sports research. It is fundamentalto the current study as we expected that the resulting motor program would include greater flexibility withrespect to environmental conditions, sensations with respect to air pressure, and flow. This flexibility is relatedto both sensing of input (sensorial input related to the tactile and haptic senses) and to related movement, suchas shifting position to better locations within a configuration. Motor learning is described as having three stages:(1) cognitive-verbal; (2) motor; (3) autonomous. Within this study, we have focused on the first stage, cognitiveverbal learning that may take place through exploring and discussing computer models. In the cognitive-verbalphase, the learners do not yet know the topic and skill they will learn. During this time they talk to themselves,ask questions about confusing issues and ask self-monitoring questions. In Biking with Particles, we haveprovided a learning environment that encourages such talk and questioning, by providing several opportunitiesto self-explain, explain to others, listen to and assess explanations (Chi & VanLehn, 1991). Perceptual learningICLS 2014 Proceedings1375© ISLSand conceptual learning are also conceptualized as part of motor learning. In the early stages of motor skilllearning, the athlete needs to experience the skill at the conceptual and perceptual level (Schmidt & Wrisberg,2008).Expert/NoviceIt has been claimed that in most fields of sports, athletes need to process information very quickly in anenvironment where time is a crucial factor (Williams et al., 2010). Therefore, athletes need to adapt themselvesto unique constraints of the task by learning knowledge structures and cognitive processes that support theirprediction of what will happen and deciding on the appropriate choice of action (Williams & Ford, 2008). Theabove researchers claim that experts circumvent the limitations of short-term memory by learning skills thatfacilitate quick processing of information into long term memory and selective access to this information, asneeded. After extended practice, experts tag information in such a way that enables anticipation of when it willbe needed in the future. In a meta-analysis of the relationship between expertise and perceptual-cognitive skills,several distinctions were found among novices and experts in various domains in sport (Mann et al. 2007).Notably experts were better at identifying perceptual cues.Training was conducted separately with two groups, both 14-17 years old youth: an elite juniortriathletes team (experts; 4 male, 3 female) and a local team (hobbyists; 6 male, 3 female). The study lastedthree days and included lectures, discussions, guided exploration of agent-based models of concerted motionthrough air particles (Levy, Hirsh, Bacalo & Kakoon, 2011), inventing new tactics, and biking in practice. Dataincluded questionnaires, interviews, videotapes, and performance measures of heart-rate and biking duration.The athletes’ invented designs were innovative and diverse, expressing well-known (diagonalplacements, one-behind-the-other units, aerodynamic group contour, rotation in motion) and new features (wrapthe weak, strong in front) in the sport. Local features (e.g. diagonal placements) were more dominant than globalfeatures (e.g. aerodynamic group contour). While displaying some well-known principles, the tactics themselveswere original, new to the sport. The athletes’ designs introduce new tactics of drafting that incorporate an ideaof uneven load distribution. In optimizing a solution that balances across the tension of cooperation andcompetition, the weaker cyclists’ performance that is detrimental to the group was alleviated by creatingvacuum bubbles. These bubbles were used to encapsulate the weaker riders, making it easier for them to ride,without impacting the group performance. A heavier load was placed on the strongest riders, while negotiatingthe energetics of this arrangement to make sure the strong bikers still obtained energetic benefits.Their performance in bicycle drafting increased dramatically, with a gain of 20%, at both individualand group levels. The experts mainly reduced their times. Hobbyists mainly reduced their effort. The gain wasmeasured with respect to the currently known best drafting tactic, the Belgian Tourniquet – named, BT(Hausswirth et al. 2001) that involves rotating placement and leadership within an ellipse of bikers.Computation of this efficiency was based upon the ratio of output to input; the invested effort (input measuredas heart-rate from resting baseline) and the performance outcome (output in terms of speed or time) thusintroducing a concise new efficiency measure into the field of sports. For each group, the tactic with the bestefficiency was compared with the BT. The experts improved in efficiency by 19%. The hobbyists improved inefficiency by 20%. For each athlete, the best efficiency among all invented tactics was recorded. The meanefficiency was .99 (.18), with higher mean efficiency for the experts [1.13 (.11)] than for the hobbyists [.86(.13)], with an unpaired t(11) = 4.01**.Some conceptual change was evidenced for the micro-level complex systems components (particulatenature of air, paired t = 2.43*), and micro/macro relations (paired t = 3.74**) but not regarding how theseemerge into drafting patterns. Generally, the athletes’ explanations of drafting from the more basic definitionsand until more complex problem solving did not change.We had found the triathletes’ designs to be innovative, proliferate, and diverse. Their inventivenessgoes beyond the single and double line, or the BT described for triathlon competitions. Older central triathloncoaching texts do not mention drafting at all. The newest coaching text to date (US Triathlon 2012) describesonly the rudimentary tactic of a single line. As drafting is a relatively new and still-contested feature in triathloncompetitions, it seems that there could be much room for growth. The junior triathletes introduced several newtactics into the field of competitive bicycle riding in triathlons, a significant achievement.We have seen a radical change in performance, not usually evidenced in the domain of competitivesports. The triathletes improved their efficiency (speed with respect to effort) by 20%, both as a group and asindividuals. Improved performance is related to greater speed, expending less effort, and staying within theaerobic range. A methodological contribution of the current study is developing a metric for the main factors asa single efficiency measure. This measure supports comparison between tactics.One may wonder as to the small rise in conceptual understanding when such a large increase inperformance was under way. While the athletes learned the basic physics of air particles’ motion and could usethe ideas of air density to understand effort, they did not improve their understanding of drafting. Motor learninghas been described as going through three stages: (1) cognitive-verbal; (2) motor; (3) autonomous (Schmidt andICLS 2014 Proceedings1376© ISLSLee 2011). It seems that in this study, the cognitive-verbal stage was cut short, and partly ‘‘skipped over’’ sothat most of the learning happens at the motor stage. This finding begs the question of whether the first stage is anecessary pre-requisite for the second stage. It suggests that with motor skills, one does not have to verbalizewhat one understands in order to perform it. Processing in the motor learning stage involves makingperformance more adaptive and efficient. It would seem that the visual and spatial information provided by themodels and completed by the athletes’ imagination and mental simulation could be enough to create a solidbasis for improved action. The highly visual and dynamic quality of the computer models leads to incorporatingthe ideas they offer into perceptual-motor schemes without going through the channel of verbal explanation.Emergent Complex Systems Reasoning: Cross-Cultural Differences inReasoning about Eating Relationships between KindsMegan Bang, Priya Pugh, and Douglas MedinAlthough some scholars have argued that biology is a core conceptual domain that is organized in terms ofuniversal principles of categorization (e.g. Berlin, 1992) and a domain which is associated with a universaldevelopmental unfolding (Carey, 1985), there is accumulating evidence of broad cultural differences inknowledge organization and suggestive evidence on variable developmental trajectories (e.g. Medin and Atran,2004; Hermann, et al, 2010). In our work we have been investigating the cognitive consequences of relationalepistemologies on knowledge, knowledge organization, attentional foci, and sense-making about the naturalworld more specifically (Medin and Bang, in press). We have found significant cultural differences inconceptions of human/nature relations that are manifest in explicit knowledge and values and implicit inpractices and conceptual organization (Bang et al, 2007, Medin et al, 2006). Further, we have found that ruralNative-American children employ ecological reasoning developmentally earlier than rural, European-Americanchildren and that rural children in general use ecological reasoning earlier than urban (Non-Native) children(Ross, et al, 2003). In the current work we are hypothesizing that these differences in ecological organization ofknowledge may develop from differences in psychological closeness and whether a systems perspective,focusing on relationships, is adopted. One way to study this is through the examination of young children andtheir caregivers communication and engagement in sense-making about the natural world. This study asked 61parent-child dyads across two cultural communities to play with a 3-d diorama forest. The content and focus onthe spontaneous talk during the task comprises the data for this study. To develop this work we briefly explain,what relational construals might mean and the specific domain of relational construals taken up in this study.Before we present our current work we also provide a brief overview of psychological distance and perspectivetaking. We develop predictions for the content and structure of the talk we anticipated given this theoreticalbackground, discuss our methods, and present our findings.Relational Construals, Psychological Closeness/Distance, Perspective TakingThere are various strands of work that contribute to our understanding of relational construals and this term isintended to incorporate this broader landscape. In part this terminology is drawn from ecological knowledgeorganization and reasoning patterns (Atran & Medin, 2008, Medin & Atran, 1999). Other work has exploredassociative relational patterns that children perceive in the world (i.e. Keil, 2003). Still other work has suggestedthat Indigenous thought is foundationally based on constructions and meanings of relationships (Cajete, 1999).For the present purposes we focus on the relational construals in the context of eating relations between kinds.Trope and Liberman (2003) proposed that psychological distance affects cognitive processing at least aroundphysical distance, temporal distance and social distance wherein psychological distance is associated withattention to abstract features and the whys rather than hows of phenomena among other things. Psychologicallyclose events are associated with (a) greater attention to context and mitigating factors and (b) a greaterlikelihood of interpreting social behavioral situationally rather than dispositionally. CLT is also relevant toperspective taking. For example, being in a position of power (by hypothesis, being more psychologicallydistant) may be associated with a failure to take the perspective of other actors or to take situational factors intoaccount in judging the behaviors of others (Galinsky, et al., 2006). CLT predicts that psychological closenessfacilitates perspective taking and there evidence suggesting that cultures differ in the ways in which they deploypsychological distance and perceptive taking (e.g. Masuda et al., 2008). There also are correlated culturaldifferences in the likelihood of spontaneously taking another person’s point of view (Wu & Keysar, 2007;Leung & Cohen, 2007). In our work we have found that psychological distance impacts the features and contentattended to in the natural world (e.g. Medin & Bang, in press).PredictionsGiven the cross-cultural differences around ecological knowledge organization, and the theoretical implicationsof psychological distance, and perspective taking, we predicted seeing the following differences between Nativeand non-Native dyads.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1377© ISLS1.2.3.4.Native dyads would have more kinds (living things) involved in eating relations than non-Native dyads.Native dyads would have a wider variety of forms of eating relations (e.g. food webs, food chains, etc.)Non-Native dyads would demonstrate more psychological distance in the use of generic forms of kinds(e.g. bears), while Native dyads would use more specific forms (e.g. this bear).Native dyads would demonstrate more spontaneous perspective taking measured by different ways ofnarrating eating relations and attention to internal states of the focal kinds.ParticipantsThis study engaged 40 Native American parent-child dyads and 21 European-American parent-child dyads.Native children and parents were recruited from the Menominee reservation and the Chicago Urban Indiancommunity and from the town of Evanston, IL USA.MaterialsParents and children were given a 3-d diorama about 1.5 feet long by 1 foot wide of a forest ecosystem thatincluded stationary parts (trees, rocks, a pond, a log) and moveable parts (trees and animals including a: cow,gorilla, zebra, deer, bear, turtle, and eagle.ProceduresThe researcher set up a video camera and the materials in front of the parent-child dyads on a table. Theresearcher invited them to play with the diorama and indicated she would be back in 20 minutes, leaving thecamera running. The video tapes were transcribed. Analysis was conducted on both the transcripts and the videodata for both verbal and non-verbal expression of eating relations. However the findings in this paper are onlyderived from the forms of eating relationships expressed in the talk.Coding & AnalysisThe data was coded along four dimensions including: kinds focused on; forms of relations between kinds ineating relationships, use of generics verses specifics; and presence of internal state ascription. The kinds focusedon dimension and forms of relations code had subcodes. Kinds focused on refereed to the type of living and nonliving things were talked about in eating relations. These codes included: animals, mammals, reptiles, insects,fish, birds, plants, and water. Forms of eating relations including the following five codes: properties of kinds(e.g. bears eat fish); food chains (e.g. bears eat fish and fish eat worms); food webs (e.g. bears eat fish andeagles eat fish); and feeding relations (e.g. mother eagles feed their babies). Each eating relationship was codedfor whether it was in the form of generics (e.g. bears) or specifics (e.g. this bear). Finally, for each eatingrelationship talked about, the presence of interpretation of the internal state was coded for.ResultsPreliminary results (we will have a second coder to ensure reliability) reveal cross cultural differences across alldimensions. Each are reported.1. Kinds focused on. A chi-square test of independence was used examine the relationship betweencultural community and kinds focused on. The Native dyads were significantly more likely than theEuropean American dyads to include eating relationships that included insects (X2 (1)=23.6, p<.01),fish (X2 (1)=4.98, p<.03), birds (X2 (1)=6.22, p<.03), and plants (X2 (1)=10.28, p<.01). There was nodifference between cultural communities inclusion of animals, mammals, reptiles, and water.2. Forms of eating relations. A chi-square test of independence was used examine the relationshipbetween cultural community and forms of eating relations. The Native dyads were significantly morelikely than the European American dyads to reflect forms of eating relationships in food chains (X2(1)=7.572, p<.01) , feeding relations (X2 (1)=3.88, p<.05, and to have multiple forms intersecting (X2(1)=6.25, p<.03). There was no difference between cultural communities use of food webs andproperties of kinds.3. Psychological distance via generics and specifics. A chi-square test of independence was used examinethe relationship between cultural community and use of generics and specifics. The Native dyads weresignificantly more likely than the European American dyads to use specifics (X2 (1)=3.86, p<.05).There was no difference between cultural communities use of generics.4. Perspective taking via eating directions and internal states. A chi-square test of independence wasused examine the relationship between cultural community and perspective taking. The Native dyadswere significantly more likely than the European American dyads to reasons from prey to predators (X2(1)=5.7, p<.03). They Native dyads were also far more likely to attend to the internal states of the focalkinds (X2 (1)=11.6, p<.0001). There was no cross-cultural difference in reasoning from predators toprey.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1378© ISLSDiscussionThe significant difference in children and parent talk found in these studies suggests that Native children andparents are far more likely to engage in thinking about eating relations with a wider range of kinds, with avariety of forms of relationships between those kinds. These various forms may have implications for how morecomplex reasoning patterns emerge because they are routinely engaging in a variety of cognitive patterns ascompared to non-Native dyads. Further these results demonstrate that the Native dyads are more likely toengage in psychological close reasoning and perspective taking. We suggest that reasoning from predators toprey is a form of perspective taking in explore eating relationships rather than always reasoning about eatingrelationship from predators to prey. Further attending to the internal states of the focal kinds suggest that Nativedyads are thinking about the context of the eating relations event from multiple perspectives. This spontaneousdifference in parent-child talk would have significant long-term impacts on children’s cognitive development.Nat's Maps: A Case Study in Climate Change CognitionMegan McGinnityClimate change is an example of a complex nested system that is causing profound and rapid changes in everynatural system that we depend upon (IPCC, 2007). As a result the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSSLead States, 2013) call for teaching global climate change. At the same time, an ongoing challenge in educationis to develop an accurate understanding of (and to teach) complex systems (Plate, 2010). Research indicates thatstudents and teachers don’t understand complex systems very well and pedagogical norms have not yet beenestablished. (NRC, 2012, Plate, 2010)Simplistic understandings lead to simplistic, linear and inadequate solutions (Venville, Rennie, &Wallace, 2012) and linear causal patterns do not reflect the phenomena of causality in systems (Lagnado et al.,2007; White, 1992). When aspects of the Earth’s climate system are taught according to a high schoolcurriculum, they are usually parsed into separate, specialized disciplines, such as biology or chemistry. Thisapproach can be problematic (NRC, 2012; Venville, Rennie, & Wallace, 2012) in that does not portray thesedisciplines as a series of steps in a greater whole and can go in the opposite direction by mis-rendering acomplex problem as simple and misleading students towards a simple solution.Concept maps have been used as a tool to explore students’ understanding of complex systems andclimate change (Rye & Rubba, 2002), but they do not address the issue of causality. Lagnado et al (2007)found that most people represent causal knowledge qualitatively, in a series of linked events, while White(1992) described causal hierarchies in which participants described natural processes as one-directional, withhumans being at the top of the chain. This study sought to investigate how environmental educators understandand reason about climate change and to determine what the participants learned in this professionaldevelopment. A case study was used to investigate the conceptual structures and dynamics of one educator’sunderstanding and how they changed over the course of the professional development period. The participantsin this study were environmental educators undergoing a professional development in climate change. “Nat”was an experienced environmental educator who characterized himself as ‘not comfortable with science’.This study drew upon traditional methods in cognitive science where participants draw their own causalmaps to make their reasoning visible (Kearney and Kaplan, 1997). Plate (2010) proposed a program calledCognitive Mapping Assessment of Systems Thinking (CMAST) that focuses on the creation of web-like causalstructures. These causal maps represent the flow of case and effect, communicating an individual’smetacognitive knowledge and can make their conceptual inferences and connections more explicit (Plate, 2010).The card task used in this study was derived from Plate’s CMAST methods and adapted to allow forrelationships where participants suspected causality between two factors but were unable to specify the nature.The participants were given a set of cards that contained concepts affiliated with climate change. Theyselected the term needed to describe climate change to a person unfamiliar with the topic. Once the cards wereselected, the participants divided them into groups and named each grouping. All the selected cards were thenstacked together and laid out one at a time on a large sheet of paper, drawing the relationship, if any, betweenthe two cards. After the relationship between all the cards on the sheet were established, the next card wasadded and the process repeated. By the end of the exercise, a web of causal influence-relationships between allof the items had been mapped out. Tasks were administered before and after the professional developmentperiod, yielding pre- and post- maps.Two types of analysis were employed in looking at the maps: structural & dynamic. Structural analysisfocused on the structures within the map while dynamic analysis was concerned with Nat’s reasoning indrawing the relationships between the concepts. Conceptual nodes (cards / terms) & conceptual links (arrows).Plate, (2010) used ‘link density’ to determine how many concepts were being incorporated into a map. As ascore, it is the ratio of links to nodes in a given system map. However, one shortcoming of link density is that itdoes not measure the complexity of branching and loops in a map. Branching in the occurrence of more thanone arrow to/from a concept and indicates multiple causes and effects in reasoning about a particular concept.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1379© ISLSLoops are a return to an earlier concept in a chain of reasoning and represent reciprocal relationships. Mapcomplexity can be better quantified by using a Web-like Causality Index (WCI), a score calculated by addingthe percentage of nodes with more than one cause to the percentage of nodes with more than one effect.Nat’s pre-map had a link density of 3.30 with eleven loops and his post-map had a link density of 2.09with two loops. The drop in link density scores and loops could be seen as a simpler causal post-map, but thismay also be a sign of increasing expertise as Nat became able to discern and select the most salient concepts(Bransford, 2000). This is further supported by the pre- and post- WCI scores of 0.42 and 0.49 respectively,indicating a greater complexity in his post- map.The dynamic analysis was used to develop some measure of Nat’s ascription of causal impact to agiven concept in the map. When Nat grouped and labeled his selected card terms, one group was labeled“Human-caused things/ Things that humans are doing”. That group held four terms (deforestation, humanconsumption, industrialization, and greenhouse effect). These terms, along with the term “fossil fuels” weredesignated as ‘human-determined’, meaning that they are directly related to human actions or are implicatedheavily in human actions that affect the climate. In looking at the relationships between the concepts, two keyquestions were determining when were they the sources or recipients of causation and how often they wereimplicated.A causal “agency” measure was created to assign a score to all the node terms in the causal map. Inthis case, the word ‘agency’ is the amount of influence a noded term has on other nodes. When an arroworiginated from a node, that term was considered to have a source arrow. If the node was the terminus of anarrow, that term was considered to have an influencing arrow. Each term was then assigned a Causal AgencyIndex score, where its source arrow score was subtracted from its influencing arrow score. Overall, humaninfluenced terms decreased in causal agency while natural terms rose in agency from pre- to post-.The frequency measure was determined by the number of times the term (node) was connected to asecond term. The results are displayed in Figure 2. The human-determined terms on the rose are clustered atthe bottom. There is a noticeable pre- to post- shift in the prominence of the human-determined terms whilesome natural terms and processes gain in frequency. In short, this figure demonstrates an overall decline in theactivity of the human-determined terms and an increase in terms associated with natural processes.In summary, Nat’s thinking about climate change & complex systems changed from the pre- to postmeasures. Structural analysis suggests increased expertise and greater complexity in his thinking while dynamicanalysis indicates a shift away from human-determined terms in both ascription of agency and usage in themaps. The concepts of agency and the role of humans have great implications for our ability to teach complexnatural systems and can better inform further study in developing curricula that help us to understand and teachcomplex natural systems.ReferencesAtran, S. & Medin, D.L. (2008). The native mind and the cultural construction of nature. Boston, MA: MITPress.Bang, Medin, D. L., & Atran, S. (2007). Inaugural Article: Cultural mosaics and mental models of nature.ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciences,104(35),13868–13874.doi:10.1073/pnas.0706627104Berlin, B. (1992). On the making of a comparative ethnobiology. Ethnobiological Classification: principles ofcategorization of plants and animals in traditional societies. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University.Bransford, J. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school: National Academies Press.Cajete, G. (1999). Native Science: Natural Laws of Interdependence. Santa Fe, New Mexico: Clear LightPublishers.Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Chi, M.T.H. & VanLehn, K.A. (1991). The content of physics self-explanations. Journal of the LearningSciences, 1: 69-105Duarte Olson, I. (Forthcoming). The state of research on complex systems thinking: A review of literature.Duarte Olson, I. (Submitted). Inequality in levels: Effects of sampling and framing on complex systemsthinking.Galinsky, A.D., Magee, J.C., Inesi, M.E. & Gruenfeld, D.H. (2006). Power and perspectives not taken.Psychological Science, 17, 1068-1074.Hausswirth, C. & Brisswalter, J. (2008). Strategies for improving performance in long duration events: Olympicdistance triathlon. Sports Medicine, 38(11), 881-891.Hausswirth, C., Vallier, J-M., Lehenaff, D., Brisswalter, J., Smith, D., Millet, G., & Dreano, P. (2001). Effect oftwo drafting modalities in cycling on running performance. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise,33(3), 485-492.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1380© ISLSHerrmann, P., Waxman, S. R., & Medin, D. L. (2010). Anthropocentrism is not the first step in children’sreasoning about the natural world. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(22), 9979 9984.Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge: MIT Press.IPCC. (2007). Summary for Policymakers. Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution ofWorking Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.Kearney, A. R., & Kaplan, S. (1997). Toward a methodology for the measurement of knowledge structures ofordinary people: The conceptual content cognitive map (3CM). Environment and Behavior, 29(5), 579617. doi: 10.1177/0013916597295001Keil, F. C. (2003). Folkscience: Coarse interpretations of a complex reality. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(8),368–373Leung & Cohen, 2007Lagnado, D. A., Waldmann, M. R., Hagmayer, Y., & Sloman, S. A. (2007). Beyond covariation. Causallearning: Psychology, philosophy, and computation, 154-172.Levy, S.T., & Wilensky, U. (2009a). Students’ Learning with the Connected Chemistry (CC1) Curriculum:Navigating the Complexities of the Particulate World. Journal of Science Education and Technology,18(3), 243-254.Levy, S.T., Hirsh, A., Bacalo, Y. & Kakoon, A. (2011). Of particles and bikers model. Completed as part of anundergraduate project at the Computer Science department led by Hananel Hazan. Faculty ofEducation, University of Haifa.Mann, D., Williams, M., Ward, P. & Janelle, C. (2007). Perceptual-Cognitive Expertise in Sport: A MetaAnalysis. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 29, 457-478.McCole S.D., Claney K., Conte J.C., Anderson R., & Hagberg J.M. (1990). Energy Expenditure DuringBicycling. Journal of Applied Physiology, 68, 748-753.Medin, D. L., & Atran, S. (Eds.) (1999). Folkbiology. Cambridge, MA: Bradford.Medin, D. L., Ross, N. O., Atran, S., Cox, D., Coley, J., Proffitt, J. B., & Blok, S. (2006). Folkbiology offreshwater fish. Cognition, 99(3), 237–273.Nasir, N. S., Rosebery, A. S., Warren, B., & Lee, C. D. (2006). Learning as a Cultural Process Achieving EquityThrough Diversity. In The Handbook of the Learning Sciences (Keyth Sawyer (Ed)., pp. 489–504).New York: Cambridge University Press.National Research Council. (2009). Learning science in informal environments: people, places, and pursuits.Washington, D.C: National Academies Press.National Resource Council (NRC). (2012). A framework for k-12 science education: Practices, crosscuttingconcepts, and core ideas. Washington DC: National Academies Press.NGSS Lead States. 2013. Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Olson, I. D. (2013). Cultural Differences Between Favela and Asfalto in Complex Systems Thinking. Journal ofCognition and Culture, 13(1-2), 145–157. doi:10.1163/15685373-12342089Ross, N., Medin, D., Coley, J. D., & Atran, S. (2003). Cultural and experimental differences in the developmentof folkbiological induction. Cognitive Development, 18(1), 25-47.Schmidt, R. A., & Lee, T. D. (2011). Motor control and learning: A behavioral emphasis (5th ed.). Champaign,Illinois, US: Human Kinetics.Plate, R. (2010). Assessing individuals' understanding of nonlinear causal structures in complex systems. SystemDynamics Review, 26(1 (January-March 2010)), 19-33. doi: 10.1002/sdrRye, J. A., & Rubba, P. A. (1998). An exploration of the concept map as an interview tool to facilitate theexternalization of students' understandings about global atmospheric change. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 35(5), 521-546.Schmidt, R. A., & Wrisberg, C. A. (2008). Motor learning and performance: A situation-based learningapproach. US: Human Kinetics Publishers.Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2003). Temporal construal. Psychological Review, 110(3), 403–421.USA Triathlon (2012). Complete triathlon guide. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.Venville, G., Rennie, L., & Wallace, J. (2012). Curriculum Integration: Challenging the Assumption of SchoolScience as Powerful Knowledge. In B. J. Fraser, K. Tobin & C. J. McRobbie (Eds.), SecondInternational Handbook of Science Education (Vol. 24, pp. 737-749): Springer Netherlands.White, P. A. (1992). The anthropomorphic machine: Causal order in nature and the world view of commonsense. British journal of psychology, 83(1), 61-96.Williams, A. M., & Ford, P. R. (2008). Expertise and expert performance in sport. International Review of Sportand Exercise Psychology, 1(1), 4–18.Williams, A. M., Ford, P. R., Eccles, D. W., & Ward, P. (2010). Perceptual-cognitive expertise in sport and itsacquisition: Implications for applied cognitive psychology. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 25, 432–442.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1381© ISLS