Everyday Life Science and Engineering:Bridging the Gap Between Formal and Informal Learning amongNative American Students in the Northwestern United StatesMarcie Galbreath, University of Idaho, ID, 83814. Email: galb4114@vandals.uidaho.eduRose Honey, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 02138. Email: rose_honey@mail.harvard.eduSameer Honwad, New York University, NY 11201. Email: svh1@nyu.eduAnne Kern, University of Idaho, ID, 83814. Email: akern@uidaho.eduChris Meyer and Laura Laumatia, Coeur d'Alene Tribe, ID 83851. Email: cmeyer@cdatribe-nsn.gov,llaumatia@cdatribe-nsn.govAbstract: This poster explores Native American student ideas regarding science andengineering and tries to understand how they bridge the formal and informal perceptions ofthese two disciplines. Students from a tribal community in the Northwest participated in asummer camp that focused on merging indigenous and non-indigenous knowledge systemsabout science and engineering. Using drawings, storytelling and interviews, the studydiscusses learning processes associated with youth who live in one Native Americancommunity as they develop an understanding of science and engineering phenomena.IntroductionEven though there is overwhelming evidence that suggests that learning is a socio-cultural phenomenon,designing learning environments for Indigenous students is a challenging endeavor (Aikenhead, 1995, 1996;Smith, 1982, 1995; Snively, 1990, 1995; Wright, 1992). In order to create an optimal learning environment forIndigenous students, not only does the content have to be culturally relevant, but it also needs to be aligned withthe learning processes of the students (Bang & Medin, 2010). As students move through formal (school) andinformal (out of school) spaces, families, friends, teachers and communities become primary sources ofknowledge, while local ways of knowing become the processes through which students realize the knowledge(Bell, et al, 2007).This study examines Native American students (from one tribal community in the northwestern UnitedStates) perceptions of science and engineering as they move through formal and informal learning spaces andstruggle with Eurocentric and indigenous epistemologies. The study is designed to find out how studentsconnect science and engineering phenomena to their everyday life, so as to bridge the gap between the formaland informal learning spaces that they experience. The research questions that the study seeks to answer are asfollows: 1. What perceptions do Native American middle school students from one tribal community in thenorthwestern Unites States have about science and engineering? 2. How do these students negotiate theirperceptions and understandings of science and engineering as they move through different learning spaces? 3.How do the students understand science and engineering as a part of their everyday lives?Theoretical BackgroundThis research takes into consideration that theories in socio-cultural learning try to understand ‘what peoplethink’ (Banks, 2007), while the collateral learning theory tries to understand ‘how people think’ (Solomon, Scott& Duveen, 1994). Socio-cultural learning theories emphasize that learning is contextual and is supported byvarious societal constructs (Barron, et al, 2009). Collateral learning, on the other hand, tries to explain how thestudents make sense of what they know (Aikenhead & Jegede, 1999). Jegede, 1995 proposes that there are fourtypes in collateral learning processes – Parallel, Simultaneous, Dependent and Secured. Collateral learningtheory tries to explain how indigenous students might store conflicting ideas (Eurocentric Scientific andindigenous) in their long-term memory. For example, parallel collateral learning is observed when indigenousstudents construct Eurocentric science concepts parallel to the indigenous concepts, with very little interferenceand interaction between the two. For optimal learning to happen it is important that both ‘what students think’and ‘how they think’ are merged together (Bang, Medin & Atran, 2007). To this end, the research questions inthis study are designed to understand what students think and how students think about science and engineeringphenomena. The first research question is designed to understand ‘what’ do the students think about science andengineering phenomena, while the second and third research questions emphasize ‘how’ students negotiate theirunderstanding of science and engineering phenomena in formal and informal learning spaces, and as part oftheir everyday lives.Study DesignThe students attended two non-consecutive week long summer camps focused on science and engineering. Thefirst camp focused on traditional practices in science and engineering design (building fish weirs, surveying)ICLS 2014 Proceedings1653© ISLSwhile the second camp focused on discussing science and engineering as tools to resolve environmentalproblems that are related to the watershed that their community resides on (how would you put the practicestogether to solve problems). The second camp used story telling as a pedagogical tool to help students put theengineering practices together in order to think through solving environmental problems related to thewatershed.The students’ perceptions of science and engineering were gauged using the following methods: Afterthe students discussed several traditional and Eurocentric science and engineering practices during the firstcamp, they were given a drawing task at the beginning of the second camp. In this activity, students were askedto draw a community that they would like to live in and show in their drawing how science and engineeringplayed a role in their community. The purpose of this activity was to observe student understanding of scienceand engineering phenomena and also their perceptions of how science and engineering phenomena play a role intheir community/everyday lives. This was a group activity, which involved students sharing ideas about scienceand engineering in order to draw a map of their community. Each group included four to five students. We thenconducted delayed post interviews four months after the camp to find out student perceptions of science andengineering phenomena after a period of time, and how students think about science and engineeringphenomena as a part of their everyday lives. Although the student drawings were created as a group, interviewsabout the drawings were conducted individually allowing us to explore individual student perceptions andunderstandings.Participants22 students in grades 4-6 participated in the summer activities. 11 of those students from one of the tribalcommunities participated in the study.Results and DiscussionIn the drawing activity, when asked to draw a community and show examples of science and engineering intheir community, students chose to draw examples of practices that they had learned in the first weeklong camp.For example, some students drew fish weirs in their community as a science and engineering phenomena. Theyhad learned about fish weirs in the first camp. The majority of the students expressed science and engineering asa phenomenon that involves ‘building’.When students were asked in the interview to point out how the science and engineering practices intheir drawing played a role in their everyday lives, most of them could not answer the question. For example,students recognized that fish weirs are used by scientists to capture and tag fish. However, they were not able toconnect that practice to how fish-tagging helps make management decisions on fishing practices that are a partof everyday life..Both the interviews and the drawing activity gave us insight into how students negotiate ideas aboutscience and engineering as they move through different living and learning spaces. In the examples discussedabove it is clear that the students think of science and engineering as something that they learn at camp. Theyare not able to make the connection to their everyday lives. Thus one can observe a clear case of parallelcollateral learning. In this case the students’ ideas of science and engineering remain limited to their experiencein the camp. As observed in the delayed post interviews, the knowledge (fish weirs) remains with them in theirlong-term memory but they are not able to fit the knowledge in their everyday life context.In the delayed post interviews, some students mentioned houses and cars as science and engineeringphenomena in their everyday lives. However, cars and modern time house designs are viewed as conceptsgrounded in Eurocentric science and engineering phenomena and therefore are difficult to connect to indigenousways of knowing. This is a problem faced by many designers of learning environments for indigenous students.Using data from the interviews and drawings in this poster we hope to spark a discussion about how to designeffective learning environments for helping Native American students learn about their traditional science andengineering practices and connect those practices to their everyday lives. Curriculum designers may considerimplementing strategies designed to bridge the gap between Native Americans home culture and the culture ofEurocentric science. This study is a preliminary study and further research is needed to address NativeAmerican students’ needs concerning culturally relevant curriculum and instruction.Select ReferencesAikenhead, G., & Jegede, O. (1999). Cross-Cultural Science Education: A Cognitive Explanation of a CulturalPhenomenon. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36(3). 269-287.Jegede, O. (1995). Collateral learning and the eco-cultural paradigm in science and mathematics education inAfrica. Studies in Science Education, 25, 97-137.Bang, M. & Medin, D. (2010). Cultural processes in science education: Supporting the navigation of multipleepistemologies. Science Education, 94 (6), 1008-1026.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1654© ISLS