Conceptualizing Teacher’s Practices in SupportingStudents’ Mathematical Learning inComputer-Directed Learning EnvironmentsAaron M. Kessler, University of Pittsburgh, 5500 Wesley W. Posvar Hall, aaronmkessler@gmail.comMelissa D. Boston, Duquesne University, 600 Forbes Ave, bostonm@duq.eduMary Kay Stein, University of Pittsburgh, 828 LRDC, mkstein@pitt.eduAbstract: In this paper, we suggest a different conceptualization of teachers’ practices insupporting students’ mathematical learning in a cognitive tutor or computer-directed learningenvironment. The CT program examined in this study aimed to enhance students’ learning ofproportional reasoning through an engaging engineering/robotics context. Students of teacherswho assumed an active role in engaging students in mathematical conversations away fromthe cognitive tutor exhibited significant learning gains, whereas students in settings using thecognitive tutor as designed (with limited interaction from the teacher) did not exhibit learninggains. This research has implications for reconsidering the teacher’s role in cognitive tutor orcomputer-directed learning environments.Purpose and FrameworkCognitive tutors are a specific type of intelligent tutoring system (ITS) that use technologies associated withcurriculum sequencing, intelligent solutions analysis and/or problem solving support to assist students’ learning(Brusilovsky & Peylo, 2003). Research on the impact of cognitive tutors (CT) on students’ learning ofmathematics often assumes a teacher-less environment, with the CT directing the teaching and learning ofspecific production rules associated with students’ ability to correctly complete mathematics problems(Koedinger & Corbett, 2006; Anderson, et.al, 1995). Because teaching and learning are designed to occurbetween the student and CT, little (if any) role is ascribed to the teacher.Our research provides empirical evidence for an innovation in practice; specifically, aconceptualization of how teachers might implement CT and computer-delivered mathematics instruction tooptimize students’ learning of mathematics. This work stems from a design-based project, in which our researchgroup’s specific role within the larger project was to examine and enhance the mathematics teaching andlearning components of a robotics-themed cognitive tutor (CT) program. The program aims to introducerobotics and proportional reasoning to students in 4th-8th grade, as programming the robots involves proportionalrelationships (e.g., linear distance and turn angle are linear functions of wheel size and motor rotations).Proportional reasoning is a key mathematical idea in middle school (National Council of Teachers ofMathematics, 2006; Lobato, et.al, 2010); hence this program aimed to enhance students’ learning of importantmathematics through an engaging engineering/robotics context.As a design study, our work proceeded in three phases. In Phase 1, we reviewed the tutor materials anddetermined that the vast majority of tasks (97% of all tutor tasks) engaged students in only lower levels ofmathematical thinking; specifically, procedures without connections to meanings, concepts, or understanding(Stein, Grover, & Henningsen, 1996). In mathematics education research, procedural knowledge of this type isconsidered “low cognitive demand” and has been empirically associated with low student achievement inmathematics (e.g., Stein & Lane, 1996; Hiebert & Stigler, 2004). Conversely, declarative knowledge isconsistent with high cognitive demand, and research suggests that cognitively challenging tasks, with high-leveldemands maintained during implementation, are associated with positive student learning (Boaler & Staples,2008; Stein & Lane, 1996; Tarr et al., 2008).The CT tasks initially observed by our research team in Phase 1 required students to performprocedures (e.g., multiply or divide to complete a data table) without invoking a conceptual understanding ofproportional relationships. In fact, only 2 of 62 original CT tasks (3%) provided students opportunities forhigher-level thinking and reasoning. Furthermore, at early implementation sites (prior to our involvement), nolearning gains appeared on a test of proportional reasoning (Weaver & Junker, 2004). Driven by our hypothesisthat higher-cognitive-demand tasks would increase students’ learning, the remainder of Phase 1 consisted of thedevelopment and integration of a set of cognitively demanding tasks into the CT system, tasks that engagedstudents in thinking about the role of unit rates and scale factors in proportional relationships. CT tasks wererevised to have high-level demands, with new materials containing 16 high-demand tasks (16/48; 33%) thatcould engage students in developing a conceptual understanding of proportional relationships and strategies(e.g., unit rates and scale factors). We analyzed CT mathematics instructional materials using existingframeworks developed to examine the cognitive demand of mathematical tasks (i.e., the Task Analysis Guide(Stein, Smith, Henningsen, & Silver, 2009) and shifts in their implementation through lesson phases (i.e., theICLS 2014 Proceedings997© ISLSMathematics Task Framework [Stein, Grover, & Henningsen, 1996). We also drew from research delineatingstudents’ development of proportional reasoning (Lamon, 2007).Phase 2 primarily consisted of observations of the implementation of the new, higher-cognitive demandmaterials using an observation instrument (the Interaction Tracker) that was based on a conceptualization ofteaching and learning known as the “instructional triangle” (Cohen, Raudenbush, & Ball, 2003; Stein & Kim,2012). At one implementation site, researchers noted that instructors engaged students in discussions away fromthe CT screen to help students understand the underlying mathematical ideas (e.g., unit rate and scale factor).These interactions between teachers and students around the mathematics seemed particularly fruitful forimpacting students’ learning, and distinctly different from interactions noted in other settings. Seeing these typesof interactions occurring in only one setting caused the team to consider the possible role of the instructors in theCT program. We hypothesized that different teacher-student-computer interaction styles would generatedifferences in students’ learning, and that different interaction styles may be associated with teachers’pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) of proportional reasoning.In Phase 3, based on this second hypothesis, we developed materials that introduced teacher-mediationinto the system. Specifically, we inserted materials that were designed to guide teacher-student interactions atpoints where students had just finished learning or dealing with difficult concepts. Specifically, facilitationmaterials were created that encouraged teachers to draw students’ attention back to the declarative knowledgepieces of the program. These materials were meant to foster interactions between students and teacher awayfrom the CT that were still grounded in the unique robot context and that provided opportunities to talk moredeeply around the mathematics. In this paper, we present research testing our hypotheses at phases 2 and 3:1.2.3.Did implementation sites using the high-cognitive-demand CT tasks exhibit increases in students’learning?Are different types of teacher-student-computer interactions associated with teachers’ level of PCK?Did implementation sites using the high cognitive demand CT tasks and embedded opportunities forinteraction (about the mathematics) exhibit increases in students’ learning?MethodIn Phase 2, the project worked with 3 implementation sites representing 111 students, observing the impact ofthe revised CT materials from phase 1 on learning outcomes and students’ interactions with the system. Duringthese implementations, the research team made regular observations and assessed student knowledge byadministering a pre-post proportional reasoning written assessment using an equivalent forms design (e.g.,Weaver & Junker, 2004). These student pre- and post-test scores were compared using paired-values t-tests.Teachers in the three Phase 2 implementation sites were observed as they implemented the CTprogram, and an “Interaction Tracker” (informed by Stein and Kim, 2012) that was developed to represent theobserved interactions. The Interaction Tracker was then tested in three additional settings. We comparedinteraction patterns of teachers with different levels of PCK in proportional reasoning, based on a projectdeveloped assessment of teachers’ use of proportional reasoning strategies to solve challenging problems andways in which they indicated they would support students’ use of proportional reasoning strategies. Wedesigned, piloted, and checked the reliability of this assessment. Specifically, we double-coded 7 teacher-PCKtests (3 pilot teachers and 4 project teachers) with 89% exact-point reliability. Teacher-PCK data exists for 8 of10 facilitators, representing 5 of 6 implementation sites (one facilitator was an expert from the project team). Wealso examined whether different interaction patterns supported students’ engagement in high-cognitive-demandtasks.During these Phase 2 observations we identified four distinct types of interactions between the teacher,students, and CT (see Table 1). Educators (n = 10) at each of the six implementation sites, through phase 2 andphase 3, were observed by at least one member of the team, during at least two sessions.Table 1. Interaction patternsInteraction PatternCognitive Tutor(CT) Environmentas DesignedICLS 2014 ProceedingsDescriptionStudents interact with the CT with minimal or nointeraction between the teacher and student orteacher and CT. The CT provides all learningopportunities; all math activity occurs betweenthe CT and the student (indicated by the doubleheaded yellow arrow)998Instructional Triangle DiagramEducatorStudentCognitiveTutor© ISLSInteraction PatternEducator TakingOver the CTEnvironmentEducatorFacilitating the CTEnvironmentEducatorFacilitating theMathematicsDescriptionThe educator (instead of the student) interactsdirectly with the CT, often physically taking overthe computer (e.g., reads CT screen to thestudent, rephrases questions on the CT, entersresponses into the computer). Most or all activitywith the CT is filtered through the teacher.Teacher-student interactions are teacher-directed,reducing students’ engagement with themathematics to brief responses.The educator addresses procedural or technicalaspects of the students’ interaction with the CTaround mathematics (e.g., calling attention to theneed to round to 2 decimal places, suggesting useof the hint button). The mathematical activityremains between the student and the CT, with theeducator facilitating this activity. The educatordoes not address aspects of the student’s specificways of thinking or components of theunderlying mathematics not present on the CTscreen.The educator interacts with the student about theunderlying mathematics or about the students’specific mathematical thinking. The interaction isno longer directly about what is happening on thescreen. Meaningful mathematical activity occursbetween the teacher and student, and then thestudent uses the mathematics to engage with theCT.Instructional Triangle DiagramEducatorCognitiveTutorStudentEducatorCognitiveTutorStudentEducatorCognitiveTutorStudentTo examine the impact of an increased role for teachers in the CT environment, we re-designed thematerials to include embedded opportunities for teacher-student interactions around the mathematics in Phase 3of the program. In the original materials, students progressed through a series of computer-delivered, cognitivetutor modules at their own pace. The new structure contained three whole-group discussion points (D1, D2, andD3 in Figure 1) and facilitation materials designed to increase students’ engagement with the robot engineeringcontext (D1), the mathematical ideas (D2) (e.g., proportional reasoning, scale factor, and unit rate), and to usethe mathematics to accomplish the goals of the robot-engineering context (D3).            !"Figure 1. Original and revised structureIn phase 3, a member of the design team piloted the new teacher-mediated materials in an afterschoolprogram (n4 = 12 students) in grades 5-7. Following this pilot, two teachers from different districts alsoimplemented the new materials (n5 = 12 students; n6 = 16 students). Students’ work on the project lastedapproximately 3 weeks at each site and included students in grades 7-8. Along with the pre/post assessments ofstudents’ knowledge, observations were carried out at both sites using the Interaction Tracker.ICLS 2014 Proceedings999© ISLSFindingsResearch Question 1. In examining the three implementation sites in Phase 2 that used the high-cognitivedemand CT materials (n = 111 students), students showed no learning gains on the proportional reasoningwritten assessment (p = .48). Hence, simply incorporating the high-cognitive-demand tasks did not generate theanticipated increases in students’ learning.Research Question 2. Teachers’ interaction patterns were examined, and for each teacher, researchersidentified a clear main interaction pattern and secondary interaction pattern(s). The 10 teachers were thengrouped by their scores on the PCK tests, and a relationship between PCK and interaction pattern appeared toexist (see Table 2).Research Question 3. In piloting the Teacher-Mediated materials (Phase 3), the instructor in oneimplementation site was a member of the research team (Site 4; n4 = 12). In the two school-basedimplementation sites (n5 = 12, n6 = 16), students’ pre/post assessments increased (Site 5, 56% to 57%; Site 6,59% to 64%). When comparing the pre/post scores across all three sites that used the new teacher-mediatedmaterials, including the pilot, we see a significant increase from M=.596 to M = .633, (n=41, p =.04).Looking across Research Questions 2 and 3 to further explicate the connection between the observedinteraction patterns and students’ learning, the research team is more deeply examining Group 1 and Group 2teachers and implementation sites (see Table 2). Preliminary results support the connection between the“facilitating the mathematics” pattern and increased student-learning.Table 2. Teachers’ interaction patterns and pedagogical content knowledge scoresTeacherCertificationPCK ScoreInteraction PatternsGroup 1: Facilitating the Mathematics as the Primary Instruction StyleSite 4ExpertHigh PCKFacilitating the MathematicsFacilitating CT EnvironmentDesigned CT environmentSite 2 –TeacherMath83%Facilitating the MathematicsDesigned CT environmentFacilitating CT EnvironmentSite 2 – Student TeacherMath Pre-Service Teacher76%Facilitating the MathematicsGroup 2: Facilitating the Mathematics as a Secondary Instruction StyleSite 3 – T2Math58%Facilitating CT EnvironmentFacilitating the MathematicsDesigned CT environmentSite 3 – T1Science56%Facilitating CT EnvironmentFacilitating the MathematicsSite 6Technology/Industrial Arts56%Facilitating CT EnvironmentFacilitating the MathematicsGroup 3: Facilitating the Mathematics Not PresentSite 1 – T2Elementary53%Facilitating CT EnvironmentTaking over the EnvironmentSite 1 – T1Elementary50%Facilitating CT EnvironmentSite 5Technology/Industrial Arts22%Designed CT environmentSite 2 - LSTLearning Support-Taking over the EnvironmentImplicationsOur work echoes a consistent finding in mathematics education research: cognitively challenging tasks are anecessary but not sufficient condition for promoting students’ learning of mathematics, and implementationappears to be key. In our work, revising the CT tasks did not enhance students’ learning, but coupling such taskswith implementation that maintains high cognitive demands (e.g., as enacted in the “Facilitating theMathematics” interaction pattern and as designed into the teacher-mediated materials) was essential forincreasing students’ proportional reasoning strategies and understanding of proportional relationships. Thisrepresents a shift in how the practice of using CT’s in the classroom has been looked at in the past.The role of teachers’ pedagogical content knowledge suggests the need for professional developmentaround the teaching of important mathematical ideas. Crafting the types of interactions that facilitate themathematics in CT and computer-delivered learning environments requires a deep understanding of theunderlying mathematical ideas that is often not included as part of current CT resources. Building this capacityin teachers who will be implementing this CT program shows promise in laying a foundation for qualitymathematics-based interactions with students.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1000© ISLSFinally, across sites and contextual factors, the addition of teacher mediation to the system had apositive impact on students’ ability to learn proportional reasoning. This finding has general implications forreconsidering the “designed” role of the teacher in CT or computer-delivered instructional settings. Teachersacting to “facilitate the mathematics” may promote greater students’ learning than if the CT or computer isassumed to direct the teaching and learning in a “teacher-less” environment.ReferencesAnderson, J. R., Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., & Pelletier, R. (1995). Cognitive tutors: Lessons learned. Thejournal of the learning sciences, 4(2), 167-207.Boaler, J., & Staples, M. (2008). Creating mathematical futures through an equitable teaching approach: Thecase of Railside School. The Teachers College Record, 110(3), 608-645.Brusilovsky, P., & Peylo, C. (2003). Adaptive and intelligent web-based educational systems. InternationalJournal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 13(2), 159-172.Cohen, D. K., Raudenbush, S. W., & Ball, D. L. (2003). Resources, instruction, and research. EducationalEvaluation and Policy Analysis, 25(2), 119-142.Hiebert, J., & Stigler, J. W. (2004). Improving Mathematics Teaching. Educational leadership, 61(5), 12.Henningsen, M. & Stein, M. K. (1997). Mathematical tasks and student cognition: Classroom-based factors thatsupport and inhibit high-level mathematical thinking and reasoning. Journal for Research inMathematics Education, 28, 524-549.Koedinger, K. R., & Corbett, A. T. (2006). Cognitive tutors: Technology bringing learning science to theclassroom.The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, 61-78.Lamon, S. J. (2007). Rational numbers and proportional reasoning: Toward a theoretical framework forresearch. Second handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning, 1, 629-667.Lobato, J. & Ellis, A. (2010). Developing Essential Understanding of Ratios, Proportions & ProportionalReasoning: Grades 6-8. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM). (2006). Curriculum focal points for prekindergartenthrough grade 8 mathematics: A quest for coherence. Reston, VA: NCTM.Stein, M. K., Grover, B. W., & Henningsen, M. (1996). Building student capacity for mathematical thinking andreasoning: An analysis of mathematical tasks used in reform classrooms. American educationalresearch journal, 33(2), 455-488.Stein, M. K., & Kim, G. (2012). The role of mathematics curriculum materials in large-scale urban reform: Ananalysis of demands and opportunities for teacher learning. In Remillard, J. T., Herbel-Eisenmann B.T., & Lloyd, G. M. (Eds), Mathematics teachers at work: Connecting curriculum materials andclassroom instruction, (pp. 37-55 ). New York, NY: Routledge Taylor &Francis Group.Stein, M. K., & Lane, S. (1996). Instructional tasks and the development of student capacity to think andreason: An analysis of the relationship between teaching and learning in a reform mathematics project.Educational Research and Evaluation, 2(1), 50-80.Tarr, J. E., Reys, R. E., Reys, B. J., Chávez, Ó., Shih, J., & Osterlind, S. J. (2008). The impact of middle-gradesmathematics curricula and the classroom learning environment on student achievement. Journal forResearch in Mathematics Education, 247-280.Weaver, R., & Junker, B. W. (2004). Model specification for cognitive assessment of proportional reasoning.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1001© ISLS