Using Deficient Models as Scaffolds for Learning EngineeringConcepts of Tradeoffs and OptimizationChandan Dasgupta, Tom Moher, University of Illinois at Chicago, 851 S. Morgan, Chicago, IL 60607 USAEmail: cdasgu2@uic.edu, moher@uic.eduAbstract: There is a need to teach core engineering concepts to elementary grade students.We present a novel approach using ‘deficient model’ i.e. a sub-optimal solution, to helpstudents attend to design optimization and associated tradeoffs required to improve anengineering system. The nascent stage of this research prevents us from making conclusions.However, the framework highlights how distinct science education approaches can besynthesized and applied in the context of engineering education.IntroductionThe recent National Research Council reports (NRC, 2010; NRC, 2012) highlight the need for elementary gradestudents to understand engineering concepts like design optimization and tradeoffs. Considerably less attentionhas been paid to this age group, where such efforts could serve as a “mainline” function for promotingtechnological literacy and stimulating long-term interest in mathematics and science (Capobianco et al., 2011).One of the few initiatives focusing on this age group is Boston Museum of Science’s curriculum – Engineeringis Elementary (http://legacy.mos.org/eie). Further research is needed to explore additional pedagogies andmechanisms for teaching engineering concepts. We propose a new approach for helping elementary gradersgrapple with concepts of tradeoffs and optimization. Our approach draws on prior science education researchusing worked examples, negative examples and model-based learning.FrameworkWorked examples provide an expert's (correct) solution to a problem for the learner to study and emulate(Atkinson et al., 2000). When worked examples are presented before unsolved problems, they channelizestudents’ problem-solving attempts in productive directions leading to efficient strategies (Chi et al., 1989;Ward & Sweller, 1990). Such examples can similarly be used for effectively guiding problem-solving activitiesin an engineering context. In contrast, negative examples provide incorrect ways of solving a problem. Suchexamples are effective in problem-solving contexts as they discourage snap design judgments, therebyincreasing accuracy of solution (Smoke, 1933). They help students identify design limitations (Haack, 1972)and can potentially lead them to focus on design optimization as a problem-solving task. We also know thatmodel-based pedagogies help students build subject matter expertise and epistemological understanding ofscientific knowledge (Lehrer & Schauble, 2006; White & Frederiksen, 1998). We consider model to be asimplified physical representation of a system of phenomena that makes its central features visible so that theycan be used to generate explanations (Harrison & Treagust, 2000). Model-based pedagogies are most effectivewhen students themselves construct and critique a model (Coll, France & Taylor, 2005). However, use of asingle model or one worked example leads to 'functional fixedness' (Furió et al., 2000) in the science educationcontext or ‘design fixation’ (Youmans & Arciszewski, 2012) in the engineering context. Students believe thatthere is only one 'right model' for depicting a phenomenon accurately. Similarly, engineers limit the probablesolutions to a problem because of an overreliance on features of example designs presented to them. To tacklefunctional fixedness, science education researchers prefer to use multiple models (Lehrer & Schauble, 2006).However, in the engineering context, multiple example solutions can reduce the range and accuracy of designsolutions (Jansson & Smith, 1991; Linsey et al., 2010).In view of these challenges, we introduce the idea of using ‘deficient model’ – sub-optimal/inefficientdesign solution in the form of a physical model – for teaching design optimization and tradeoffs. As opposed tonegative examples which represent incorrect solutions, a deficient model presents inefficient solutions requiringstudents to learn how to identify these deficiencies and optimize the design. Based on research with workedexamples, a deficient model (a) shows students a (sub-optimal) sample solution, (b) provides a starting point, (c)provides a reference example for comparison, and (d) prompts students to develop rules that guide problemsolving. Our approach also draws on limited research using negative examples by (a) showcasing inefficientsolutions and providing a baseline for the students, (b) channelizing attention to limits of a design, and (c)countering design fixation and leaving exploration space open for students. We also use model-based pedagogyby having students analyze the deficient model and then construct an (emergent) optimal model.Through this research, we will investigate how the use of deficient models as priming artifacts impactstudents’ productive engagement with engineering concepts of tradeoffs and design optimization. Two types ofdeficient models will be used – Improvable model (inefficient but complete model that that can be optimized byICLS 2014 Proceedings1497© ISLSmodifying) and Partially optimal model (partially optimal but incomplete model that can be optimized byextending and modifying).ActivityWe will use the context of designing a home plumbing system for this research. Two upper elementary gradeclassrooms will participate in the study. One grade will work with the improvable model and the other will workwith the partially optimal model. Students will be first asked to critique the sub-optimal model and thensubsequently build an optimal model by modifying or extending them using a limited amount of constructionresources (serving as design constraint). They will measure the values of design variables (pipe length anddiameter) and then use a software simulator to investigate the effect of different design decisions on theoutcome variables (pipe cost, water pressure, water flow). For example, replacing a 1-inch pipe with 3-inch pipereduces drop in water pressure at the end of the pipe but also increases cost of pipe. Students organize suchfindings in the form of rules of thumb for later use while designing their own emergent optimal model. Theseactivities give students an opportunity to understand the sub-optimality of the deficient model, investigate theconsequences of those deficiencies, establish relationships between different variables in the system and exploreways of constructing an optimal model. The deficient model will be used as a reference model while studentsbuild their emergent model using the rules identified before. Students will determine the optimal length anddiameter of pipe for their emergent model based on given design goal – build a model as cheaply as you can(within a fixed budget of $2000) yet meet the minimum pressure requirements set by the building engineer. Webelieve that these design constraints can trigger consideration of tradeoffs related to optimization decisions.Students will finally compare their improved model with the given sub-optimal model, share their designrationales and answer questions about the design that their peers might have.Conclusions and ImplicationsThe nascent stage of this research prevents us from making conclusions. However, the framework and design ofthe study has implications for the communities’ knowledge of engineering education pedagogy. Two primarycontexts encapsulated in the conference theme are ‘engaging in epistemic practices’ and ‘engaging in design’.The research idea presented here espouses these contexts by facilitating student engagement with design tasksrequiring them to make tradeoffs and optimization decisions, critical concepts in engineering discipline.ReferencesAtkinson, R. K., Derry, S. J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D. (2000). Learning from examples: Instructionalprinciples from the worked examples research. Review of educational research, 70(2), 181-214.Capobianco, B. M., Diefes dux, H. A., Mena, I., & Weller, J. (2011). What is an engineer? Implications ofelementary school student conceptions for engineering education. J of Engg. Ed., 100(2), 304-328.Chi, M. T., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students studyand use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.Coll, R. K., France, B., & Taylor, I. (2005). The role of models/and analogies in science education: implicationsfrom research. International Journal of Science Education, 27(2), 183-198.Furió, C., Calatayud, M.L., Barcenas, S.L., & Padilla, O.M. (2000). Functional fixedness and functionalreduction as common sense reasonings in chemical equilibrium and in geometry and polarity ofmolecules. Science Education, 84, 545-565.Haack, P. A. (1972). Use of positive and negative examples in teaching the concept of musical style. Journal ofResearch in Music Education, 20(4), 456-461.Harrison, A. G., & Treagust, D. F. (2000). A typology of school science models. J. of Sc. Ed., 22(9), 1011- 1026Jansson, D., and Smith, S. (1991). Design Fixation. Design Studies, 12(1), 3–11.Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Cultivating model-based reasoning in science education. Cambridgehandbook of the learning sciences, 371-388.Linsey, J. S., Tseng, I., Fu, K., Cagan, J., Wood, K. L., & Schunn, C. (2010). A study of design fixation, itsmitigation and perception in engineering design faculty. Journal of Mechanical Design, 132, 041003.National Research Council (2010). Standards for K-12 Engineering Education. Washington, DC: NAP.National Research Council (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Smoke, K.L. (1933). Negative instances in concept learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 16, 583-588.Ward, M., & Sweller, J. (1990). Structuring effective worked examples. Cognition and Instruction, 7, 1-39.White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making science accessible toall students. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 3-118Youmans, R. J. (2011). The effects of physical prototyping and group work on the reduction of designfixation. Design Studies, 32(2), 115-138.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1498© ISLS