Exploring the Use of Elaborative Interrogation in an IntroductoryPhysics CourseRobert Zisk, Elana Resnick, Eugenia EtkinaGraduate School of Education, Rutgers University, 10 Seminary Pl, New Brunswick, NJ 08901robert.zisk@gse.rutgers.edu, eugenia.etkina@gse.rutgers.eduAbstract: Elaborative Interrogation, which has students read a passage from the text andrespond to the prompt “Why is this true?” for a sentence from the passage, was employed inan introductory college physics course. We report initial results with regard to studentaccuracy and depth of reasoning, and detail the effect of sentence type on student responses.We also report the results of a reading survey that addressed students’ reading habits duringthe course.IntroductionReading and comprehending science texts is a skill that is crucial to the future success of students in the STEMfields. STEM practitioners gain much of their knowledge through reading (Hurd, 1998), and professionals whoare successful within their field employ many comprehension strategies in order to understand what they arereading (Holliday, Yore, and Alverman, 1994). However, little attention is paid to developing reading andcomprehension skills within science courses (Felder and Brent, 1996).One method that encourages students to read and comprehend the material in the textbook is theinterrogation method, which prompts students to answer “Why is this true?” for a sentence in the passage thatthey have read previously (Smith, Holliday, and Austin, 2009). In this study, we explored the use of theinterrogation method in an introductory physics course for non-physics science majors, not only to get studentsto read more often, but to better understand what they read. Specifically we posed the following researchquestions: (1) Do students use the textbook when answering interrogation questions? (2) How do studentresponses to the “Why is this true?” prompt vary with the sentence they are given to respond to? (3) How dostudent responses evolve throughout the semester and between homework and exams?Theoretical FrameworkElaborative interrogation is a question-based reading strategy in which readers are prompted to read the text andthen answer a “Why” question based on the reading (Levin, 2008). This method was developed to aid in thelearning of scientific facts through the reading of science texts. Results of interrogation studies wereencouraging, as the method showed increased comprehension over more traditional comprehension techniquessuch as rereading (Smith, Holliday, and Austin, 2009). We expand on elaborative interrogation research bybringing the method into every-day instruction and focusing on developing reasoning skills when answering the“why” questions. Additionally, in this study we investigated the choice of sentences for students to respond to inorder to identify sentences that allow them to deeply reason and respond beyond a definition or formulae.MethodsThe Course and TextbookThe study was conducted in a large enrollment (180 students) introductory algebra-based physics course forscience majors at a large university in the northeastern United States. The textbook used in the course was“College Physics” (Etkina, Gentile, and Van Huevelen, Pearson, 2013).Each week, students were assigned homework with instructions to read the text and then answer two“Why is this true?” interrogation questions for given sentences from the text. Each homework assignment wasgraded, and the students were provided with minimal feedback. On the first exam and the final, interrogationsentences were also given. Two of the questions were exact matches to questions they had seen previously andthe third was a similar question. A reading survey asking students to report what resources they used to answerthe interrogation questions was also administered to students at the beginning and end of the semester.Sentence TypesAs this was an exploratory study, we gave the students multiple sentence types to respond to. The first type wasa fact statement or definition. The second type of sentence was characterized as a simple phenomenon prompt.These sentences provide students with simple phenomena such as collisions. The final type of sentence wascharacterized as a complex phenomenon. These sentences provide students with complex, concrete phenomenaor occurrences such as analyzing an elevator ride, or the floating of a boat.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1501© ISLSCodingTwo independent coders evaluated each sentence for accuracy of physics, and depth of reasoning. Both wereboth coded on a 0-3 scale (3 being the highest). To check for reliability, both coders coded 20 percent of thestudent answers. Reliabilities of .93 and .89 were reached for accuracy and reasoning, respectively.FindingsComparing Responses Based on Sentence TypeWe assigned a total of 7 fact statements, 17 simple phenomena, and 18 complex phenomena statements to thestudents throughout the semester. The mean reasoning score for the responses to fact statement sentences was1.20, for simple phenomena, 1.32 and for complex phenomena, 1.87. Using an ANOVA we found that the levelof reasoning students used when responding to complex phenomena statements was significantly higher thanfact statements or simple phenomena (p-value < .01).Accuracy and Reasoning Throughout the SemesterWe first compared homework accuracy to the accuracy on identical and similar exam questions. We used t-teststo test the significance of the difference in scores between homework and the exam. There was a significantpositive change between identical and similar homework and exam questions (growth from HW1 to Exam 1,.4318, p < .01, HW2 to exam 2, .30, p < 01). To assess change in reasoning throughout the semester, wecompared reasoning ratings from the first homework and the last homework of semester 1. There was positivegrowth in reasoning (.20), however it was not a significant gain (p = .093)Reading Survey105 students responded to the survey administered in their lab sections. 35 students indicated that they used onlythe textbook to answer the interrogation questions, and an additional 47 students indicated they used somecombination of the textbook and material from class. The remainder of the students indicated that they neverused the text to answer the questions (23 students).DiscussionThe initial results of this study show that throughout the semester there was growth in both students reasoningand the accuracy of their answers. While it is plausible that there are other reasons for students’ growth inaccuracy and reasoning, such as the nature of the course, this result is promising nonetheless. To answer theinterrogation questions correctly and completely, the students must understand the material and be able toreason as to why the sentences are true, which is an important goal of any science class. Additional work willhave to be done utilizing a control group to further test the effect of the interrogation sentences.With regard to sentence type, there is a clear difference between the answers students give to factstatement and simple phenomena as opposed to complex phenomena. The students reasoned deeper whenresponding to the complex sentences. Further work using cognitive interviews will be done to better determinewhy students reason more deeply when responding to certain sentences.Finally, the main goal of this study was to get students to read and interact with the text with moredepth and frequency. Based on the initial survey results, it appears that by having the students answer theinterrogation questions we encourage them to spend time reading the text and using the information to answerthe questions.While further analyses need to be done to determine the strategies students use when answering theinterrogation questions and the effect the method has on student learning and reasoning, it appears thatelaborative interrogation is a method that at the very least engages students in active reading of the text.ReferencesFelder, R.M. and Brent, R. (1996) “Navigating the bumpy road to student-centered instruction.” CollegeTeaching, 44 (2): 43–47.Holliday, W.G., Yore, L. and Alverman, D.E. (1994) “The reading-science learning-writing connection:Breakthroughs, barriers and promises.” Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31, 877-894.Hurd, P.D. (1998) “Scientific literacy: New minds for a changing world.” Science Education, 82, 403 – 416.Levin, J.R. (2008) The unmistakable professional promise of a young educational psychology research andscholar. Educational Psychologist Educational Psychologist, 43, 70–85.Smith, B. Holliday, W. and Austin, H. (2009) “Student’s comprehension of science textbooks using a questionbased reading strategy.” Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 47(4), 363-379.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1502© ISLS