Identity, Digital Learning Environments and Academic SuccessMirlanda E. Prudent, University of Illinois at Chicago, mprude2@uic.eduAbstract: A student’s identity significantly influences their attitude and behavior towardsacademics regardless of abilities. This paper proposes a framework for the design andevaluation of digital learning environments (DLEs) that explicitly promote identityconstruction related to academic success. Subsequent research can address three questions: (1)How does one’s identity affect how they interact with DLEs? (2) Which aspects of DLEs bestpromote identity construction? and (3) How does exploring issues around identity affectlearning outcomes?Problem Statement and Theoretical BackgroundAs many scholars have found, identity is a crucial component of learning. As the use of technology inclassrooms grows, it is important for researchers to gain a better understanding of how interacting with digitalenvironments affects learning as it relates to identity construction. Pulling from research on identity andacademic success as well as identity and digital learning environments (DLEs), I propose design principles andelements to guide the development of future DLEs that cultivate identity and academic success. Subsequentresearch related to these DLEs will be able to address three questions: (1) How does a person’s identity affecthow they interact and learn with digital environments? (2) What aspects of virtual learning environments bestpromote (and hinder) identity construction? and (3) How does exploring/addressing issues around identity affectlearning outcomes? I believe that in answering these questions, educators and design-based researchers will bebetter able to understand and meet the needs of learners, conceivably allowing for greater learning gains.Identity and Academic SuccessIdentity construction is a fluid and ongoing process of exploration (or evaluation) and commitment. Wenger(1998) states that “It is in that formation of an identity that learning can become a source of meaningfulness andof personal and social energy” (p. 215). Therefore, to be most effective, teaching practices need to incorporateinstructional elements and activities that make explicit the ways in which academic content is related tostudents’ everyday lives. Specifically, cultural identity, a subcomponent of one’s collective identity, is importantto consider since it can be in opposition of academic success. For example, conflict between a student’s homeculture and what is expected of them in the school culture has been identified as part of the reason for schoolfailure (Bransford, Brown & Cocking, 2000). Each subcomponent of a person’s identity holds a certain saliencein relation to the collective identity. Certain environments and interactions can temporarily change the salienceand relevance of an identity so that particular characteristics and commitments are given preference (Spears,2011). Also, the ideas a person holds about their future possible selves depend on environmental affordancesand constraints and, as a result, are constantly revised (Oyserman & James, 2011).Identity and Digital EnvironmentsThere are three ways in which digital environments have been positioned in the research that have implicationsfor use in improving academic success: digital environments as mirrors, digital environments as exploratorytools, and digital environments as construction tools. In The Second Self, Turkle challenged the then widespreadidea that a computer is “just a tool” by proposing that we view a computer “as an evocative object” (Turkle,1984, p.19), and asserted that using a computer “changes people’s awareness of themselves, of one another, oftheir relationship with the world” ultimately resulting in viewing the computer as a second self (p. 18). Bermanand Bruckman (2001) proved the exploratory capacity of digital environments with their study of an onlinegame where users are assigned a gender and must prove their identity to others and single out the imposters.While some participants used the game to explore their ideas of their ideal self, others explored ideas of theirideal or actual mate. Therefore we can conclude that digital environments hold great potential to help studentsexplore aspects of their identity. Lastly, the three-dimensional environment Zora (Bers, 2006) is a primeexample of a construction tool. Zora allows users to design the objects, characters, spaces and values of a virtualcity that they then inhabit – activities that the author asserts promote competence, connection, character,confidence, caring, and contribution (Bers, 2006). These components are linked throughout the identityliterature as being supportive of identity achievement (e.g., Vignoles, Schwartz & Luyckx, 2011).Designing for Learning and Becoming in PracticeTo promote the development of a constructed identity, and in turn academic success, DLEs need features andactivities that integrate the positions of mirror, exploratory tool, and construction tool. Influenced by the designguidelines of Zora (Bers, 2006), I offer possible design principles and particular embodiments of the principles.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1619© ISLSDesign PrinciplesI. Promote positive development of identity1) Provide dynamic, diverse and flexible computational tools with which users can interact and identifya. Encourage users to create complex representations of the self and identity in various waysb. Encourage users to explore powerful ideas about the self and identity, highlighting the multiplicityof aspects and changes over time.c. Include personally relevant and salient informationd. Provide a wealth of academic content and activities situated in real-world contexts2) Ensure a safe and supportive environment/communitya. Establish guidelines for respectful communications between usersb. Celebrate and support diversity among usersc. Identify and enlist the support of more knowledgeable others in the digital communityDesign Elements1) An interactive and customizable interface (Design Principle 1a) – A customizable interface creates aspace for the user to explore, create and reflect on identity aspects (Bers, 2006). The persistence of theinteraction encourages the user to regularly reevaluate the accuracy of the representation.2) A user created avatar and profile (Design Principles 1a & 1b) – an avatar acts as a mediator betweenthe user and the digital environment by serving as a portrayal of the user stylized in the same manner asthe rest of the environment. The profile presents the user’s most salient identity aspects in one space.These aspects also prompt the user to reflect on how they understand and choose to represent theiractual and ideal selves, which is important for learning (Bransford, Brown & Cocking, 2000).3) Portfolio: An indexed artifact reservoir (Design Principles 1a & 1b) – this feature allows users tocollect and store any artifacts from the learning environment (e.g., a completed activity or a forumthread) as well as items from other sources. As it develops, the portfolio will support reflection andhelp the user create a narrative about their identity (Bers, 2006).4) Journal: An active reflection space (Design Principle 1b) – The journal provides a constructive outletfor the user’s innermost thoughts. It also allows the user to review past entries and notice trends ormajor changes which can lead to improved metacognition and a more integrated identity.5) Academic content and activities (Design principles 1c & 1d) – A student’s skills or technical ability is asignificant component of how users view themselves in relation to academics (Oyserman & James,2011).6) Social networking tools (Design Principles 2a, 2b & 2c) – Talking to various, more knowledgeableothers can help users to change their beliefs about what is possible, learn best practices and also build anetwork of support and accountability, all of which are important for learning (Wenger, 1998).ConclusionAcademic success requires students to possess academic knowledge and skills as well as a constructed identitywherein salient and dominant identity components (e.g., cultural and ethnic identity) align with academic anddisciplinary identities. As discussed, the necessary processes for developing a constructed identity can befacilitated by the affordances of digital environments. It falls to design researchers to devote more explicitattention to developing learning environments that incorporate identity constructing elements and activities. Thedesign principles and elements discussed provide direction for future work in this area.ReferencesBerman, J., & Bruckman, A. S. (2001). The Turing Game Exploring Identity in an Online Environment.Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies, 7(3), 83-102.Bers, M. U. (2006). The role of new technologies to foster positive youth development. Applied DevelopmentalScience, 10(4), 200-219.Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. (2000). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and SchoolExpanded Edition (pp. 3 – 27, 51 - 113, 129 – 154). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Oyserman, D., & James, L. (2011). Possible identities. In Handbook of Identity Theory and Research (pp. 117145). Springer New York.Spears, R. (2011). Group identities: The social identity perspective. In Handbook of Identity Theory andResearch (pp. 201-224). Springer New YorkTurkle, S. (1984). The second self. New York: Simon and Schuster.Vignoles, V. L., Schwartz, S. J., & Luyckx, K. (2011). Introduction: Toward an integrative view of identity. InHandbook of Identity Theory and Research (pp. 1-27). Springer New York.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New York, NY: CambridgeUniversity Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1620© ISLS