Cognitive Ethnographies of Heterogeneous Engineering DesignCarlye Lauff, Joanna Weilder-Lewis, Kevin O’Connor, Daria A. Kotys-Schwartz, and Mark E. RentschlerUniversity of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA{Carlye.lauff, Joanna.Weidler-Lewis, Kevin.OConnor, Daria.Kotys, Mark.Rentschler} @colorado.eduAbstract: This is an empirical ethnographic study of how engineers in both undergraduatedesign courses and the professional workplace engage in engineering design. The findingssuggest that the organizational contexts constitute processes of design differently, in ways thatchallenge the typical rhetoric of undergraduate education that project courses are intended toprovide students with “real world” experience.IntroductionDesign is “widely considered to be the central or distinguishing activity of engineering” (Dym, Agogino, Eris,Frey, & Leifer, 2005), and yet it remains an insufficiently researched and understood topic (Barley, 2004; Dymet al., 2005; Stevens, Johri, & O’Connor, 2013). From the perspective of engineering education, where a“disconnect” between professional engineering practices and school-based practices is an oft-discussedlimitation, this sparseness of research on professional engineering design is both puzzling and troubling (Stevenset al., 2013). As Stevens et al. (2013) argue, trustworthy and specific representations of real engineeringpractices are necessary to inform attempts to prepare future engineers. The present study attempts to informthese efforts through comparative ethnographic research on design practices in the undergraduate curriculumand in the workplace.Theoretical FrameworkThe theoretical framework for examining practices of engineering design is provided by the notion of“heterogeneous engineering” (Law, 1987), which has been developed in Social Studies of Science andTechnology as a way of countering a received “ideology of engineering” (Williams, 2002) that reducesengineering to the application of technical principles and processes in the service of solving technical problems.The notion of heterogeneous engineering, in contrast, sees engineers as “system builders” (Law, 1987, p. 112)who are involved in the active stabilization of systems that are composed of heterogeneous elements, bothhuman and nonhuman. In this sense, what is being engineered is not just a technical object; rather, engineeringis productive of objects, but also of persons, institutions, and everything that is part of the system that constitutesthe object.Suchman (2000) developed the notion of heterogeneous engineering in organizations, noting theimplications of the perspective for learning and becoming. In the context of this project, the heterogeneouselements being coordinated can include the technical principles and processes held in high esteem within thetechnicist ideology of engineering. However, these principles and processes do not determine the course ofengineering work; rather, they are flexibly adapted as resources in the flow of practice. They are, Suchmanclaims, appropriated in forms of “artful compliance” and “endless small forms of practical ‘subversion, taken upin the name of getting the work of the organization done” (p. 313). Suchman’s focus on the organizationalcontext of the appropriation of the tools of technicist rationality points to the importance of understanding theorganization, institutional framing of engineering activity. For the learning sciences, this focus calls forunderstanding notions of “authenticity” in ways that go beyond the modeling of epistemic practices ofdisciplines (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989) and using these as the basis for enculturation into a profession ordiscipline.MethodologyThe present study attends to the location of engineering design in different organizational settings, as a way ofexamining the nature of purported “disconnects” between professional engineering design practices and thosetaking place in the undergraduate curriculum. Our core methodology is that of “cognitive ethnography”(Hutchins, 1995), which examines how cognitive tasks, in our case design, are accomplished within “functionalsystems” (Hutchins, 1995) constituted of heterogeneous elements, both human and nonhuman. Our focus is on“how the work of the organization” (Suchman, 2000) gets done through the process of design. The research hasthree unique settings: a general engineering freshman design course, a senior mechanical engineering designcourse, and small to medium sized professional engineering companies in the same geographic region.Specifically from this project, we want to answer the following research questions: In what ways are theredisconnects between the way engineering design is constructed in undergraduate courses compared toprofessional engineering design environments? What will make university design practices authentic tobecoming a professional engineer?ICLS 2014 Proceedings1539© ISLSThis qualitative research study was approached with techniques for doing fieldwork in modernsocieties (Czarniawska, 2007). A variety of fieldwork methods, both direct and indirect, were used to capture allthe elements of participants’ activities in the design process. The observations include all parties that impact thedesign process, such as those organizing freshmen and senior design, employees in the machine shop, andclients. The researchers engaged in participant observations, while taking field notes and audio/video recordingthe meetings. The researchers followed the design teams through each step of the process. Additionally, allmaterials and artifacts that were produced by participants during their work were collected, such as copies ofpaper/electronic documents and photographs of temporary surfaces like whiteboards where participants usedwhile working. There have been over 400 hours of observation and over 200 documents collected fromfollowing the design teams.Preliminary FindingsIn this section, we report preliminary findings of the study; these findings will be developed as the studycontinues. Our initial findings are suggestive that the organizational contexts constitute processes of designdifferently, in ways that challenge the typical rhetoric of undergraduate education that project courses areintended to provide students with “real world” experience. Key among these findings are that, at theundergraduate level, abstracted technical descriptions of professional expertise serve a central role, in the formof, for example, design methodologies that are intended to serve as the basis for student work. Instructors ofthese courses—sometimes without substantive expertise in the design of “products”—rely on these epistemicforms to frame a learning trajectory through the course for students, and students’ performance is thus graded onthe basis of their proficiency with these technicist forms. Moreover, the organizational trajectory for thesedesign courses appears to end with the semester; unlike sequenced courses in, for example, physics and calculus,design courses are not formally connected within the curriculum to any other courses. Finally, the “products”being produced—the contingently stabilized objects, in the heterogeneous engineering perspective—themselvesmay often have no trajectory: sometimes they are disposed of or disassembled for reuse of parts in future projectclasses, and are not always core aspect of the constitution of the organization. In contrast, at the professionallevel, trajectories are often organized around technical objects, and organizational and individualaccomplishment is assessed on the basis of the success of these stabilized objects. Representations of expertperformance, such as design methodologies, are not central aspects of the evaluation of performance, but ratherare “subversively” used (Suchman, 2000) in order to get the work of the organization done.SignificanceWe expect the findings from this project to both contribute to our understanding of the nature of the structureand practice of engineering design and to have direct relevance to ongoing attempts to redesign the engineeringeducation curricula, as well as add to conversations in the learning sciences on the nature of authentic practice.ReferencesBarley, S. (2004). What we know (and mostly don’t know) about technical work. In S. Ackroyd, R. Batt, P.Thompson, P. Tolbert (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of work and organization, Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.Brown, J., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educationalresearcher, 18(1), 32-42.Czarniawska, B. (2007). Shadowing and other techniques for doing fieldwork in modern societies. Copenhagen:Copenhagen Business School Press.Dym, C., Agogino, A., Eris, Ozgur, E., Frey, D., & Leifer, L.(2005). Engineering design thinking, teaching, and learning. Journal of Engineering Education, 95(1),103-120.Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild (Vol. 262082314). Cambridge, MA: MIT press.Law, J. (1987). Technology and heterogeneous engineering: The case of the Portuguese expansion. In W.Bijker, T. Hughes & T. Pinch (Eds.), The social construction of technological systems, Cambridge,MA: MIT Press.Stevens, R., Johri, A., and O’Connor, K. (2013). Professional engineering work. In B. Olds and A. Johri (Eds.),Cambridge Handbook of Engineering Education Research. New York: Cambridge University Press.Suchman, L. (2000). Organizing alignment: a case of bridge-building. Organization, 7(2), 311-327.Williams, R. (2002). Retooling: A historian confronts technological change. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.AcknowledgementsThis research was supported by the National Science Foundation (CMMI Grant No. 1355599).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1540© ISLS