Supporting Teacher Learning for Pedagogical Innovation throughCollaborative Co-Design: Issues and ChallengesNancy Law, Johnny Yuen and Yeung Lee, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong KongEmail: nlaw@hku.hk, jyuen@hku.hk, yeunglee@hku.hkAbstract: This study reports on an in-depth analysis of two teachers’ implementation of onecollaboratively designed curriculum unit in the context of the school’s participation in an elearning initiative to integrate ICT use in the grade 5 General Studies curriculum. The analysisreveals significant differences in the actual implementation as well as in the students’ learningoutcomes achieved. While both teachers ventured beyond their comfort zone to provide moreopportunities for student interactions and explorations, the enacted implementations reflectdifferences in the learning goals they targeted and their knowledge of practice. Visualizationsof learning analytics did not trigger further exploration among teachers, though these revealstrong links between learning outcomes and the enacted curriculum. Findings raise questionsabout collaborative instructional design as a model for organizing teacher learning forpedagogical innovation, and the paper proposes design principles and further research to betterfacilitate innovation-focused professional development.IntroductionThere is much in the literature about the challenges to changing teachers’ pedagogical practices, whether ICT isinvolved or not (Fullan, 2007; Hargreaves, 2000) The present study is concerned with promoting teacheradoption of more student-centered, inquiry-oriented pedagogies in their everyday practice, using ICT integrationas a key leverage for pedagogical change. It is a design research conducted in the context of a governmentfunded e-learning pilot project a school was awarded to carry out, and for which the research team wascontracted by the school concerned to provide professional development and consultation service. A teamdesign approach (Koehler, Mishra & Yahya, 2007) was adopted to foster the teachers’ development oftechnological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK, Koehler & Mishra, 2005) needed for theimplementation as the teachers had been using rather traditional, teacher-centered delivery methods, and ICTuse was primarily confined to teachers’ use for whole class presentation purposes. In this design study, in linewith the focus of the government pilot scheme to foster pedagogical transformation through e-learningimplementation, the professional development focus was on learning design—the identification of learninggoals and the design of appropriate teaching and learning activities that provide learning experiences conduciveto student attainment of those goals (Goodyear, 2005). The knowledge and skills needed for the development ofdigital learning resources/online activities is not included in the professional development plan.An important principle for design research is the need to be sensitive to the local context and to respectand nurture the agency of the teachers concerned. The teachers involved here were novices with regard to elearning, and they did not have a clear understanding or expectation of the transformative potential of ICT.While the teachers were willing to take part in the pilot project, they were worried about their own technologicalcompetence and the workload involved. Hence the design principles adopted and the actual socio-technicaldesign for teacher learning took account of the contextual constraints.The focus of the present study is on identifying evidence of teacher learning throughout the design andenactment process of the technology-enabled, blended lessons in order to assess the effectiveness of the designprinciples for teacher learning adopted and how these could be improved. In this study, all five teachers wereenacting the same curriculum unit design agreed upon after participating in a collaborative co-planning process.Given this scaffolded collaborative design process, would the teachers’ implementation be largely the same, andhow may they differ? What are the conditions, if any, for such teams to engage in sustained teacher learning andcontinuous improvement in professional practice? These are the research questions that this study addresses.Literature Review and Conceptual FrameworkMishra and Koehler (2005) identify seven types of teacher knowledge for effective integration of ICT use inteaching and learning: content knowledge (CK), pedagogical knowledge (PK), technological knowledge (TK),pedagogical content knowledge (PCK), technological pedagogical knowledge (TPK), technological contentknowledge (TCK) and technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPCK or TPACK). While there is nocommon agreement on the nature of TPCK as a theoretical construct, nor is there a commonly adopted set ofmeasurement for TPCK (Voogt et al., 2012), there is general consent that the intersection and interactionbetween these three areas of knowledge and performance are important in the development of teachercompetence to integrate ICT use in their teaching.ICLS 2014 Proceedings777© ISLSFor teacher learning provisions to be effective, they have to be coherent and meaningful within theteachers’ professional contexts. Koehler and Mishra (2005) reported significant advances in teachers’ TPCKwhen they engage in the collaborative design of online courses. The design process provides participants with anauthentic and engaging context to exercise their own creative agency, and the designed course materials becomea reification (Stein & Coburn, 2008) that can mediate further learning through teachers’ implementationpractice. Design research (Brown 1992) has been found to be an appropriate model for supporting teacherlearning as it can be designed to address three key challenges encountered in designs for teacher learning: theneed to collaborate within the institutional context of the school, the need to trace and document individual aswell as group level learning, and the need to provide an authentic context to link the teacher learning with theirclassroom practices (Cobb, Zhao & Dean, 2009). Design research is particularly suited when the teacherlearning for technology integration aims to foster pedagogical change in the context of school reforms (Holland2001). Penuel et al (2007) further found that the incorporation of lesson planning time and the provision oftechnical support were important for promoting implementation.In the present study, the university-based research team was invited by the school to provideprofessional development support to help teachers integrate ICT use in their teaching of the school curriculum,and to conduct formative evaluation of the school’s e-learning pilot implementation. Design-based research wasadopted. Each cycle of learning is centered around the design and implementation of an e-learning curriculumunit. e-Learning in this context refers to the integration of online student learning activities to be completedindividually or in groups within or outside of the timetabled class teaching time. To facilitate this mode of elearning for novice teachers and learners, the researchers provide a Moodle-based learning management system(LMS) customized for young learners for the school to implement their blended learning curriculum units.In designing the present study, the research team is guided by the following design principles:1. The ultimate decisions on the design of the e-learning curriculum unit to be implemented rest with theschool teachers to ensure its intelligibility, feasibility and acceptability to the culture and norms of theschool (Fishman et al., 2000).2. The teacher learning interactions should focus on the conceptual aspects of learning design (i.e., theselection and deployment of learning activities and associated online resources and tools for thetargeted learning objectives) and skills in classroom implementation. To reduce the cognitive stress andworkload for teachers, the installation of the designed learning activities and digital resources on theLMS are to be carried out by the research team.3. Accessibility of technical support—hotline and email support for LMS operations.4. Analyses of students’ learning processes and outcomes will be used as a main form of feedback toscaffold teacher reflection on practice and further learning.The Design StudyThis design-based research was conducted in the form of a school-university partnership initiated by a primaryschool requesting school-based professional development and technology support for the implementation of theschool’s e-learning pilot project. The school was located in an area of relatively low SES and did not have astrong record of e-learning implementation. The predominant pedagogy was teacher-centered instruction, butboth the principal and the teachers were keen to take advantage of the funding support provided to pilot schoolsto make advances in the pedagogical adoption of ICT. Each pilot project funding application had to identify thepedagogical focus, targeted outcomes and an implementation plan. This school identified the fostering ofstudents’ information literacy skills as recommended by the Education Bureau in Hong Kong (EDB 2005).Grade 5 General Studies (GS) was selected by the school for e-learning implementation in the 2012-13school year. All of the five in-service teachers teaching grade 5 GS in this school participated in the study. Thecollaborative design took an iterative process, led by the pilot project coordinating teacher, who was also one ofthe five grade 5 GS teachers. The teacher team selected the curriculum unit on Fostering a Positive AttitudeTowards Life for e-learning implementation in the 2012-13 school year. Figure 1 is a graphic representation ofthe design study process undertaken, based on the design principles described above.Based on design principle 1, the research team invited the teachers to provide an initial e-learningcurriculum unit design they would like to implement based on their prior curriculum design. Three cycles ofinteraction took place between the coordinating teacher and the university team. During the first iteration, theresearcher input focused on converting the essentially teacher directed curriculum plan to include inquiryoriented individual and group-based student activities to foster student engagement, after which the coordinatingteacher provided a revised unit plan. A second iteration of coordinating teacher-university researcher interactiontook place that focused on providing ideas for further e-learning refinement. The coordinating teacher thensubmitted a finalized e-learning unit plan to the research team, who then implemented the e-learning componentof the curriculum unit design into five separate but identical courserooms on the LMS, one for each of the fiveclasses. A face-to-face team planning meeting involving all five GS teachers and the research team member thentook place, during which the courseroom features and activities were introduced. The courseroom activitiesICLS 2014 Proceedings778© ISLSwere further refined after the meeting for actual deployment, based on the teachers’ concerns and suggestions.The curriculum plan involved two double periods (each class period was 35 min) in the computer laboratory,and an optional single period for extension activities to be decided by the class teacher concerned.The university-based researchers observed all the five teachers’ classroom enactment of the finalcurriculum plan. The courseroom activities for all five classes were identical, which also served as a reificationto mediate the implementation of the agreed curriculum plan. Videos were taken during the lesson observations.A student focus group interview and a teacher interview were conducted for each class right after the seconddouble period. A short debriefing meeting was also held with all five teachers shortly after the completion of thecurriculum unit. Three months after the completion of the teaching, a meeting was scheduled between a researchteam member and the teachers to review the graphic visualization of analyses of data from the LMS server thatprovide information about students’ learning processes and outcomes for the five classes.Figure 1. A graphical representation of the design research cycle implemented by the research team.Design of the Curriculum Unit and Data SourcesThe curriculum unit submitted by the teachers included a listing of the specific learning objectives for the unit,which remained unchanged throughout the study: I. set personal goals and develop an executable plan to achievethe goals, II. adopt a positive attitude towards stress and setbacks, and III. help others to adopt a positive attitudetowards life. The basic learning design for the finalized curriculum unit was to use two contrasting cases, ahikikomori youth (1) and a “reborn hero”(2), to stimulate students’ discussion and reflection, in order to fosterin students a positive attitude towards difficulties and challenges in life. Table 1 presents the designed learningactivities for the first of two 70 min. lessons in this curriculum unit. The plan clearly shows that the planned useof ICT was to support student sharing and exploration of ideas. Four types of digital tools are involved: aYouTube video for viewing by the whole class, an online discussion forum for students to post and share ideas,an online voting tool that provides an immediate summary of the class responses and a wiki for each group toreview and consolidation what they have learnt. At the end of the second lesson, students were asked to sharetheir thoughts and reflection on their learning experience using a blog in the LMS used in this course.Analysis and FindingsIn this section, we report on teachers’ learning as reflection during each of the three phases of the design studyprocess: the curriculum design phase, the enactment phase and review of learning analytics visualization ofstudents’ learning processes and outcomes.Teacher Learning During the Design PhaseThe design phase includes steps 1, 2, 3 and 5 of the design cycle in Figure 1. During steps 1 to 3, the researchteam interacts with the teachers through the coordinating teacher. Hence it is not possible to differentiateICLS 2014 Proceedings779© ISLSlearning at the individual level from the group level. The initial curriculum unit was based on the teaching planused in the previous school year, which was strongly influenced by the textbook. The design focus was onincluding computer-based activities to provide opportunities to learn information literacy skills such as defining,accessing, managing, integrating, evaluating and communicating information. There were three major learningactivities in the initial curriculum unit that focused on getting the students to develop their own personal goal:learning about the life cycle of the butterfly as an introduction to changes in one’s life journey; identify apersonal goal and to developing a personal plan for its achievement; and to develop a better understanding ofvarious stages in one’s life journey through studying the life events of a reborn hero. The e-learning activitiesincluded were mainly searching, selecting and presenting information connected with these tasks. Theresearcher input encouraged the teachers to focus on the social affective aspects of the targeted learningobjectives and to include more sharing and group interactions among students. An example of a unit with asimilar set curriculum objectives designed and implemented by teachers in a local secondary school wasintroduced to the coordinating teacher for reference. That example unit used two contrasting cases as apedagogical anchor, a hikikomori youth and a reborn hero, and details of the design were publicly availablefrom a webpage.Table 1. Sequence of learning activities for the two 70 min lessons based on the teaching plan finalized by thecoordinating teacher after the co-planning team meeting.SequenceActivity typeDescriptionLesson 11.11.21.31.41.52.12.22.32.42.53InvestigateStudents asked to investigate unhappiness by sharing with the whole class theirunhappy moments, and discuss how they handle unhappiness.WatchStudents watch a TV documentary (YouTube) on a hikikormori youth, Ar Yuen.Discuss—online Students share their feelings about the video, discuss why Ar Yuen isolatedforumhimself, whether and how Ar Yuen should connect with the outside world.InvestigateStudents vote online on the problem that troubles them most from a list: academicresults, relations at school, relations with family, friends, money matters. Teacherreview voting results in class, invite students to elaborate on the problems theyexperienced, and whether they had tried to isolate themselves under thosecircumstances.Produce—Students work in groups of three on a wiki to describe: what problems troubleonlinethem most and how they solve those problems.Lesson 2Discuss-whole Students asked to summarize the problems they encountered as reflected in groupclasswiki entries.WatchStudents watch a YouTube video on one “reborn” hero.Discuss—online Students to post their feelings about the reborn hero in the video.forumInvestigate & Students work in groups to search for further examples of reborn heroes onlineproduce online and select one to write about on their group wiki and reasons for their choice ofhero.Online peerStudents peer assess other groups based on an online rubric and vote for the bestassessmentgroup wiki.Lesson 3—optionalReflection blog Students post reflections on their learning in the unit using the LMS blog module.The revised design submitted by the coordinating teacher was very close to the example design. Theteachers decided to drop the activities related to the butterfly life cycle and the development of a personal goaland plan, and adopt the use of two contrasting cases as the design anchor. In the second round of interactionsbetween the research and the teacher teams, the focus was on clarifying the intended function of the e-learningactivities included and to reduce the number of different online activities within the same lesson to ensure thatthe plan was feasible. Hence, the finalized plan did not differ much from the plan previously submitted.Step 5 in Figure 1 was the final step in the design and planning process. During this meeting theteachers were shown a sandbox courseroom on the LMS with the planned online activities set up for them toexplore. During this meeting, the main concerns expressed by the teachers were how to navigate and manage thedifferent activities, and whether the students would be able to handle the various online activities according tothe plan. There was no discussion on the appropriateness of the overall pedagogical design. The teachers spentmuch time on mastering the technical skills of navigating and using the LMS, which was totally new to them.Towards the end of the meeting, several teachers expressed their lack of confidence in helping students to useICLS 2014 Proceedings780© ISLSthe e-portfolio system provided, Mahara, for their students to create their group report on a reborn hero in thesecond lesson. The research team then eliminated the need for students to work on two platforms (though linkedthrough single sign-on), and created a group wiki in the LMS course room for the task.To summarize, the teachers exhibited openness to trying out new pedagogical designs and technologytools, while still harboring much anxiety in the process. This is an important first step in teacher learning.Teacher Learning During the Enactment PhaseAs the curriculum design required all students to have access to an internet-connected computer during lessons,it was necessary to schedule the classes at times when the computer labs were available. In the end, the teachersdecided that the best time was to conduct the classes during the post-examination period when teachers wereable to flexibly schedule different activities. They booked both computer labs available in the school for twowhole days and schedule the two double period lessons on the two days. This was very convenient for theresearch team as all lesson observation and interviews could be completed in two days. On the other hand, theteachers did not attempt to engage in peer lesson observation because of the tight time schedule, which inhindsight was an obstacle to more productive professional learning (to be further discussed in a later section).All five teachers implemented the online activities according to the plan and were positive about theexperience and outcomes in the post-observation interviews. The debriefing meetings with the teachers, whetherindividual or in groups, were rich and productive. While the implementation details and competences of theteachers differed, all were pleased with the ability of the students to complete the designed activities. Much oftheir initial fears and worries were allayed and most of the teachers found students’ levels of engagement to bebeyond their expectation. The most encouraging aspect of the teachers’ conversation was its focus on mattersthat span both technology and pedagogy. For example:My concept of wiki was different from what I experience in this unit…. It is a learningapproach…. Watching the YouTube video and working on wiki iteratively is very good.I could not imagine my students’ response to be like this. I want to suggest .. modification ..For example, voting for the best [group] wiki [on reborn hero]. We should ask them to votenot only for the best group, but to give a score for each group. When asked whether we shouldask students to do peer or self assessment earlier, I thought for a long time …. I have not seenpeer- or self-assessment and I worried that the children would not be able to handle….It is difficult to get low achievers to collaborate … I find that their engagement in this activityto be much better than before. … online voting is a kind of guidance, encouraging them to dobetter. For example, one of the groups in the weak class was not putting in their best …. Afterthe voting, the group was surprised that none in the class voted for them and asked why.The teachers’ talk exhibits a fluid and fluent integration of pedagogical ideas and concerns with thefunctionality and use of different online tools. The observation of their own students’ engagmenet in the elearning activities served as an important experiential grounding that connects/bridges the teachers’ priorpedagogical skills and understanding with new technological tools and new pedagogical methods. The bridgingwas so successful in helping the teachers to make sense of the new tools and activities that they were able tosuggest improvements to their enacted designs that would go beyond what they were initially prepared to “risk”.Clearly, these teachers gained much in TPCK in their learning through design and enactment of those designs.What is also very encouraging was that the teachers were also aware of this venture as a productive professionallearning experience, as so well articulated by one of the teachers in the post lesson interview:I did not plan for the children to come out and talk, but since there was time available … the[LMS] platform provide flexibility for teaching. You can think as you go along. You cannever plan perfectly in advance … we need to accumulate experience. So I think this time weare not really teaching, but learning. We are learning how to use this [LMS] platform ….It is clear from the above quote that the fear of not being able to navigate and manage activities on thenew platform is replaced by confidence and sense of control, as communicated through the term “flexibility”.Variations in Teachers’ Enactment of the E-Learning PlanWhile all five teachers implemented the learning activities as planned, a detailed analysis of the classroomvideos revealed subtle and important differences between them, which could be linked to differences in patternsof students’ engagement and learning outcomes achievement as revealed through analyses of the online log data.Due to space limitations, two of the teachers’ classroom interaction and orchestration are selected forICLS 2014 Proceedings781© ISLSexamination in this section as they represent different foci in their enactment. A brief summary of the activitysequence for the first double period lesson for Teachers A and C is presented in Table 2. Neither of these twoteachers was the coordinating teacher.Table 2 A summary of two teachers’ implementation of the first lesson in the co-planned curriculum unit.Sequence1.1InvestigateTeacher ADid not perform this activity.Teacher C• Recapped a similar topic from last year• Asked for the meaning of “hidden” as inhikikomori• Ask for an adjective to describe Ar Yuen1.2 Watch Showed video.Showed video.1.3Ask whole class how the video described Ar• Checked students can loginDiscussYuen, the meaning & attitudes of hikikomori. • Asked students to post responses to aboveStrict regimented instruction to students:questions on forum• 10 min to post own ideas• Gave feedback on students’ postings & refer• 3 min to read others’ poststo hikikomori as a social phenomenon• 5 min to discuss in group about notes read• Guided students to post causes of hikikomori• 8 min to post group discussion results andin terms of individual, family and socialrespond to othersfactors1.4• Administered online voting on key difficulty • Administered online voting on key difficultyInvestigate • Randomly chose 2 students to report how• Reviewed results and explained whythey votedacademic results had highest votes• Contrasted Ar Yuen’s attitude with students’1.5• Asked students how they solve own problems • Asked each group to discuss solutions toProduce• 10 min for group to discuss f-t-f theirmost concerned problem & post on wikiproblems & solution• Read out from wiki some of the students’• Groups post results in wikisolutions• Read some students’ wiki entries to concludeN.B. Italicized texts indicate careful scaffolding of student interactions structures (individual, group and wholeclass) using face-to-face and online means. Underlined texts indicate conceptual scaffolds for student discussionand reflection.Teacher A followed the plan very closely in the form of instructing students on the activities they needto go through. He did not attempt to provide a conceptual focus or guide the discussion. Teacher A followed theplan very closely in the form of instructing students on the activities they need to go through. He did not attemptto provide a conceptual focus or guide the discussion. On the other hand, he paid much attention to structuringof the discussions. In sequence 1.3, he gave time for the students to read others’ postings, followed by a face-toface group discussion, and then posting the group discussion outcomes as a response to the forum postings. Herethe teacher modeled how online discussions is meant to be an interaction of ideas, and encouraged students totake each others’ postings seriously. The italicized text in Table 2 highlights the instances Teacher A providedsocial-technical structuring of the discussions, which demonstrated his TPCK fluency in relation to facilitatingstudent discussions.Teacher C demonstrated a strong conceptual focus on her learning design enactment. She was the onlyteacher who started the unit with recapping for the students a similar topic in last year’s curriculum, and to guidestudents to discuss the causes of hikikomori from individual, family and social perspectives; both of thesemoves were not mentioned in the curriculum plan. She also ensured that all students were able to login to theonline learning platform before she gave instructions for the first discussion forum. The instances where sheprovided a conceptual scaffold for the students are underlined in Table 2.Variations in Students’ Learning OutcomesSome preliminary analysis of the students’ online discussion and reflection blog data reveal interestingdifferences in the learning outcomes for the different classes. Figure 2 presents an analysis of the quality of theforum postings from the different classes using an argumentation-based framework.The quality of forum postings are often analyzed based on the quality of argument presented. As thechildren involved in this study were only grade 5 children and were not used to online discussion as a learningactivity, explanations were not further categorized. The analysis presented in Figure 2 shows that class C has thehighest number and percentage of high quality postings (i.e. explanation, personal judgement and suggestions).It is not clear whether this outcome is a consequence of the cognitive scaffolding provided by the teacher asClass C also happens to be the high achievers at this grade level. Another measure of quality of forumICLS 2014 Proceedings782© ISLSdiscussions is the level interactivity among participants. Figure 3 is the Social Network Analysis (SNA) displayfor the two classes. The class C SNA result is a typical star shape indicative of students’ postings servingprimarily as responses to the teacher’s posting. There was not real discussion or exploration of ideas amongstudents. On the other hand, the class A SNA display is a well connected network showing much interactionamong the students.Figure 2. Analysis of the nature of the forum posts contributed by the five classes of students in lesson 1.Figure 3. Social Network Analysis results for the discussion forum writing interactions for classes A and C.A further analysis was conducted to categorize the level of reflection of the students’ end of unit blogposts: 1) a simple listing of ideas learnt, 2) include positive suggestions on handling difficult situations, and 3)connect personal experience in the reflection. Contrary to results presented in Figure 2, class A students’ levelsof reflection in their posting (1:13:6) was much higher than those from class B students (10:5:1).Variations in Students’ Learning OutcomesThree months after the curriculum unit enactment, the research team had an opportunity to present the abovefindings to the teachers, hoping that they will find these outcomes intriguing and trigger another conversationthat allows for further probing of the unit design and its enactment. Disappointingly, the teachers did not showmuch interest and the graphs were taken as rather academic artefacts. On reflection, the research team identifiedseveral reasons why this may be so: 1) the analyses shown were rather unfamiliar to the teachers and do notreally carry meaning in terms of learning outcomes as the teachers understand them, even thought they arefamiliar to the learning sciences research community; 2) lack of recency to effectively trigger discussion due tothe time lag between curriculum enactment and the presentation of the analyses outputs; and 3) the teachers didnot have an opportunity to observe each others’ lessons and were hence unaware of the differences inenactment. All three conditions limited greatly the opportunity for this design study to contribute to deeperteacher learning.ConclusionResults from this study indicate that collaborative design based on the design principles presented under theconceptual framework section is a non-threatening approach to support teacher learning for e-learningimplementation. The collaborative design that emphasizes teacher agency and teachers as the ultimate decisionmaker provides a safe environment for teacher learning. The actual enactment of the learning design and postenactment reflection is crucial to effective learning. The present study demonstrates that teachers were able toICLS 2014 Proceedings783© ISLSmaster the interactive aspects of TPCK through practice. On the other hand, the findings also reveal theinadequacies of the design principles in fostering progressive inquiry and learning through reflecting on thevariations in teacher enactment and associated student outcomes. Curriculum enactment reveals an extra, morenuanced level of teacher knowledge that cannot be adequately reflected in reified design documents orcurriculum artifacts, be they digital or otherwise. To leverage this extra level of teacher learning and becomingin and through practice requires three additional design principles: 1) promote assessment and learning analyticliteracy so that teachers can interpret and make use of the tools and indicators developed in the learning sciencescommunity for understanding and improving their students’ learning; 2) artifacts and opportunities to supportreflection on practice should be provided as soon as possible after enactment to ensure recency and impact; and3) provide peer lesson observation opportunities to teachers to support a teacher learning discourse onknowledge in and through practice.While design principles clearly matter, it is important to note that there are school and system levelconditions that are necessary for these principles to be feasibly implemented. For example, peer observation ofteaching would only be a rarity unless explicitly supported by school level policy. Assessment and data analyticliteracy and the availability of automatic data analytic and visualization tools need system level investment andpolicy support to be realized.Endnotes(1) A Japanese term referring to reclusive adolescents or young adults who withdraw from social life, often seekingextreme degrees of isolation and confinement, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hikikomori.(2) A term that refers to those who is determined not to succumb and continue to lead a productive life even in the face ofgreat atrocities. In this curriculum unit, the “reborn hero” is a radio broadcaster (DJ) who returned to his former jobafter undergoing surgery as treatment for tongue cancer.ReferencesBrown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The journal of the learning sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Cobb, P., Zhao, Q., & Dean, C. (2009). Conducting design experiments to support teachers' learning: Areflection from the field. the journal of the learning sciences, 18(2), 165-199.Education Bureau (EDB) (2005). Information Literacy Framework for Hong Kong: Building the Capacity ofLearning in the Information Age. Hong Kong: Government printings.Fishman, B., Best, S., Foster, J., & Marx, R. (2000). Fostering teacher learning in systemic reform: A designproposal for developing professional development. ERIC Clearinghouse.Fullan, M. (2007). The new meaning of educational change. New York: Teacherís College Press.Goodyear, P. (2005). Educational design and networked learning: Patterns, pattern languages and designpractice. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 21(1), 82-101.Hargreaves, D. H. (2000). Schools and the Future: the Key Role of Innovation. In Centre for EducationalResearch and Innovation (CERI) (Ed.), Innovating Schools (pp. 45-57). Paris: OECD.Holland, P. E. (2001). Professional development in technology: Catalyst for school reform. Journal ofTechnology and Teacher Education, 9(2), 245-267.Koehler, M. J., & Mishra, P. (2005). What happens when teachers design educational technology? Thedevelopment of technological pedagogical content knowledge Journal of Educational ComputingResearch, 32(2), 131-152. doi: 10.2190/0ew7-01wb-bkhl-qdyvKoehler, M. J., & Mishra, P. (2005). What happens when teachers design educational technology? Thedevelopment of technological pedagogical content knowledge. Journal of educational computingresearch, 32(2), 131-152.Koehler, M. J., Mishra, P., & Yahya, K. (2007). Tracing the development of teacher knowledge in a designseminar: Integrating content, pedagogy and technology. Computers & Education, 49(3), 740-762.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Yamaguchi, R., & Gallagher, L. P. (2007). What makes professionaldevelopment effective? Strategies that foster curriculum implementation. American EducationalResearch Journal, 44(4), 921-958.Stein, M. K., & Coburn, C. E. (2008). Architectures for learning: A comparative analysis of two urban schooldistricts. American Journal of Education, 114(4), 583-626.Voogt, J., Fisser, P., Pareja Roblin, N., Tondeur, J., & van Braak, J. (2013). Technological pedagogical contentknowledge‚ a review of the literature. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 29, 109-121.AcknowledgmentThis research was conducted on a set of data from the research “Pedagogical Design for Effective e-Learning”commissioned by the Hong Kong Applied Science and Technology Research Institute (www.astri.org).ICLS 2014 Proceedings784© ISLS