Enculturation: Contemporary Use in the Learning Sciencesfrom a Historical PerspectiveOrnit Sagy and Yotam HodUniversity of Haifaornit.sagy@gmail.com, yotamhod24@gmail.comAbstract: We are working on an extended literature review to create a useful framework thatelucidates the complex process of enculturation for the learning sciences. The purpose of thisposter is to present our progress based upon issues and dilemmas that have come up indisciplines that have examined enculturation, with the goal of applying them to educationalcontexts. Such a framework can inform current learning sciences researchers as theyappropriate this fundamental learning concept.BackgroundEnculturation is one of the foremost constructs describing how cultures evolve over time, from generation togeneration. Since the mid-twentieth century, it has had significance in anthropology and sociology, where it wasconceived. Despite its widespread use and obvious importance as a construct, or perhaps because of it, there aremultitudes of definitions describing how the process works. It is clearly complex and has conceptual ambiguity(Shimahara, 1970).Along with the impact of Vygotskian thought, which is the basis of the recognition of socio-culturalprocesses in learning (Wertsch, 1985), the learning sciences field emerged in the early 1990’s. Innovative waysto view learning that took into consideration a community perspective (Brown & Campione, 1994; Lave &Wegner, 1999; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994) became new focuses in educational discourse. Fundamentalbehind many of these ideas was the view of learning from a metaphor of participation (Rogoff, 1994), showingthat the learning sciences had adopted enculturation as a key concept (Brown, Collins, & DuGuid, 1989).While enculturation has been widely accepted within the learning sciences at a macro-level, theconceptual ambiguity that it carried from other disciplines has still not been adequately theorized in educationalsettings. Recognizing that the enculturation process, on a micro-level, has unique characteristics within learningenvironments compared with the culture-at-large, the learning sciences community can benefit a great deal byrefining the contemporary use of enculturation from a historical perspective. In this poster, we propose apreliminary perspective and inquiry process to investigate the contemporary use of the concept. Development ofthis framework can give consistency and clarity of use in the learning sciences given this conceptual ambiguity.Guiding QuestionsWe seek to develop a framework that can articulate the various perspectives that learning scientists have takenabout the enculturation process at the micro-level. To do this, we ask the following questions:• What issues surrounding the concept of enculturation existed or currently exist in other disciplines(e.g., sociology and anthropology)?• How is this concept, as is used in the learning sciences, applied today?• In what ways is enculturation different or the same whether in educational contexts or when consideredfrom a broad cultural perspective?• What framework can be applied to help learning scientists think about enculturation?Inquiry ProcessWe propose an extended inquiry process to answer our guiding questions. We will start by examining theconceptual ambiguities of enculturation from different disciplines. Thereafter, we will investigate how they aredealt with in the uniqueness of educational contexts. As part of the inquiry process, we will investigate thedifferences between related terms, such as acculturation and socialization. Similarly, we will address caseswhere enculturation is not explicitly defined, but is taken for granted (e.g., Heath, 1983). We will conclude ourreview with a synthesis of uses of enculturation within the learning sciences.A Preliminary PerspectiveOur work thus far has led us to recognize several dimensions and open issues that are involved inconceptualizing the enculturation process. Table 1 summarizes various preliminary dimensions that we haveappropriated from our review of relevant literature, with a lens on distinguishing between natural, professional,and educational settings.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1519© ISLSTable 1: Preliminary dimensions comparing enculturation in different disciplines and settingsDimensionEnculturation in everyday lifeEnculturation inEducational settingsEnculturation in the workplaceContextEveryday life (with the manycultural practices orbehaviors, oftencontradictory)Schools (depends uponclarity and consistencyof school culture)Work (depends upon clarity andunification of organizationalculture)SizeCulture or community(usually large)Classroom or schoolcommunityOrganization; workplace(usually small)AgeExtends from day 1 to end oflife.Children (3-18) andadults (higher educationand adult education)Typically adultDurationGeneration to generationSemester, school year,several years in a schoolLifespan of a person’semploymentDesignedGenerally ambientIntentionality Generally ambientIn addition to these dimensions, there are also numerous open issues regarding the conceptual ambiguity ofenculturation. We have identified three main analytical axes: a) uni-directionally versus bi-directionality: b)stable versus dynamic nature; c) descriptive versus prescriptive notions. Directionality refers to whetherenculturation is viewed as a one-way street, from culture to individual, or if the individual also influences theculture. Stable versus dynamic refers to how and whether enculturation is conceptualized as something thatundergoes change. Finally, descriptive versus prescriptive notions refers to whether enculturation is different indesigned versus emergent settings.We hope to further examine these issues and refine our preliminary framework as we continue with ourextended literature review. This can ultimately contribute to how learning and becoming in practice, otherwiseknown as the process of enculturation, is theorized in the learning sciences.ReferencesBrown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided Discovery in a Community of Learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.),Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229-272). Cambridge,U.K.: The MIT Press.Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32-42.Heath, S. B. (1983). Ways with words: Language, life, and work in communities and classrooms. Cambridge,U.K.: Cambridge University Press.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, U.K.:Cambridge University Press.Rogoff, B. (1994). Developing understanding of the idea of communities of learners. Mind, Culture, andActivity, 1(4), 209-229.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.Shimahara, N. (1970). Enculturation - a reconsideration. Current Anthropology, 11(2), 143-154.Wertsch, J. (1985). Culture, communication, and cognition: Vygotskian perspectives. Cambridge, U.K.:Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1520© ISLS