Reel Science: Identity Development through FilmmakingRachel Chaffee, University of Rochester, Warner School of Education, Rochester, New York,rchaffee@u.rochester.eduAbstract: This study explores how four urban middle school girls co-constructed a sciencedocumentary film in an after-school science club. By examining the ways the girls engaged in“core” practices of science and a variety of science, film, and artistic tools and multimodalresources, this study seeks to understand how filmmaking provided unique opportunities forgirls to develop positive identities with respect to science.Researchers have begun to document and explore how youth-produced films provide opportunities for learningand engaging in positive identity development, particularly for youth who often struggle in school settings(Calabrese Barton & Tan, 2010; Halverson, 2010). Increasingly, researchers are attending to the wider range ofmultimodal resources and practices involved in constructing youth-produced films and the complex ways thatidentities materialize in and through multimodal texts and create new possibilities for meaning-making(Halverson, 2013; Phal, 2011). This study seeks to understand how four middle school girls participating in anafter-school science club co-constructed a science documentary film about bisphenyl A (1) (BPA) in theirbodies. By examining the multimodal construction of the film BPA and Our Bodies, this study explores howfilm production provided important opportunities for girls to engage in “core” scientific practices and how theseopportunities were taken-up or “lived” through multimodal resources. In addition, this study will provide insightinto how girls’ identities shape, and are shaped by, participation in culturally relevant science.Research FocusThe data for this study are taken from a longitudinal ethnographic study of urban middle and high school girls’identity development in an after-school science club intentionally designed to combat notions of science and“norms” of participation typically perpetuated in school-based science classes. The focus of this researchexamines the ways that a team of four girls engaged in the construction of a science documentary film over thecourse of 14 weeks. The core curriculum of the science club focused specifically on scaffolding girls’ authoringof a science story that was informed by engaging in four types of scientific practices: conducting an empiricalinvestigation, critically analyzing published scientific research studies, developing physical models of complexscientific concepts with artistic materials, and interviewing local expert scientists. These four scaffolded sciencepractices were designed to provide opportunities for girls to engage in both practices specific to the culture ofscience as well as provide a framework on which to build a film. This study explores the ways the team of girlstook up and modified these four science practices and engaged with a variety of science, film, and artistic toolsand resources in order to represent what they learned about the impact of BPA on the female body. Primary datasources for this study include participant-constructed artifacts, including the final film, participant journals, andvisual inquiry investigation maps and filmmaking storyboards. Additional data sources include participantobservation fieldnotes and memos, video and audio recordings of girls engaging in the construction of the film,and semi-structured interviews and a focus group with all four participants.Theoretical and Methodological FrameworksThis study adopts a cultural production theory lens on culture and learning as identity development. Culturalproduction theory shifts attention to how individuals engage in science in specific contexts with an eye towardsthe ways that culture is co-constructed and continuously unfolding in the moment (Eisenhart, 2001). Noblit(2013) writes that when culture is conceptualized as a verb, it becomes about actions; it “denotes a sense ofbecoming” or processes that are not just about sets of beliefs and practices but about the “reproduction andproduction by people in specific contexts” (p. 244). Cultural production theory provides unique affordances foraccounting for the “complex interplay” between individual agency (micro) and societal structures (macro) in theshaping of identities and how these tensions unfold over time (Carlone & Johnson, 2007, p. 1188). Culturalproduction theory provides a lens through which to examine how girls engage in science in specific contextswhile also recognizing the role that broader discourses (i.e. of school, science, gender) play in shaping thatengagement.In addition, this study draws on a social semiotic approach to multimodality that posits that all forms ofrepresentation and communication are multimodal and that multimodality implies a theory of learning becauselearning always entails meaning-making (Kress, 2010; Kress & Van Leeuwen, 2001, 2006). Kress (2010) arguesthat a social semiotic approach understands identity as connected to the semiotic and conceptual resources thatindividuals use to engage in communicating within their social and cultural worlds; although these social andcultural worlds are always shifting and changing, multimodality allows us access to understanding how inICLS 2014 Proceedings1557© ISLSparticular times and spaces, individuals make meaning by engaging through culturally relevant semioticresources. “Doing” science and making films requires that individuals to engage in concrete material “stuff”(e.g. chemicals, lab equipment, cameras, editing programs) that are specific to science and film; both rely onvisual and embodied modes of communication. The visual and embodied nature of scientific work (observing,representing) through different materials, or modes of communication and representation (i.e. graphs, tables,concept maps) are central to understanding the semiotics of multimodal communication in science (Kress,Jewitt, Ogborn and Tsatsarelis, 2001). As an analytic framework, multimodality provides a lens forunderstanding the ways that girls engaged with material and conceptual resources in service of authoring ascience story through film. As a text, the film provides evidence of how the girls produce their ownrepresentations of science, as well as what those representations tell us about the unique identities of those girls.By studying the various semiotic resources (e.g. images, music, printed words, gesture) the girls foregrounded inthe production of the film and how the girls took-up the scaffolded science resources and practices (highlightedabove) during the construction of the film, this study provides us with a deeper understanding of how this teamof girls enacted in a culture of science unique to this materially resource-rich environment.Potential significanceLearning science by engaging in core practices specific to the culture of science and constructing visualrepresentations of these practices through artistic mediums for the production of a film requires unique demandsof the learner. Analyzing and understanding how the construction of these multimodal representations supportspositive identity development provides important insights into how filmmaking provides opportunities to learnscience through the media that youth create, particularly for girls who lack opportunities to explore positiveunderstandings of themselves in school science classrooms. In addition, findings from this study deepen ourunderstandings of how historically marginalized girls become participants in science when provided withlearning spaces that actively combat traditional notions participation in science.Endnotes(1) BPA is a chemical produced primarily in the production of polycarbonate plastics and resins and can be found in foodand drink packaging. A synthetic hormone that mimics estrogen in the body, BPA has been shown to exhibit hormonelike properties in high doses and has been banned in numerous countries outside of the United States.ReferencesCalabrese Barton, A. & Tan, E. (2010). We be burnin! Agency, identity, and science learning. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 19, 187-229.Carlone, H. B., & Johnson, A. (2007). Understanding the science experiences of successful women of color:Science identity as an analytic lens. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44(8), 1187-1218.Eisenhart, M. (2001). Educational ethnography past, present, and future: Ideas to think with. EducationalResearcher, 30(8), 16-27.Halverson, E. R. (2010). Film as identity exploration: A multimodal analysis of youth-produced films. TeachersCollege Record, 112, 2352-2378.Halverson, E. R. (2013). Digital art making as a representational process. Journal of the Learning Sciences,22(1), 121-162.Kress, G. (2010). Multimodality: A social semiotic approach to contemporary communication. New York:Routledge. Kress, G. & van Leeuwen, T. (2006). Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual Design,Second Edition. London: New York: Routledge.Kress, G., Jewitt, C., Ogborn, J., & Tsatsarelis, C. (2001). Multimodal teaching and learning: The rhetorics ofthe science classroom. London: Continuum.Noblit, G. W. (2013). Culture bound: Science, teaching and research. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching,50(2), 238-249.Phal, K. (2011). My family, my story: Representing identities in time and space through digital storytelling.Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, 110(10), 17-39.AcknowledgmentsFunding for this research was provided by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1114481.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1558© ISLS