The Roles of Teacher Questioning inArgument-Based Inquiry (ABI): Approaches that PromoteCognitive Thinking and Dialogical InteractionYing-Chih Chen, Arizona State University, Mary Lou Fulton Teachers College, chenpeter78@gmail.comBrian Hand, University of Iowa, Teaching and Learning, brian-hand@uiowa.eduAbstract: The purpose of this study was to investigate the various questioning roleselementary teachers adopt to scaffold dialogical interaction, students’ cognitive responses, andthe use of evidence for constructing and critiquing ideas in argumentation over time. Thisstudy was designed as a follow-up study after a four-year professional development programthat emphasized an argument-based inquiry approach. Data sources included 30 sciencelessons focusing on whole-class discussion from three early elementary teachers’ classes.Data were analyzed through constant comparative method and enumerative approach. Thefindings indicated: (1) teachers used multiple roles in establishing argumentative discourse asthey persistently implemented an argument-based inquiry approach, (2) as teachers usedmultiple roles in establishing patterns of questioning, framing classroom interaction, students’higher levels of cognitive thinking was promoted, and (3) as teachers’ patterns of questioningchanged, the frequency of students’ talk increased and the dialogical interaction betweenstudents and teachers became more evidence-based and connected.IntroductionThe emphasis on argumentation in science education shifts the focus of science classrooms from memorizingfacts to engaging students in an authentic scientific practice in which they search for data patterns to shapeevidence for the support of scientific claims and debate those claims publicly to identify the weaknesses of theirarguments (Cavagnetto, 2010; Berland & Reiser, 2009). In this form, learning science is not simply about howto define vocabulary to explain content, but is rather about the ways in which questioning and evolvingquestioning techniques can be used to extend one's conceptual understanding of the subject matter. Theimportance of argumentation has been explicitly endorsed by two recent U.S. reform documents, TakingScience to School (National Research Council (NRC), 2007) and A Framework for K-12 Science Education(NRC, 2012), as a critical approach utilized in science classrooms for promoting student conceptualunderstanding and cognitive thinking.However, A Framework for K-12 Science Education (NRC, 2012) raised the critical point thatargumentation “has too often been underemphasized in the context of science education” (p. 44, NRC, 2012).The problem has not been so much the content of the lessons (Banilower et al., 2013) or the pedagogicalknowledge of the teachers (Ball, 2000), but rather the way teachers ask questions to engage students in thepractice of actively constructing and critiquing scientific knowledge (Hmelo-Silver & Barrows, 2008). Anational observation survey in the United States conducted by Banilower et al. (2013) found that more than 90%of questioning patterns in science lessons consist of low-level “fill-in-the-blank” questions, asked in rapid-firefashion to obtain the correct answer and move on, in effect short-circuiting student cognitive thinking. Teachersstruggle with developing appropriate and diverse roles for asking a series of high quality questions to establishargumentative discourse and foster students’ conceptual understanding and cognitive thinking (Oliveira, 2010).For Chin (2007), teachers’ questions “play an important role in determining the nature of discourse” (p. 815) forargumentation, including eliciting, comparing, challenging, and synthesizing students’ arguments in differentconditions.Developing appropriate and multiple roles of questioning in the establishment of argumentativediscourse is challenging and takes time (Martin & Hand, 2009; McNeill, & Pimentel, 2010). Addressing thischallenge requires examining teacher roles of questioning in the establishment of argumentative discourse aswell as examining the dynamic discourse patterns among teachers and students that can influence students’cognitive thinking (Oliveira, 2010). Many studies of this subject have dichotomized the types of teacherquestions into open- and closed-ended questions, which tend to oversimplify the role of teacher questioning inthe complexity of argumentative dialogue. This dichotomy also prevents teachers from developing multipleroles for argumentation. There is still much to be learned about supporting the development of teacher roles ofquestioning in promoting student ownership of learning, as well as about the relationship between teacher rolesof questioning and the way students use evidence to actively construct and critique knowledge.In addition, although U.S. national reform documents (NRC, 2007, 2012) have called forargumentation as a core practice of science classrooms across the entire K-12 grade span, the opportunities forearly elementary students to participate in scientific argumentation are practically “epistemologicallyimpoverished” (p. 51, Metz, 2011). Deficiencies in the cognitive development of early elementary students haveICLS 2014 Proceedings641© ISLSbeen misinterpreted as reasons why they are not able to participate successfully in scientific argumentation.Most previous studies have focused on upper elementary (e.g., Martin & Hand, 2009), middle (e.g., Nam, Choi,& Hand, 2011; Chin, 2007), and high school levels (e.g., McNeill, & Pimentel, 2010; Scott, Mortimer, &Aguiar, 2006). Little information currently exists on early elementary classrooms, even though researchsuggests that early elementary science practices are fundamental for developing cognitive thinking andscaffolding readiness capacities in multiple domains (Lee & Kinzie, 2012).This multiple-case study aimed to explore and conceptualize the roles of questioning that developed asearly elementary teachers attempted to implement an argument-based inquiry approach over four successiveyears and how those changes in teacher roles impacted on student engagement in argumentative processes. Thestudy was framed by the following research questions: (1) What roles do early elementary teachers adopt inargumentative discourse, especially in whole class discussion, when they use questioning as a tool to engagestudents in cognitive response over the course of four years? (2) How do the roles teachers adopt impact onstudents’ cognitive response? (3) How do the roles teachers adopt impact on the way students use evidence fordialogical interactions?Theoretical FrameworkResearch has suggested that teacher questioning is a major contributing factor to shape the role of teachers forpromoting dialogical interaction and students’ ownership of ideas (Scott, Mortimer, & Aguiar, 2006). However,Roth (1996) argued that teacher questioning is activity dependent. That is, the function of teacher questions isnot just about discussing ideas with students, but the teachers also need to have awareness of the ownership ofactivity situated in the moment of that context. For example, some classroom activities are still controlled by theteachers even if the ownership of discussion ideas belongs to students (Chin, 2007). In contrast, there are caseswhere activities are maintained by students but teachers may serve in the role of a coach to nudge studentstowards an understanding of canonical science knowledge. Thus, the role of teachers’ questions should beconceptualized based on ownership of ideas and activities. The following four categories of dialogical approachemerge.a.b.c.d.Teacher’s ownership of ideas/ Teachers’ ownership of activities involves the teacher guiding studentsand directing them to develop ideas and strategies for argument. Teachers control the ideas andactivities during dialogue.Students’ ownership of ideas/ Teacher’s ownership of activities involves encouraging students todevelop their own ideas through teacher-led dialogue. The teacher only intervenes in recognizing,comparing, and integrating students’ ideas to reach consensus. Teachers control the activity, but thedirection of dialogue follows students’ ideas.Teacher’s ownership of ideas/ Students’ ownership of activities involves the teacher allowing studentsto conduct activities but challenging students’ ideas and resolving their difficulties by asking questions.The teacher guides students’ ideas during the students’ activities.Students’ ownership of ideas/ Students’ ownership of activities involves the teacher and the studentsexchanging ideas and developing activities collaboratively through student-led negotiation. Studentscontrol their ideas and activities and the teacher is open to learning new concepts.By analyzing various questioning approaches and the associated teacher–student discourse, we usedthese four aspects to explicate the critical roles of the teacher in argumentation and to reveal some of thelimitations and functions of teacher roles of questioning for establishing dialogical patterns and students’ownership of learning.MethodsThis study took place in three early elementary science classrooms (Brielle and Susan were third grade teachers;Lynette was a second grade teacher) utilizing an argument-based inquiry (ABI) approach (Chen, & Steenhoek,2014; Martin & Hand, 2009) over a span of four consecutive years. This multi-case study employing a mixmethods approach (Creswell, 2003) was designed as a follow-up study after a four-year professionaldevelopment project that emphasized learning science as a negotiation process by embedding arguments inscientific inquiry activities using the ABI approach. This project attempted to aid elementary science teachers indesigning instruction around unit big ideas and provided opportunities for teachers to tie learning theory topedagogical practice. Three teachers were purposefully selected for this study from the 31 participating teachers.The criteria of selection was that (1) they taught early elementary grade levels, (2) they had no experience withimplementing argument-based inquiry in their classrooms before they participated in the project, and (3) theyhad completed data sources that enabled the researchers to trace their changes over time.ICLS 2014 Proceedings642© ISLSData CollectionThe major data sources were 30 science lessons taught by the three teachers over four consecutive years. Thoselessons were recorded by the three teachers when they engaged their students in public negotiation about claimsand evidence. Each lesson recorded was 25-45 minutes in length and focused on whole-class discussions after asmall group of students presented their written claim and evidence about a concept in science. The total time ofBrielle’s video-taped classroom observation was 364 minutes; Lynette’s was 280minutes; and Susan’s was 337minutes. The units taught in the three teachers’ classrooms were covered by National Standards (NRC, 1996)and State Standards, and included units such as plants, force, the three phases of water, and sound, etc.Data AnalysisTo triangulate the dynamics of and changes in the role of teachers’ questioning and the resulting impact onstudents’ engagement in argumentation, data were analyzed through two approaches: (1) the constantcomparative method (Strauss & Corbin, 1990) and (2) the enumerative approach (LeCompte & Preissle, 1993).What follows is a description of each approach.Constant Comparative MethodAll 30 science lessons focusing on whole class discussion were first transcribed and each transcript was brokeninto individual utterances. An utterance was defined as a unique idea contributing to the discussion. The totalnumber of utterances in Brielle, Lynette, and Susan’s classrooms were 1991, 1451, and 2407, respectively. Fourdifferent coding frameworks were developed to code the utterances to address three research questionsrespectively: teacher roles for questioning to address Research Question 1; student cognitive responses toaddress Research Question 2; evidence of quality and dialogical interaction to address Research Question 3. Thecoding system was established by five graduate students in the field of science education through an interactiveprocess of reviewing the transcripts. Any disagreements were discussed weekly until a consensus was reachedTeacher roles for questioning: The coding system was established through an interactive process ofreviewing the transcripts without utilizing a pre-existing coding system. As a result, the coding system included:lecture, guide, recognize, compare, integrate, challenge, elicit, exchange, and encourage. In order to simplifyand capture the representation of teacher questioning roles, we attempted to group these nine codes into morecomprehensive categories. The nine codes were categorized based upon these four roles. As a result, lecture andguide were categorized as dispenser; recognize, compare, and integrate were categorized as moderator;challenge and elicit were categorized as coach; and exchange and encourage were categorized as participant.Figure1. Framework for teacher roles of questioning from two combinations of ownership of ideas andownership of activityStudent cognitive responses: Codes developed through the analysis included: retrieve, express,elaborate, reframe, defend, synthesize, challenge, and justify. In order to categorize the codes into a hierarchicaltypology, the codes for cognitive processes were clustered into three levels using Bloom’s taxonomy. As aresult, retrieve and express were clustered in the low level (knowledge/comprehension); elaborate and reframewere clustered in the medium level (application/analysis); and defend, synthesize, challenge, and justify wereclustered in the high level (evaluation).Evidence of quality: Evidence is an explanation consisting of data and reasoning to show how or why aclaim is supported (Chen, Hand, & McDowell, 2013). Two coding schemes were developed to classify thequality of student evidence: without reasoning and with reasoning. If students simply expressed experience,reported data, or quoted information from books or the Internet as their evidence, it was coded as withoutICLS 2014 Proceedings643© ISLSreasoning. If the evidence included a justification for why it supported or rejected a student’s claim or evidence,it was coded as with reasoning.Dialogical interaction: The scheme included three codes: independence, trivialization, and connection.Utterances coded as independence represent any reaction that was not connected to evidence or ideas that hadbeen previously raised in classroom discussion. Utterances coded as trivialization represent any reaction thatwas shut down or that ignored previous evidence or ideas. Utterances coded as connection represent anyreaction that challenged, rejected, supported, or asked for elaboration about evidence or ideas that had beenpreviously proposed during discussion.Enumerative ApproachIn order to clearly and explicitly portray the changes over a four-year period in teacher use of questioning toengage students in argumentation, an enumerative approach was employed to quantify verbal data (LeCompte &Preissle, 1993).FindingsTeachers Increasingly Used Multiple Roles in Establishing Argumentative Discourseas They Persistently Implemented an Argument-Based Inquiry ApproachFour different roles in establishing patterns of questioning were increasingly adopted by the three teachers overthe four-year period. These included: dispenser, moderator, coach, and participant. In the first year, the mosttypical role adopted by teachers in classroom discussion was the dispenser, focused on getting a specificresponse. As Table 1 shows, 76% (193/254), 96% (123/128), and 56% (136/246), respectively, of Brielle,Lynette, and Susan’s questioning strategies fell in the role of dispenser in the first year.Table 1. Number and percentage of teacher roles for questioning used by the three teachers and students’cognitive responses over four yearsHowever, as teachers consistently implemented an argument-based inquiry approach, they developeddifferent roles for questioning in order to establish students’ ownership of ideas and activities. The moderatorICLS 2014 Proceedings644© ISLSrole was employed to synthesize students’ ideas as a consensus, leading the students to the development ofcanonical science concepts that were consistent with the teachers’ lesson goals. This type of questioning issimilar to Chin’s (2007) “verbal jigsaw” and “semantic tapestry” approach in that the teachers still maintainedtheir position of ownership for the discussion activity but students played active roles in verbalizing theirideas.Taking Brielle as an example, the percentage of utterances coded as moderator increased from 17%(44/254) in the first year to 60% (154/255) in the fourth year.Another role developed by the three teachers was that of the coach. For example, the coach role inSusan’s class increased from 4% (44/246) in the first year to 28% (43/156) in the fourth year. The purpose ofthis role was to elicit and challenge students to resolve discrepant views to build and strengthen the connectionsamong their preconceptions and a new concept, thereby broadening and deepening their conceptual network.The participant role was another salient strategy that the three teachers developed for argumentativeenvironments. For example, the coach role in Lynette’s class increased from 0% (0/128) in the first year to 14%(26/187) in the fourth year. This role provides students ownership of ideas and activities in which they activelyask questions, pose problems, and seek an explanation as a class.Taken together, the findings show a series of shifts in teacher roles for questioning from one single rolefocusing on controlling the ownership of ideas and activities toward multiple roles that provide for students’ownership of ideas and activities.As Teachers Used Multiple Roles in Establishing Patterns of Questioning, FramingClassroom Interaction, Students’ Higher Levels of Cognitive Thinking Was PromotedThe findings shows that as these teachers simply adopted the dispenser role for interacting with students, thestudents mainly engaged in lower-level cognitive activities, such as retrieving scientific vocabularies andproviding short answers (See Table 1). While the dispenser role is usually pitched at short answers and lowerlevel cognition, the moderator, coach, and participant roles usually required much longer student responses todefend, challenge, synthesize, and articulate claims and evidence as well as further prompted higher-levelcognition.Taking Brielle as an example, as her questioning patterns shifted away from a single, more teachercentered role to multiple, student-centered roles, students’ higher-level cognitive thinking was encouraged.Evidence of the shift in students’ cognitive response is supported by the increase of their utterances categorizedas medium and high, which grew from 14% (13/95) and 9% (9/95), respectively, in the first year to 36%(97/268) and 51% (138/268) in the fourth year.In the following discussion, several examples will be provided to demonstrate the differences andtrends in the four roles of teacher questioning over the four years as well as to illustrate how those questioningpatterns impacted students’ cognitive levels of response.As Teachers’ Patterns of Questioning Changed, the Frequency of Students’ TalkIncreased and the Dialogical Interaction Between Students and Teachers BecameMore Evidence-Based and ConnectedAs the teachers’ roles in establishing patterns of questioning were examined further, the data showed a parallelshift between teachers’ questioning patterns and students’ verbal participation. Figure 2 shows that students’argumentative utterances in an hour increased from the first to the fourth year (Brielle’s class from 140.1 to301.1; Lynette’s class from 177.6 to 295; Susan’s class from 199.8 to 321.1). Figure 3 portrays the trend of thechanges in students’ verbal participation in an hour. These changes in the relative frequency of students’argumentative utterances suggest that the learning environment became more student-centered andunthreatening, and that thus students were more willing to articulate their arguments.Figure 2. The Trend of Students’ Utterances over Four YearsAs students’ oral participation increased over the years, two distinct shifts regarding the quality ofdiscussion were found: (1) students came to discuss their ideas based on evidence, and (2) students began toconnect pieces of evidence to other evidence they had found.ICLS 2014 Proceedings645© ISLSEvidence-Based DiscussionTable 2 shows that the proportion of utterances where students used evidence to discuss their ideas increasedfrom 10% (15/145) in Brielle’s classroom, 9% (6/69) in Lynette’s classroom, and 14 % (11/80) in Susan’sclassroom in the first year to 68 % (149/220), 70 % (52/74), and 69% (119/173), respectively, in the fourth year.Table 2. The Quality of EvidenceBrielle (3rd grade)Lynette (2nd grade)Susan (3rd grade)Dialogical Interaction	  Figure 5 presents our analysis of the interactions during classroom discussion. In the first year, only 10%(21/222) of the utterances during discussion in Brielle’s class, 8% (16/211) in Lynette’s class, and 15% (52/356)in Susan’s class were linked to previous ideas in that the ideas reworded, justified, clarified or posed anelaborating question. However, in the fourth year, the utterances connected to previous ideas increased to 80%(417/523) in Brielle’s classroom, 77% (286/373) in Lynette’s classroom, and 75% (275/ 367) in Susan’sclassroom.Table 3. Dialogical Interaction during DiscourseBrielle (3rd grade)Lynette (2nd grade)Susan (3rd grade)Summary of FindingsTable 4 summarizes the findings across the four major features that emerged along the time span involved. Thefirst feature was that during the four years of the study the teachers increasingly used four roles to establishargumentative discourse; this is referred to as an increasing richness of the teacher role, rather than relying onlyon the dispenser role as they had in the first year. As the shift in the use of multiple roles occurred, students’cognitive responses were promoted to higher and more complex levels. Students were also observedconstructing and critiquing ideas in a more evidence-based form. The final feature was that students alsobecame more likely to link their ideas back to previous contributions made by the teacher and their peersthrough defending, challenging, synthesizing, and justifying. The findings imply that to promote studentengagement teachers should go beyond one single role for questioning and should play multiple roles to tackledifferent situations by considering student ownership of ideas and activities (Crawford, 2000; Walshaw &Anthony, 2008). With the support of teacher questioning, this study suggests that even early elementary studentsICLS 2014 Proceedings646© ISLScan successfully engage in productively argumentative practices.Table 4. Trend of features of teacher questions and classroom discourse over four yearsYear 1Teacher Role ofQuestioningSingle role: Teachersfocused on dispenser roleto lecture and directclassroom discourse. Theownership of ideas andactivities controlled by theteachers.Students’ CognitiveResponseSimplicity: Students’discourse was restricted tolow-level cognition, suchas retrieving andexpressing ideas.Evidence-basedDiscussionSimple: High proportion ofutterances focused onsimple response.Independence: Students’utterances wereindependent. Classroomdiscussion was dominatedby teacher talk.Dialogue InteractionYears 2 & 3Transition: Teachersgradually developedmoderator, coach, andparticipant roles inquestioning to promotestudents’ diverse dialogue.The ownership of ideasand activities shifted fromthe teacher to the students.Transition: Students’discourse shifted tomedium- and high-level,such as elaborating,reframing, defendingchallenging, synthesizing,and justifying ideas.Transition: Students cameto use evidence to discusstheir ideas.Transition: Students cameto link back to what otherstudents had said.Student voices increased,and teacher’s voicedecreased.Year 4Richness: Teachers usedmultiple roles ofquestioning to supportstudents’ thinking andconversation. Students hadmany opportunities to takeownership of ideas andactivities.Complexity: Students’discourse was in high-levelcognition, such asdefending, challenging,synthesizing, and justifyingideas.Evidence-based: Highproportion of utterancesfocused on evidence.Connection: Studentsactively connected theirutterances to previousideas. Classroomdiscussion was dominatedby student talk.DiscussionWhile many studies on teacher role of questioning have simply dichotomized the type of questions into open/closed end and disconnected the two types of questions, this current study conceptualizes four roles of teacherquestioning based on the tension between ownership of both ideas and activities to better represent thecomplexity of argumentative environment. Significant is that the ABI approach requires students to engage inknowledge construction and critique; therefore, the function of the shifting roles of teacher questioning is tofully implement an approach that pushes students to be involved in and take ownership of construction andcritique in generating arguments. The function of teacher questions is not just about discussing ideas withstudents, but the teachers also need to have awareness of the ownership of activity situated in the moment ofthat context. As the examples demonstrate in the four role, the purpose and function of teacher questions can bevaried depend on the tension between ownership of ideas and activities.Although the moderator, coach, and participant roles promoted higher-level cognition in studentresponses, the three teachers in this study also continued to adopt the dispenser role in the fourth year (Brielle:22%; Lynette: 31%; Susan: 8 %). This finding raises essential questions about whether teachers shouldeliminate the dispenser role to successfully engage students in argumentative practices. Oliveira (2010)suggested that teachers should aim to better understand the important cognitive functions of differentquestioning strategies and the situations in which they can apply those strategies to help students effectively andproductively develop conceptual understandings. Thus, instead of simply abandoning the adoption of thedispenser role, educators should realize how the different roles can elicit different cognitive results for differentpurposes and contexts. More research is needed to determine both the best times and contexts to use thedifferent roles in argumentative environments and the most appropriate sequence for using different roles toadvance students’ conceptual understanding.The development of different roles to support student argumentation requires time. In this study, it tookthe three teachers years to shift their classroom environments to a more reform-based model. An increasingbody of empirical evidence suggests that it takes more than 18 months before significant shifts in teachers’questioning pedagogy are observed (Martin & Hand, 2009). Therefore, this study supports Luft’s (2001)suggestion that teacher professional development should be designed systematically and should consist ofongoing training. The various roles of teacher questioning should be viewed as an essential component ofICLS 2014 Proceedings647© ISLSprofessional development in order to expedite the shift in teachers’ practices from a teacher-centered approachto a more student-centered orientation.ReferencesBall, D. L. (2000). Bridging practices: Intertwining content and pedagogy in teaching and learning to teach.Journal of Teacher Education, 5(3), 241-247.Banilower, E. R., Smith, P. S., Weiss, I. R., Malzahn, K. A., Campbell, K. M., & Weis, A. M. (2013). Report ofthe 2012 National Survey of Science and Mathematics Education. Horizon Research, Chapel Hill, NC.Berland, L. K., & Reiser, B. J. (2011). Classroom communities' adaptations of the practice of scientificargumentation. Science Education, 95(2), 191-216.Cavagnetto, A. R. (2010). Argument to foster scientific literacy: A review of argument interventions in K–12science contexts. Review of Educational Research, 80(3), 336-371.Chen, Y.-C., Hand, B., & McDowell, L. (2013). The effects of writing-to-learn activities on elementarystudents’ conceptual understanding: Learning about force and motion through writing to older peers.Science Education, 97(5), 745-771.Chen, Y.-C., & Steenhoek, J. (2014). Arguing like a scientist: Engaging students in core scientific practices. TheAmerican Biology Teacher, 76(4), 231-237.Chin, C. (2007). Teacher questioning in science classrooms: Approaches that stimulate productive thinking.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44(6), 815-843.Crawford, B. A. (2000). Embracing the essence of inquiry: New roles for science teachers. Journal of Researchin Science Teaching, 37(9), 916-937.Creswell, J. W. (2003). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches. ThousandOaks, CA: Sage Publications.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Barrows, H. S. (2008). Facilitating collaborative knowledge building. Cognition andInstruction, 26(1), 48-94.LeCompte, M. D., & Preissle, J. (Eds.). (1993). Ethnography and qualitative design in educational research(2nd ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.Lee, Y., & Kinzie, M. (2012). Teacher question and student response with regard to cognition and language use.Instructional Science, 40(6), 857-874.Luft, J. A. (2001). Changing inquiry practices and beliefs: The impact of an inquiry-based professionaldevelopment programme on beginning and experienced secondary science teachers. InternationalJournal of Science Education, 23(5), 517-534.Martin, A. M., & Hand, B. (2009). Factors affecting the implementation of argument in the elementary scienceclassroom: A longitudinal case study. Research in Science Education, 39(1), 17-38.McNeill, K. L., & Pimentel, D. S. (2010). Scientific discourse in three urban classrooms: The role of the teacherin engaging high school students in argumentation. Science Education, 94(2), 203-229.Metz, K. E. (2011). Disentangling robust developmental constraints from the instructionally mutable: Youngchildren's epistemic reasoning about a study of their own design. Journal of the Learning Sciences,20(1), 50-110.Nam, J., Choi, A., & Hand, B. (2011). Implementation of the science writing heuristic (SWH) approach in 8thgrade science classrooms. International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 9(5), 11111133.National Research Council. (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching science in grades K-8.Washington, DC: National Academy Press.National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Oliveira, A. W. (2010). Improving teacher questioning in science inquiry discussions through professionaldevelopment. Journal for Research in Science Teaching, 447(4), 422-453.Scott, P. H., Mortimer, E. F., & Aguiar, O. G. (2006). The tension between authoritative and dialogic discourse:A fundamental characteristic of meaning making interactions in high school science lessons. ScienceEducation, 90(4), 605-631.Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Open coding. In A. Strauss & J. Corbin (Eds.), Basics of qualitative research:Grounded theory procedures and techniques (2nd ed., pp. 101-121). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Walshaw, M., & Anthony, G. (2008). The teacher's role in classroom discourse: A review of recent research intomathematics classrooms. Review of Educational Research, 78(3), 516-551.ICLS 2014 Proceedings648© ISLS