Science Sims and Games: Best Design Practices and Fave FlopsMina C. Johnson-Glenberg, Arizona State University, mina.johnson@asu.edu (Chair)Caroline Savio-Ramos, Arizona State University, casavio@asu.eduKatherine K. Perkins, University of Colorado Boulder, kathy.perkins@colorado.eduEmily B. Moore, University of Colorado Boulder, emily.moore@colorado.eduRobb Lindgren, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, robblind@illinois.edu (Co-Chair)Douglas Clark, Vanderbilt University, doug.clark@vanderbilt.eduCorey Brady, Inquire Learning, cbrady@inquirelearning.comPratim Sengupta, Vanderbilt University, pratim.sengupta@vanderbilt.eduMario Martinez-Garza, Vanderbilt University, mario.m.martinez@vanderbilt.eduDeanne Adams, Vanderbilt University, deanne.adams@gmail.comStephen Killingsworth, Vanderbilt University, skillingsworth@gmail.comGrant Van Eaton, Vanderbilt University, grant.vaneaton@vanderbilt.eduMatthew Gaydos, University of Wisconsin Madison, gaydos@wisc.eduAmanda Barany, University of Wisconsin Madison, amanda.barany@gmail.comKurt Squire, University of Wisconsin Madison, kdsquire@education.wisc.eduNathan Holbert, Northwestern University, nholbert@gmail.comAbstract: We represent a variety of educators and designers who have in common a deepconcern about the quality of STEM learning and how new media tools are designed and used.These tools run the range of interactive simulations to embodied games with full arcnarratives. We believe there is not one correct way to instruct in science using new media. Forexample - some formats (e.g., whiteboard vs. tablet) may be better for some learners (low vs.high prior knowledge) in some situations (single learner vs. small group) on some content(abstract vs. concrete). Our goal is to highlight some of the games and simulations we havedesigned and disseminated, and to explore their strengths and weaknesses. Each participantwill present an original work, show a demo, present data on efficacy, and finally shareanecdotes about what was done well and what could have been improved.Embodied Science Education: Design Principles and Rolling It OutMina C. Johnson-Glenberg and Caroline Savio-RamosThe Embodied Games for Learning (EGL) lab creates learning scenarios. These are interactive motion capturegames that are designed to increase K-12 student learning. Along the way we have learned several extremelyvaluable lessons about design and real world dissemination. We begin with our game design precepts, move toresults, and then end with several lessons learned – many of them the hard way.The EGL lab is somewhat different from other learning game design labs is that we integrate gestureand novel motion capture technologies (for example, the Microsoft Kinect sensor and Leap Motion) where theyare most efficacious for learning. The affordances of the myriad, rapidly-evolving technologies are exciting butchanging so quickly that no one can remain an expert in the most innovative tech for long. The technology alsohas effect on our STEM topic choices. We would rather create a levers curriculum than focus solely onpolynomial equations, because we can readily envision how the arm can act (and be tracked) as a lever. Whenwe design we follow these precepts:• Make it embodied – with as much gestural congruency as possible. This means that the gesture matchesthe content (e.g., spinning your arm in a circle to the right makes the virtual gear rotate in a clockwiserevolution).• Socio-collaborative- build in discourse opportunity and space for reflection, require observing studentsto do meaningful tasks• Make it generative – constructive and active• Wrap in narrative – make them care• Give immediate performance feedback• Level up in cycle of expertise - AI adaptive if possible (We like to use machine scoring algorithms aswell.)• Try to include user-created content - Students should be producers, not just consumers of technology.It takes time and more programming funds to build user-friendly editors that allow users to inputcontent, but it greatly pays off in increases in motivation and “stickiness”.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1199© ISLSOur first embodied learning environment was a mixed reality platform (Milgram & Kishino, 1994)called SMALLab (Situated Multimedia Learning Lab) (D. Birchfield, Johnson-Glenberg, Savvides, MegowanRomanowicz, & Uysal, 2010). This system used 12 infrared motion-tracking cameras either mounted in aceiling or on a trussing system. The cameras record where in 3D space a student is holding a rigid-bodytrackable object (the wand). The floor space is 15 x 15 feet and so it feels VERY immersive to the student in thespace (generally two at a time). By dipping the wand below a certain level on the Z axis, a virtual objectprojected on the floor could be “grabbed” by the wand and moved to another location (like a typical “drag anddrop” interaction). Two notable differences between this platform and a traditional desktop one are that studentscan 1) locomote through the immersive environment and be tracked, and 2) the affordance of the openenvironment that an entire class can sit around the perimeter and partake in the lesson via observationallearning. (See why locomotion is important and a Taxonomy of Embodiment in Education in (M. C. JohnsonGlenberg, Birchfield, Tolentino, & Koziupa, 2014).Observing students who are on the perimeter of the SMALLab active space are encouraged tocollaborate via discussion and whiteboard activities while the two active students in the SMALLLab space areinteracting with the system. The effectiveness of this platform has been demonstrated in several content domainsinclude language arts (Hatton, Birchfield, & Megowan-Romanowicz, 2008), STEM- physics (M.C. JohnsonGlenberg, Birchfield, Savvides, & Megowan-Romanowicz, 2011); (Tolentino et al., 2009); geology (DavidBirchfield et al., 2009), and Disease Transmission (M. C. Johnson-Glenberg et al., 2014) . We found that anentire classroom (up to 30 students) would remain engaged for an entire 50 minute lesson with this large scaleplatform. Part of that may be because the observing students were often given roles – to be recorders of whatwas happening or to write out predictions. In addition, there is an intense performative nature to the situation.Every student knows his/her turn will eventually arrive and the students do not want to fail in front of theirpeers. We try to make the tasks low stakes and game-like, but we believe this expectation of performance drivesa fair share of the sustained attention. All of our teachers were delighted with this aspect of the system.Switching PlatformsFigure 1. Alien Health game using Kinect and vertical projectionThe SMALLab system was a powerful learning platform, but it was costly and not very mobile, so we starteddesigning for the skeletal tracking sensor called Microsoft Kinect. We were able to keep the performative natureintact as students must still come to the front of the room and perform in front of an Interactive Whiteboard(IWB). However, now that the virtual surface is vertical and smaller (typically an IWB has a 7 foot diagonal) wesee changes in the learning dynamics. With this transition we noticed that whole classroom engagement fell offafter a period of time. We describe the Alien Health Game as an example. This is an embodied exergamedesigned to teach 4th through 12th grade students about nutrition and several USDA My Plate guidelines. Asubmitted study assessed efficacy and accessible (M. C. Johnson-Glenberg & Hekler, submitted) 2013 - in theSMALLab space. We observed full engagement for the one hour class for 4th graders. However, when theplatform was altered to the Kinect (vertical and smaller) and we tested it on 20 6th and 7th graders, we noted thatattention was not highly maintained after fifteen minutes (or after the first three dyads played).The Kinect PilotParticipants were randomly assigned to either the Alien Health game or a treated control condition that alsoperformed in front of a whiteboard. Players learned about the amount of nutrients and optimizers in commonfood items and practiced making rapid food choices while engaging in short cardio exercises. All playersengaged in “front of the class” performative activities at the IWB. The alien would get progressively morefatigued if fed the poorer food choice. See Figure 1. The match pair in this image includes a bran muffin versusa cupcake. The Alien Health group experienced the game narrative of feeding the alien and the Kinect sensorgave feedback on quality of cardio exercise. The control group experienced the same performative food choicesat the IWB, but did not perform the cardio exercises. Significant learning gains were seen in both groups on theICLS 2014 Proceedings1200© ISLSimmediate posttest. The Effect Sizes from pretest to two week follow-up were .83 for control and 1.14 for theexperimental group- significant but not differentially so. However, we did see a crossover interaction fromimmediate posttest to follow-up that approached significance, F(19)= 3.96, p < .058, that favored the experimentalgroup. Thus, students retained more knowledge after doing the exercises on a two week follow-up. Several ofour studies have demonstrated gains are not always evident on immediate posttests but become evident atfollow-up – and at that follow-up point the gains favor the embodied learning group.In sum, participants who use more bodily gestures appear to show better retention of knowledge after aperiod of “consolidation”. We encourage our colleagues to include follow-up tests when possible. We will alsodiscuss why a memory trace may be stronger when content is learned via embodiment and the challenges ofdelivering professional development to the teacher community using new technologies. We look forward to aparticipatory section at the end of all presentations where we (Drs. Johnson-Glenberg and Lindgren) will collateideas from members of the audience on best design and implementation practices for simulations and games forlearning. The goal is to then share those principles with a broader community.Blending Implicit Scaffolding and Games in PhET Interactive SimulationsKatherine K. Perkins and Emily B. MooreSince 2002, the PhET Interactive Simulations project at University of Colorado Boulder has been engaged inresearch around effective simulation (sim) design strategies for supporting inquiry-based learning of science.Our design approaches and strategies aim to simultaneously support multiple educational goals. In addition todeveloping knowledge of and engaging students in science content, process, and practices (NGSS Lead States,2013), we seek to attend to student motivation and ownership by creating environments where studentsexperience control and choice over the learning experience, and perceive the experience as challenging butinteresting and attainable (Pintrich, 2003).Implicit scaffolding in interactive simulations has emerged as a powerful design approach for achievingthese multiple goals (Moore, Herzog, & Perkins, 2013; Podolefsky, Moore, & Perkins, Submitted) – drawing onthe education research literature (e.g., Bransford et al., 2000; Norman, 2002; Mayer, 2009) and our experienceof designing over 100 interactive simulations (e.g., Podolefsky et al., 2010). Implicit scaffolding employsaffordances, constraints, cueing, and feedback in order to frame and scaffold student exploration withoutexplicit guidance. Successful designs leverage what students know (e.g. buckets hold things, scissors cut), cuefocus on important factors through intuitive designs (e.g. cuing attention to chemical formulas through moleculecollection boxes or to key parameters by using sliders), tap into natural curiosities (e.g. spark “what if?” or“why?” questions), and support building of knowledge (e.g. using tabs to scaffold complexity). Whensuccessful, students perceive the sims as engaging, open exploration spaces, while the implicit scaffoldingprovides cuing and guidance so students are inclined to interact with the sim in productive ways.In this presentation, we will focus on PhET simulations which utilize both implicit scaffolding andeither implicit or explicit games to create a learning environment. The games – while relatively simple – aredesigned to target development of core concepts and learning goals and to enable users to test and revise theirunderstanding. Interviews and classroom testing look for evidence that the challenges in the game supportstudent sense-making around and productive progress towards learning of core concepts – as opposed tolearning to “game the system” without progress towards learning the content. If the latter is found, the game isrevised or removed. Through the overall simulation design and use of multiple screens, students retain choiceand control over their learning experience – freely moving between exploring simulation features and screens,and working on solving game challenges.Figure 2. Screenshot of the Build a Molecule simulation showing implicit game (left) on startup and (right)during use – with Jmol window open showing a three-dimensional molecule representation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1201© ISLSWe provide evidence of the effectiveness of these design approaches using data from studentinterviews and classroom use of the Build a Molecule simulation (Figure 2). The simulation goals are to supportstudents in integrating pictorial and symbolic chemical representations, and in interpreting and producingchemical formulas with coefficients and subscripts. In the classroom study, the simulation was used in anactivity by three 5th grade classes, with a total of 64 students. Students were given pre, post and delayed postassessments. Significant increases – pre-post gains ranging from 23% to 78% – were found in the amount ofcorrect responses to all assessment questions involving writing chemical formulas from molecule pictures ordrawing molecules from chemical formulas.“How Do I Move This?”: The Delicate Dance of Control Mechanisms inEmbodied Science Learning SimulationsRobb LindgrenThe emergence of computer interface devices that accept gross physical movement as input has facilitated a newparadigm of educational technologies where a learner can use their bodies as a vehicle for understanding novelconcepts and giving access to transformative ideas. Computer-mediated simulations equipped with motiontracking technologies allow learners to interact with scientific and other phenomena in ways that may be moreintuitive and expressive (Johnson-Glenberg, Birchfield, Tolentino, & Koziupa, 2013), and they have thepotential to leverage body-based metaphors for developing complex understandings (Antle, Corness, &Droumeva, 2009; Lindgren & Moshell, 2011). Despite this potential, designing body-based interactions indigital environments that engender desired effects of insight and robust conceptual development is non-trivial.One issue is that that the physical actions that a user is prompted to perform (e.g., using arms and hands to pusha virtual button or move a virtual slider) may not be sufficiently commensurate with the learning goals of asimulation (Lindgren & Johnson-Glenberg, 2013; see also Segal (2011) for “gestural congruency”). Anotherissue is that body-based interfaces to simulations may offer insufficient or ambiguous control mechanisms thatmake it challenging for learners to map the activity of their body onto simulation events and outcomes. There issometimes a tendency, for example, to “pack too much” into the translation of a single body action, whichdisrupts a learner’s ability to effectively utilize the interface metaphor. Here I discuss strategies and lessonslearned for the design of control mechanisms for embodied science learning simulations.Previous research suggests that students often struggle to acquire effective strategies for scientificexperimentation such as adopting a control of variables strategy to isolate the effects of a specific parameter(e.g., Schauble, Glaser, Duschl, Schulze, & John, 1995). Typical science learning simulations do little toalleviate this struggle by frequently making multiple parameters available for simultaneous manipulation—picture the prototypical simulation as one with some phenomenon (e.g., shooting an object up in the air)depicted graphically and a series of slider bars and/or input boxes located off to the side. Simulations that take ingross motor movements have an analogous problem in that these actions operate in three dimensions and canconsist of multiple temporal components, meaning that a single physical action such as waving one’s hand in theair has the ability to correspond to multiple simulation parameters. And even if the physical action correspondsto only one parameter in the simulation, it can be challenging and ultimately unsatisfying for a learner todiscover that only one aspect of their physical act—side-to-side movement in the horizontal plane, forexample—has a consequential effect on the simulation.I observed these interface challenges firsthand as my research team was designing an immersive mixedreality floor-projection-based simulation of planetary astronomy that aimed to build middle school students’intuitions about the physics of how objects move in space. The simulation was built around the metaphor of“learner as asteroid” where the user would utilize their body to set the asteroid into motion and then activelypredict its subsequent trajectory based on the presence of gravitational forces (i.e., nearby planets). In the firstiteration of the simulation learners launched the asteroid simply by walking off a virtual platform; the simulationregistered the position and velocity of the learner at the point they crossed the “launch line.” From a technicalstandpoint this was a seamless interface mechanism because it allowed the simulation to transition from theparameter specification phase to running the simulation without interruption. From a learning perspective,however, the fact that all three pertinent launch parameters (horizontal position, angle, and speed) were beingset simultaneously with one step across the line led to numerous instances of confusion about how to control theasteroid’s movement and what were the respective effects of the various parameters. As a result, there were nosignificant knowledge gains for the students using this version of the simulation compared to a control conditionthat used a desktop computer version of the same simulation. In a subsequent, second iteration of the simulationwe changed the launching mechanism to a virtual spring in a tube instead of a platform (Figure 3 left). Using ascheme of arrows and highlighted “hot areas” learners were directed to use their bodies to set the threeparameters sequentially. Learners caught on quickly to bodily conventions for setting the spring launcher andexhibited a greater awareness of how each parameter affected the asteroid trajectory. Most importantly, learningresults from the study utilizing the second iteration control mechanisms showed a significant advantage for theICLS 2014 Proceedings1202© ISLSlearners using the bodily controls compared to the desktop version (Lindgren, Tscholl, Johnson, Glasshof, &Moshell, 2014).Figure 3. A participant using their body position to set the launch parameters via a virtual spring (left) and aparticipant using their body to control the frequency of a wave (right).The emphasis on control mechanisms in science learning simulations has been extended into the designefforts of subsequent body-based simulations in other areas of science that will be demonstrated in the session.For example, in an immersive simulation of waves, rather than having participants replicate the literalmovement of waves across space, they are instead being prompted to enact individual components of wavebehavior such as frequency; learners use their bodies to anticipate the number of cycles per a given unit of time(Figure 3 right). The possibilities for embodied interactions for generating powerful learning experiences inscience is expansive, but successful body-based interfaces will require special attention to mechanisms ofcontrol, and taking great care to convey to a learner how their gross movements translate to simulationparameters and ultimately to core science concepts.Evolving and Balancing Informal and Formal RepresentationsDouglas Clark, Corey Brady, Pratim Sengupta, Mario Martinez-Garza, Deanne Adams, Stephen Killingsworth,and Grant Van EatonSchool science, with its traditional focus on explicit formalized knowledge structures and learning but notapplying factual knowledge, frequently does not address tacit understandings, and thus does not support studentsin revising their intuitive misconceptions. Interestingly, well-designed digital games are exceptionallysuccessful at helping learners build accurate intuitive understandings of the concepts at the heart of the gamesdue to the situated and enacted nature of good games (e.g., Gee, 2007). Most commercial games fall short asplatforms for learning because they do not help people articulate and connect their evolving intuitiveunderstandings to more explicit formalized structures that would support transfer of knowledge to new contexts(e.g., Masson, Bub, & Lalonde, 2010). Our thinking about bridging these two approaches parallels Vygotsky’s(1978) thinking about using everyday ideas to bootstrap formal ideas.Figure 4. Surge Classic.The granularity of the focal representations in a game, however, involves a careful balancing act tosupport this bootstrapping. Figures 4 and 5 show the progression of representations across our grants. Ouroriginal NSF SURGE grant included explorations of a relatively “realistic” 3D representation. Players enjoyedthe visual perspective, but the 3D representation and disconnect from formal representations made bridgingintuitive and formal knowledge difficult (Clark et al., 2011).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1203© ISLSFigure 5. Surge 2 Fuzzy Chronicles (left) and SURGE 3 Away Missions (right).Our subsequent DOE EPIGAME grant focuses on a 2D representation that integrates formalrepresentations including dot traces, time lines, force magnitudes, and vector representations. Krinks, Sengupta,and Clark (submitted) found that this type of structure supports students in developing intuitive understanding asthey shift in terms of the p-prims (diSessa, 1988, 1993) they leverage in their explanations, but Van Eaton,Clark, and Beutel (2013) have found that teachers and students connect their intuitive understanding to formalunderstanding in ways that support their initial misconceptions about the formal understanding. To address thesechallenges, our current research on this project focuses on leveraging self-explanation (Clark & Martinez-Garza,2012; Adams & Clark, submitted) and integrated graphing activities (Sengupta et al., 2013).Our NSF EGAME grant currently includes an exploratory focus on a highly schematized 1Drepresentation of motion directly and tightly integrated and controlled through formal disciplinary graphicalrepresentations. This approach builds on a long history of having students match motion with graphs, controlmotion with graphs, or create graphs through motion with motion sensors. The most detailed work to date in thisarea was conducted as part of the SimCalc projects, beginning with MathCars (Kaput, 1994) and laterMathWorlds (Roschelle & Kaput, 1996; Hegedus & Roschelle, 2013). SURGE1D extends SimCalc’s use ofCartesian graphs as control structures that have “representational expressivity,” (Hegedus & Moreno-Armella,2009) in two critical ways. First, it uses the Cartesian space as a means for communicating critical gameinformation to the player. For instance, the SURGE1D position graph holds forecasts about regions in the gameworld that will be affected by electrical storms, as well as about locations where rewards or allies will appear torendezvous with Surge. The velocity and acceleration graphs likewise indicate constraints on game-play, such asmaximum or minimum speeds and maximum accelerations, each of which can be tied to narrative elements ingame scenarios. SURGE1D also extends the expressivity of Cartesian representations by introducing the notionof a moving frame of reference. Both the challenges and the benefits to learners of representing relative motionhave been recognized by researchers (Radford, 2009), and the importance of the selection of a reference frame isfundamental to the learning and practice of physics. In SURGE1D, the “camera” can be placed at any fixedlocation in the game-world, and it can also be mounted on a non-player character that moves at a constantvelocity. The resulting transformations of graphical space offer opportunities for exploring narratives thatinvolve making sense of other perspectives on the game-world.Essentially, while our initial approach focused more on layering formal representations over informalrepresentations, we are now exploring approaches that layer informal representations over formalrepresentations while organizing gameplay explicitly and formally around navigating and coordinating acrossrepresentations. Whereas SimCalc focuses on manipulating formal representations to achieve goals in theinformal representation, we are attempting to extend SimCalc approaches by (a) integrating the goals directlyinto the formal representations in a way that projects onto the informal representations and (b) supporting theintegration through advanced self-explanation functionality and representation decomposition.Methods for Supporting Professional Practice and Video Game BasedResearchMatthew Gaydos, Amanda Barany, and Kurt SquireEffectiveness and SupportOne of the most difficult challenges that educational technologies have faced has not been in the development ofsuccessful learning interventions, but in moving such interventions from the laboratory to the classroom,especially at scale (Cohen & Ball, 2001; Gomez, Gomez, & Gifford, 2010). Supporting the development anduse of educational technologies means establishing teacher buy-in and ownership over the curriculum (Cohen &Ball, 2001; Gomez et al., 2010; Kwon, Wardrip, & Gomez, 2008). Educational video games similarly, requirethat researcher and developer designs be coordinated with teacher and administrator support. That is, in orderICLS 2014 Proceedings1204© ISLSfor games to be effectively and sustainably used in formal education settings, they must not only be contentladen and effective, but supported by local agents – those who will utilize them.In this presentation, we summarize findings from two case studies conducted as a part of an on-goingdesign-based research project centered on the educational video game Citizen Science. In each case, CitizenScience was used in authentic classroom settings. Its use was observed, documented and analyzed in order toexamine teacher-designed curricula that 1) suggest modifications for future game designs and 2) suggestobstacles that may need to be addressed in similar game-based contexts.The game Citizen ScienceCitizen Science is an action/adventure role-playing game designed to teach students civic-science literacy asrelated to lake ecology. In game, players engage in dialogues with non-player characters (NPCs) that representstakeholder groups, collecting evidence in order to argue with NPCs and advance the game’s narrative. Thegame is setting-specific, as players travel back and forth through time in Madison, WI, in order to convincelocal non-player characters to change their minds about how they use the local lakes. The goal of the game is tochange the conditions of a local natural resource, Lake Mendota, especially so that the lake does not becomehyper-eutrophic. If the lake were to become hyper-eutrophic, negative effects on the community could includefish die-offs because of decreased oxygen levels, unpleasant smells especially around the shoreline, increasedtoxic blue-green algae blooms, and an unattractive, murky aesthetic. Using elements typically found incommercial adventure video games including character, fantasy, humor, and strong role induction, CitizenScience is designed to provide students with an engaging and positive game-based experience, informationabout lake science content related to taking civic action within the local community, and the willingness to takeaction to improve the health of local lakes.With regards to its intended use, Citizen Science was designed to be integrated into already-existingeducational contexts, supported through teacher-developed curriculum. Within a classroom context and with thehelp of a teacher, the game’s content could be reviewed, explained, and connected to its accompanyingcurriculum. This curriculum, in turn, can vary widely depending on the teacher’s particular needs or educationalgoals. In the two cases that follow, we briefly describe the context and the petite generalizations (Stake, 1995)that characterize the game’s relationship with established curricula.Two Cases of Citizen Science Use in ClassroomsIn the first case, seven middle school students played Citizen Science as a part of a three-day science curriculumat a private school for the gifted and talented. Student learning was measured using an ad hoc multiple-choicequestionnaire that covered game-related content and was administered at the beginning and end of theintervention. Students’ scores on these tests showed improvement, increasing on average by 26% (SD = 16%)from pre- to post-test. The teacher and students’ video and audio-recordings were reviewed and selectivelytranscribed for activities and dialogues in which the students and teachers were interacting with or explicitlyreferring to the game. During the intervention, students played the game during the first two days of class. Onthe third day, students and their teachers visited a local lake, where they made general observations of the lake’secosystem, took water samples that were later examined under microscopes, and discussed local lake issues andecology concepts with each other and with their teachers. Throughout the field trip, the teachers explainedecology concepts in terms of students’ prior experiences, including previous classes they had taken, coursematerial they had covered, and Citizen Science game play. For example, the teacher explicitly asked students toconnect the scientific measurement practices that they conducted during the field trip to the parallel practicessimulated within the game.In the second case, 75 seventh grade students in a public middle school Life Science classroom playedCitizen Science over the course of two days as the lake ecology portion of a five-week ecology unit. Studentlearning was measured by completion of an online worksheet in which students practiced organizing andcreating evidence-based arguments using content from the game (results being analyzed now). Students alsodemonstrated their use of evidence-based argumentation in final projects. During the two-day curriculum, theteacher used note cards as a tool to mediate the intersecting needs of the school administration and the gamebased curriculum. At the end of each class, the teacher asked students to briefly hand-write “one thing that theylearned and one question they had” as a result of game play. In so doing, the teacher designed a simple tool thatfunctioned as a formative assessment that could be referenced in class. E.g., the teacher referenced the notecards at the start of the second day of the curriculum, using student responses to prompt a discussion about bluegreen algae. Because some students had incorrectly written that all algae could be fatal, the teacher wanted toclarify that only particular types produced toxins. These note cards thus served a dual function that we willexplore in the talk.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1205© ISLSDiscussionTogether, these cases highlight the importance of providing support for educational games in terms of theirintegration into curriculum with respect to content, and their integration into practice with respect to localconstraints. In the first case, the teachers’ practices suggest a need for support that helps draw connectionsbetween material referenced within the game to activities within the classroom. The note cards used in thesecond case highlight the need to develop assessments that can be used to meet content-based and institutionalconstraints. Similar to Hoadley’s use of design narratives (2004) to promote understanding and ultimatelyreliability within messy, authentic contexts, video game based learning would benefit from techniques thatencourage sharing game-specific educational practices. Our hope is that by presenting these cases of CitizenScience use within classrooms, we might prompt a discussion of how such sharing can be better promoted,particularly with regards to game design and educator practice.Exploring the Particulate Nature of Matter in a Constructionist Video GameNathan HolbertMany video games include rich science phenomena and principles that players frequently encounter during playmaking them potentially powerful spaces for STEM learning. Designers interested in the educational potentialof video games often attempt to create new games that both enhance the science phenomena commonlyembedded in games as well as provide carefully orchestrate interactions that ensure players encounter thetargeted phenomena. While many educational games have been shown to produce in players learning gains onmeasures that directly align with in-game action and mechanics, these same games often fail to show playerimprovement on distal problems (Clark & Martinez-Garza, 2012). This result suggests that while players maybe gaining expertise with the game, they are not achieving a deep understanding of the concepts that underliegame mechanics.Rather than design scripted experiences that ensure players confront targeted phenomena, I haveexplored game designs that privilege freedom and exploration. Borrowing heavily from the constructionistdesign paradigm which has been shown to be a powerful means of facilitating deep exploration of STEMconcepts (Papert & Harel, 1991; Papert, 1980), these games engage players in the building of personallymeaningful artifacts to overcome obstacles and challenges met in the course of more traditional genre gameplay.Particles! (Holbert & Wilensky, 2012), is a platformer game that encourages players to explore how thephysical properties of matter emerge from the arrangement of molecular-level particles.Particles! DescriptionParticles! was designed to have the look and feel of a platformer video game while including principles centralto the constructionist design paradigm (Papert & Harel, 1991). As in most platformer games, players are taskedwith moving through a level full of obstacles to reach a locational goal. However, in Particles! players modifythe game level as they play through it by removing existing world blocks and adding new designed blocks.Players design these new blocks at the molecular level—by adding and removing bonds between atoms to createlarge and complex molecular structures (Figure 6 left). These player-designed structures then serve as a templatefor the many molecules that populate the larger block that will be added to the game world. When these newblocks are added, they have physical properties emergent from the player-designed structures (such asbounciness or slipperiness), which in turn provides new options for how the player might complete each gamelevel (Figure 6 right). These acts of construction encourage players to engage deeply with the mechanics of thegame as well as the scientific principles (bonding and molecular structures) that are infused in these mechanicsgaining a sense of the role molecular structure plays in object properties.Figure 6. Players add and remove bonds between atoms to create molecular structures in the “atomizer” (left).These player-designed structures result in new emergent properties for blocks added into the game world (right).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1206© ISLSIn addition to including meaningful opportunities for construction, the atoms and bonds central toblock building in Particles! visually and epistemologically align with the ball-and-stick model—an importantrepresentation used in the formal practice of chemistry. This visual similarity, and the alignment between themeaning and use of the representation in-game and in the formal domain, encourages players to see in-gameblock construction as a useful knowledge resource when thinking and reasoning outside of the game.Method and DataNine players, ages 11-14, were recruited from various non-school gaming clubs. Semi-structured clinicalinterviews were conducted with the participants 1-week before and after playing the prototype game. Interviewsand game play occurred in informal settings and focused around the description of and explanations for thephysical properties of Lego and Styrofoam blocks present during the interview. Interviews were videotaped,transcribed and analyzed for player invoked “concepts” using a coding scheme developed bottom-up frommultiple passes of the data. In addition, participant drawings of the atoms that make up each interview blockwere analyzed for feature changes before and after playing the game.Results and DiscussionIn this presentation I will show how participant explanations of the causes of material properties shifted afterplaying Particles! from focusing on the identity of the substance to more complex explanations of how thearrangement and structure of the particles that make up a substance might result in observed properties. In thepre-game all nine participants suggested the “identity” of the material (71 times) primarily determines anobject’s properties while only five participants claimed properties are due to the arrangement and structure ofthe particles (24 times). In the post-game all nine participants were more likely to cite the structure andarrangement of block particles (57 times) as well as related constructs such as bonding as primarily responsiblefor observed properties. Eight participants also mentioned material identity (43 times). Furthermore, participantdrawings of the particles that make up each interview block were significantly more likely to include imagesthat showed many particles arranged in a specific pattern with many using the particular grid arrangementutilized in the game.These findings indicate participants shifted from attributing object properties solely to the identity ofatoms and elements that make up the object to both identity and structure. Furthermore, this shift seems to havebeen facilitated by participants’ experiences with game mechanics as in-game representations became central inparticipant explanations and drawings. The results suggest Particles! unique design may have provided playerswith a rich set of knowledge resources that they can freely access when thinking and reasoning in a variety ofcontexts. Furthermore, the success of Particles! offers important insight into possible design mechanics that canelicit deep learning in informal game play.ReferencesAdams, D. & Clark D. B. (submitted). Integrating self-explanation functionality into a complex gameenvironment: Keeping gaming in motion. Computers & Education.Antle, A. N., Corness, G., & Droumeva, M. (2009). What the body knows: Exploring the benefits of embodiedmetaphors in hybrid physical digital environments. Interacting with Computers, 21(1), 66-75.Birchfield, D., Campana, E., Hatton, S., Johnson-Glenberg, M., Kelliher, A., Olson, L., . . . Uysal, S. (2009).Embodied and mediated learning in SMALLab: a student-centered mixed-reality environment. Paperpresented at the ACM SIGGRAPH 2009 Emerging Technologies, New Orleans, Louisiana.Birchfield, D., Johnson-Glenberg, M., Savvides, P., Megowan-Romanowicz, M. C., & Uysal, S. (2010). DesignPrinciples for Embodied Learning in Computer-Mediated Environments. Paper presented at the AnnualConference of the American Educational Research Association (AERA), Denver, CO.Clark, D. B., Nelson, B., Chang, H., D’Angelo, C. M., Slack, K. & Martinez-Garza, M., (2011). ExploringNewtonian mechanics in a conceptually-integrated digital game: Comparison of learning and affectiveoutcomes for students in Taiwan and the United States. Computers & Education, 57(3), 2178-2195.Cohen, D. K., & Ball, D. L. (2001). Making change: Instruction and its improvement. Phi Delta Kappan, 83(1),73–77.Gomez, L. M., Gomez, K., & Gifford, B. R. (2010). Educational innovation with technology: A new look atscale and opportunity to learn. Educational Reform: Transforming America’s Education throughInnovation and Technology.Hatton, S., Birchfield, D., & Megowan-Romanowicz, C. (2008). Learning metaphor through mixed-reality gamedesign and game play. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium onVideo Games, Los Angeles, California.Hegedus, S. J., & Moreno-Armella, L. (2009). Intersecting representation and communication infrastructures.ZDM, 41(4), 399-412.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1207© ISLSHegedus, S., & Roschelle, J. (Eds.). (2013). The SimCalc vision and contributions: Democratizing access toimportant mathematics. New York, NY: Springer.Hoadley. (2004). Methodological alignment in design-based research. Educational Psychologist, 39(4), 203–212.Holbert, N., & Wilensky, U. (2012). Particles! Evanston, IL: Center for Connected Learning and Computerbased Modeling.Johnson-Glenberg, M. C., Birchfield, D., Tolentino, L., & Koziupa, T. (2014). Collaborative embodied learningin mixed reality motion-capture environments: Two science studies. Journal of EducationalPsychology. , 106(1), 86-104.Johnson-Glenberg, M. C., & Hekler, E. B. (2013). " Alien Health Game": An embodied exergame to instruct innutrition and MyPlate. Games for Health: Research, Development, and Clinical Applications, 2(6),354-361.Krinks, K., Sengupta, P., & Clark, D. B. (submitted). Conceptual change in physics through use of digitalgames. Journal of the Learning Sciences.Kwon, S., Wardrip, P. S., & Gomez, L. M. (2008). Co-design of interdisciplinary projects as a mechanism forschool capacity and teacher professional community growth. In Proceedings of the InternationalConference of the Learning Sciences.Lindgren, R., & Johnson-Glenberg, M. C. (2013). Emboldened by embodiment: Six precepts for research onembodied learning and mixed reality. Educational Researcher, 42(8), 45-52.Lindgren, R., & Moshell, J. M. (2011). Supporting children’s learning with body-based metaphors in a mixedreality environment. Proceedings of the Interaction Design and Children Conference, Ann Arbor, MI,177-180.Lindgren, R., Tscholl, M., Johnson, E., Glasshof, C., & Moshell, J. M. (2014). Learning and engagement effectsof embodied interactions within an immersive science simulation. Paper presented at the AnnualMeeting of the National Association for Research on Science Teaching, Pittsburgh, PA.Masson, M. E., Bub, D. N., & Lalonde, C. E. (2011). Video-­‐game training and naïve reasoning about objectmotion. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 25(1), 166-173.Mayer, R. E. (2009). Multimedia Learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Milgram, P., & Kishino, A. F. (1994). Taxonomy of mixed reality visual displays. IEICE Trans. Informationand Systems., E77-D(12), 1321-1329.Moore, E. B., Herzog, T. A., & Perkins, K. K. (2013). Interactive simulations as implicit support for guidedinquiry. Chemistry Education Research and Practice. 14, 257-268.Norman, D. A. (2002). The Design of Everyday Things. Basic Books.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms. New York: Basic Books.Papert, S., & Harel, I. (1991). Situating constructionism. In Constructionism. New York: Ablex Publishing.Pintrich, P. R. (2003). A motivational science perspective on the role of student motivation in learning andteaching contexts. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(4), 667–86.Podolefsky, N. S., Moore, E. B., & Perkins, K. K. (submitted). Implicit scaffolding in interactive simulations:Design strategies to support multiple educational goals.Podolefsky, N. S., Perkins, K. K., & Adams, W. K. (2010). Factors promoting engaged exploration withcomputer simulations. Physical Review Special Topics-Physics Education Research, 6(2), 020117.Radford, L. (2009). Signifying relative motion: Time, space and the semiotics of Cartesian graphs. In W. M.Roth (Ed.), Mathematical representation at the interface of body and culture (pp. 45–69). Charlotte,NC: Information Age Publishing.Schauble, L., Glaser, R., Duschl, R. A., Schulze, S., & John, J. (1995). Students' understanding of the objectivesand procedures of experimentation in the science classroom. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,4(2), 131-166.Segal, A. (2011). Do gestural interfaces promote thinking? Embodied interaction: Congruent gestures anddirect touch promote performance in math. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Columbia University,New York.Stake, R. (1995). The art of case research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.Tolentino, L., Birchfield, D., Megowan-Romanowicz, C., Johnson-Glenberg, M. C., Kelliher, A., & Martinez,C. (2009). Teaching and learning in the mixed-reality science classroom. Journal of Science Educationand Technology, 18(6), 501-517.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1208© ISLS