Controlling for Statistical Dependencies in CSCL Using GeneralEstimating EquationsE. Michael Nussbaum, Gwen C. Marchand, University of Nevada, Las Vegas4505 Maryland Parkway, Box 453003, Las Vegas, NV 89154-3003nussbaum@unlv.nevada.edu, Gwen.Marchand@unlv.eduAbstract: Statistically analyzing small-group discourse in CSCL requires controlling forstatistical dependencies among group members that arise from the fact that group membersinfluence one another’s behaviors. Although some researchers in the learning sciences haveaddressed this problem by using multilevel modeling, that approach requires large group sizes.This poster presents an alternative approach, known as General Estimating Equations (GEE),which is more suitable when small groups such as dyads or triads are analyzed.The ProblemComputer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) by definition involves group tasks and group learning.CSCL research often involves experimental and quasi-experimental research that employs statistical hypothesistesting to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of different instructional designs on students’ discursivebehaviors. The problem addressed in this poster is that student behaviors are not statistically independent fromone another, which violates basic, underlying statistical assumptions of many analytic methods.By way of illustration, suppose students in a study (N = 150) are randomly grouped into triads andasked to engage in a synchronous discussion about some topic. Furthermore, half the triads receive some sort ofintervention to improve the quality of the arguments made during CSCL discussion (Weinberger, Stegmann, &Fischer, 2010), such as being given information on group members’ prior opinions (Buder & Bodemer, 2008).The other half of the triads do not receive the intervention. The number of counterarguments and rebuttalsgenerated in the discussions is found to be higher in the first condition than in the second, but is the differencestatistically significant? 	  A t-test could be performed, using the formula for the standard error: Sqrt(2σ2/N).	  	  What in this caseis the effective N? It cannot be all 150 students, because there are not 150 statistically independent data points;the members of each triad affect one another. If one student offers a counterargument, her partner might do soas well for purposes of refutation. Furthermore, students also often imitate one another’s discourse moves(Anderson	   et	   al.,	   2001).	   	   As	   a	   result,	   the	   chance	   of	   obtaining	   relatively	   more	   extreme	   observations	  increase	   because	   one	   extreme	   observation	   begets	   another If	   we	   treat	   the	   observations	   as	   statistically	  independent,	  we	  will	  underestimate	  this	  probability,	  increasing	  the	  chance	  of	  Type	  I	  errors.	  	  On	   the	   other	   hand,	   we	   could	   treat	   the	   triads	   as	   the	   unit	   of	   analysis,	   but	   doing	   so	   reduces	  statistical	  power,	  because	  the	  effective	  N	  is	  now	  only	  50	  rather	  than	  150.	  	  This	  problem	  has	  been	  typically	  addressed	   by	   using	   a	   multilevel	   model	   (see	   Cress,	   2008),	   which	   fits	   a	   separate	   regression	   line	   for	   each	  small	  group.	  	  However,	  Hox	  (2010)	  recommends	  that	  there	  should	  be	  a	  minimum	  of	  20	  students	  in	  each	  group;	   otherwise,	   the	   regression	   estimates	   will	   not	   be	   reliable.	   	   Small-­‐groups,	   such	   as	   triads,	   clearly	   do	  not	   meet	   the	   sample	   size	   criterion.	   	   As	   a	   result,	   researchers	   must	   either	   use	   multi-­‐level	   model	  inappropriately	   or	   use	   groups	   as	   the	   unit	   of	   analysis.	   	   In	   this	   paper,	   we	   propose	   a	   solution	   that	   has	   rarely	  been	   used	   in	   CSCL	   and	   other	   learning	   sciences	   research.	   	   The	   solution	   involves	   a	   new	   application	   of	   an	  existing	  methodology.	  The Proposed Solution: General Estimating Equations (GEE)The GEE methodology (Hardin & Hilbe, 2003) also attempts to adjust for statistical dependence in clusters ofobservations but unlike multilevel modeling, does not require the clusters to be large. It therefore is a moreuseful methodology for analyzing behavior in small groups, as long as there are a sufficient number of clusters.GEE models statistical dependence by estimating to what degree student behaviors are correlated. Forexample, to what extent are the number of counterarguments generated by one person in a triad correlated withthe number of counterarguments generated by another? Fifty dyads would provide 50 data points. Unlikemultilevel modeling, the GEE methodology does not attempt to estimate regression lines for each group.Technical DetailsThe procedure begins by estimating a working correlation matrix. With dyads, only one correlation needs to beestimated, but if there three or more members in a group, a matrix would be estimated. In the case of threemembers, the working correlation matrix would be:ICLS 2014 Proceedings1487© ISLSR=,where p1 is person #1, p2 is person #2, etc. Three correlation parameters would need to be estimated, but wecould make a simplifying assumption that all three parameters are equal to one another (this option is known asusing an “exchangeable” structure). This is not a mandatory assumption, and one can test which type ofcorrelation matrix (exchangeable, unstructured, etc.) best fits one’s data. One can also assume an autoregressivestructure if the statistical dependence is associated with repeated measurements. If there is doubt about whichcorrelational structure is correct, a “robust” standard error can be estimated that is less sensitive to choice of thecorrelation structure.The second step is to use one’s statistical model to generate predicted values for each individual (i = 1…N) on the dependent variable. From the predicted means one can calculate associated variances based ongeneralized linear models (for example, in analyzing counts using Poisson regression, the variance equals themean). If there are three members in each group, a 3x3 diagonal variance matrix is generated for each of the jgroups, (Aj)1/2, and this matrix is multiplied by the working correlation matrix R (and (Aj)1/2 again) to produce a3x3 variance-covariance matrix, Vj . The third step is to calculate a p x p variance-covariance matrix, where p isthe number of parameters in the overall regression equation. For example, if there is one predictor, then therewould be two parameters (an intercept and slope), and so the variance-covariance parameter matrix would be2x2. It is calculated using the following formula:. The matrices forthe different groups are then summed, and the final matrix used to derive standard errors or to update parameterestimates. Further details and a more detailed example can be found in Nussbaum (in press).The GEE methodology is currently available in various statistical packages, such as Stata, SAS,MATLAB, and R. It is also currently available in SPSS, but only for time-series data.ConclusionsThe GEE methodology can be used to control for statistical dependencies among group members whenanalyzing data for individuals engaged in collaborative learning. The methodology does not require the groupsto be large, but there should be a large number of groups (at least 30). This stands in contrast to multilevelmodeling, which requires fewer but bigger groups. The GEE methodology is currently underutilized in CSCLand other learning sciences research (but for exception, see Lin et al., 2012). This poster will hopefully raiseawareness on the merits of this approach.ReferencesAnderson, R. C., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., McNurlen, B., Archodidou, A., Kim, S., Reznitskaya, A., Tillmanns, M., &Gilbert, L. (2001). The snowball phenomenon: Spreading ways of talking and ways of thinking acrossgroups of children. Cognition and Instruction, 19(1), 1-46.Buder, J., & Bodemer, D. (2008). Supporting controversial CSCL discussions with augmented group awarenesstools. International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 3, 123-139.Cress, U. (2008). The need for considering multilevel analysis in CSCL research—An appeal for the use ofmore advanced statistical methods. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 3, 69-84.Hardin, J. W., & Hilbe, J. M. (2003). Generalized estimating equations. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall.Hox, J. (2010). Multilevel analysis: Techniques and applications (2nd ed.). Hoboken: Taylor & Francis.Lin, T.-J., Anderson, R. C., Hummel, J. E., Jadallah, M., Miller, B. W., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., Morris, J. A., Kuo,L.-J., Kim, I.-H., Wu, X., & Dong, T. (2012). Children’s use of analogy during collaborativereasoning. Child Development, 83(4), 1429-1443.Nussbaum, E. M. (in press). Categorical and nonparametric data analysis: Choosing the best statisticaltechnique. NY: Taylor & Francis.Weinberger, A., Stegman, K., & Fischer, F. (2010). Learning to argue online. Scripted groups surpassindividual groups (unscripted groups do not). Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 506-515.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1488© ISLS