Influence of Public Design Critiques on Fifth Graders CollaborativeEngineering Design WorkMichelle E. Jordan, Arizona State University, Mary Lou Fulton Teachers College, Farmer Education Building1050 S Forest Mall, Tempe, AZ 85287–1811, Email: Michelle.e.jordan@asu.eduAbstract: Understanding how young students learn to engage in collaborative designpractices entails understanding social interaction processes that occur beyond collaborativegroups. The purpose of this study was to understand how talk generated during whole-classpublic design critique sessions influenced collaborative groups in subsequent small-groupwork sessions. Analysis focused on data from one fifth-grade class in which students werechallenged to collaboratively design, build, and program robots. Video-recorded andtranscribed whole-class interactions from three design critique sessions across the second,third, and fourth day of a 14-day robotic engineering design project were examined in order tocategorize the types of comments made by the teacher and students relative to the nascentdesign solutions of three focal groups. Collaborative discourse from subsequent small-groupwork sessions was then examined in order to understand what ideas students took up, as wellas how they took them up and to what effect.IntroductionGrounded in socially oriented theories of learning that emphasize the role of social interaction (Bransford,Brown, & Cocking, 1999; Greeno, 2006; Rogoff, 1990), learning scientists frequently attend to importantdimensions of interactional patterns among group members for increasing the potential of learning fromcollaborative experiences. Fewer scholars have investigated how social interaction in the broader classroomcontext (i.e., with classmates and teachers) influences small-group collaborative project experiences andoutcomes (but see Greiffenhagen, 2012; Roth, 1995). Such investigations, motivated by a learning sciences’focus on authentic learning in complex contexts, needs to include research on ill-structured problems and designprojects because such experiences entail the complex authentic tasks that learning and becoming in practiceentail. Thus, the study described here focuses on one important practice identified in the ICLS 2014 conferencetheme, engaging in design, by exploring learning opportunities afforded through design critique processesrelated to fifth graders’ collaborative engineering design projects. Drawing on data from a 14-session challengeto collaboratively design, build, and program robots, analysis focused on social interaction that occurred aroundthree public design critique sessions in which students presented their engineering projects-in-progress andreceived formative feedback from their teacher and classmates. Two research questions guided analysis:• What was the nature of talk elicited from the teacher and students during the design critique sessions?• How did students take up ideas from design critique sessions in subsequent small-group work sessions?The aim of the study was to understanding how public design critique processes influence the design activity ofearly adolescents learning to engage in collaborative engineering design in order to increase knowledge of howclassroom-level social interaction influences learning from collaborative design projects.Theoretical FrameworkLearning scientists and educational researchers increasingly investigate the use of engineering design projectswith children and young adolescents as understanding of the affordances of design for learning increases (e.g.,Kafai & Ching, 2004) and as K12 engineering education gains prominent attention (e.g., NRC, 2009, 2011).Helping learners engage in engineering design favors project-based instruction as design tasks are open in theirproblem specification and solutions (Dorst, 2003). Constructionist theorists emphasize that learning is moreeffective when children make their own projects, construct their own ideas, and design their own solutions toproblems (Bers, 2008, Papert, 1980). Furthermore, design activities have been shown to be more effective thandirect instruction for helping students learn complex science concepts (Hmelo, Holton, & Kolodner, 2000) andhelping students see the connections between science concepts and solutions to real world problems (Kolodneret al., 2003). Engineering design projects not only help students improve their ability to build things, but alsounderstand what the building of things entails (Sadler, Coyle, & Schwartz, 2000). Additionally, the ill-structurednature of such projects can help students learn to cope with the uncertainty inherent in design endeavors (Jordan& McDaniel, in press). Finally, engineering design projects may be particularly effective for engaging younggirls and other under-represented students in STEM learning (Laursen, Liston, Thiry, & Graf, 2007). These arecompelling reasons for K-12 educators to create and implement engineering design projects. Yet, there is stillmuch to understand about the social interaction processes that facilitate learning from such projects.More broadly, design tasks entail the creation of an idea or physical artifact through thinking andmanipulating tools and/or materials. Design practices cut across disciplines, and design literacy is seen by someICLS 2014 Proceedings1166© ISLSscholars and practitioners as a crucial need of the 21st century (Pendleton-Jullian & Brown, 2011). Designpractices have most often been investigated in fields such as architecture, engineering, and computerprogramming, and in the post-secondary education literature pertaining to those fields. Design tasks areunderdetermined because a design cannot be fully defined by the problem statement. Designers must rely oncreativity to generate a unique product. However, they are not free to invent anything; problem constraintspartly determine a problem. Engaging in design involves iteratively redefining the problem and choosing amongmultiple paths that can be taken to infinite, unpredictable solutions (Jonassen, 2000).Social interaction plays critical roles in design endeavors. Design is situated action that takes placeover time through social interaction and reflection (Fleming, 1998). Communication among engineering teammembers is widely recognized as a fundamental aspect of design processes (Darling & Dannels, 2008) andlearning to design (Jordan & Babrow, 2013). Engineering design also requires the ability to communicateeffectively beyond the design team through online and face-to-face mediums (Jordan, 2014; Otto & Wood,2000). Most notably for the purpose of this study, design critique sessions (DCS) are important opportunities forsocial interaction to facilitate learning. Used extensively in settings such as art schools, design studios, andengineering labs, DCS usually consist of public formative feedback related to an individual or group’s ongoingdesigned project (Sawyer, 2012). The importance of DCS lays in that the teaching of design depends oncommunication among design students and teachers. Social interaction during DCS consists of cyclicalprocesses of “telling and listening” and “demonstrating and imitating” (Demirbas, 2001). It draws attention toefficient and effective solutions as well as to design inconsistencies while facilitating knowledge exchangerelated to procedural aspects of design (Uluoglu, 2000). Ideally, students develop arguments about the validityof design solutions, defend their solutions, develop ideas and refine their projects (Schaffer, 2003). However,critical feedback can be difficult for students to accept and make use of in subsequent drafts of design work.Previous analysis focused on discourse in the DCS, identifying shifts in social interaction patterns thatsignaled learning across the three design critique sessions. These included shifts (a) from talk focused onhelping students deal with negative feedback to helping students consider needs of the customer, (b) from talk inwhich classmates talked only to the teacher and the presenters to talk in which classmates talked to presentersand to each other, the use of only sketches in presentations of design solutions to use of built structures andwebsites as discursive tools, (c) from reliance on self-generated design ideas to accepting and valuing remixesof other’s creations incorporated into designs (See Kafai, Fields, & Burke, 2010), and (g) from reporting designideas to co-constructing design ideas. Additionally, across the DCS, there was an increase in authority taken upby students, and a focus on structures and functions gave way to integrated talk about structures, behaviors, andfunctions (Jordan, in press). The current study builds on these findings by conducting a more fine-grainedanalysis of discourse related to three focal groups’ design solutions during DCS and by expanding analysis toinvestigate the influence of those sessions on subsequent collaborative interactions.MethodsThe setting for this study was a regular fifth-grade class in a suburban school district in the southwest US. The24 ethnically and academically diverse students in the class included 15 girls and 9 boys. Their teacher, Ms.Stevens (all names are pseudonyms), had 20 years of experience and was recognized in the district for herexpertise in STEM instruction. Engineering experiences were part of the regular curriculum in this class. Ms.Stevens implemented instruction primarily around engineering challenges utilizing Lego robotic Mindstormskits. Students engaged in three collaborative engineering challenges across the school-year, working in three-tofour-member groups and changing membership for each project. Projects 1 and 2 were well-structured taskspre-determined by the teacher to help students learn collaborative engineering knowledge and practices. Project3 (the focus of this study) was an ill-structured design task: to design, build and program a robot to address anenvironmental problem identified by each group. Six four-member groups were assigned by the teacher for thisproject. Three of those groups, each of whose membership was diverse in gender, ethnicity, and academicachievement, were selected for focal analysis. The Water Washer group created a remote-controlled paddle boatto clean lake pollution. The Claw Grabber group designed a wheeled-vehicle with a claw operated via touchsensors to pick up trash for people with mobility impairments. Finally, the Recycling Rover designed a vehiclewith a trailer that operated via a light sensor, transporting recyclable materials down colored paths.During Project 3, the teacher organized instruction around 14 instructional days across one month,during which small-group work sessions were punctuated by whole-class mini-lessons (just-in-time topics) andteacher check-in meetings. The analysis described here focuses on data associated with the first four days of theproject. Day 1 began with each group brainstorming possible projects. On Day 2, after settling on and sketchingout their initial designs during a 40-minute work session, the class was called together by Ms. Stevens andDCS1 convened. Each group in turn presented their project progress and received critical feedback and designideas from their teacher and the rest of the class. Members of a presenting group clustered at the front of theroom around a document camera and a computer used to project artifacts on a Smartboard. Physical artifactscame into play as students displayed sketches, structures, and websites to explain and defend their designICLS 2014 Proceedings1167© ISLSdecisions. The teacher then led an evaluative discussion, offering questions, critiques and suggestions, andeliciting them from students. Two more DCS were convened over the next two days, interspersed between worksessions during which groups continued to refine and prototype their design ideas.Data consist of (a) video recordings and transcripts of each DCS, (b) transcripts of work sessions preand post DCS for three focal groups, (c) expanded observational field notes, (d) transcripts of semi-structuredinterviews with students and the teacher, and (e) artifacts associated with the project (i.e., photos of structures,written reflections, project wiki pages, computer programs). The first step of analysis was to create content logsof video recordings of DCS and all small-group work sessions of the three focal groups. Next, transcripts of allDCS were created and checked to verify accuracy. I drew on structure-behavior-function (SBF) theory (HmeloSilver & Pfeffer, 2004) to categorize the nature of talk generated during the DCS sessions for each group.Structure refers to the physical nature of the engineered system that students were designing, including howparts were connected (e.g., “Is that attached to the transporter?”); behavior refers to mechanisms that allow thefunction to be carried out (e.g., “You can program it to read different things on one program, too”); and functionrefers to purpose of the system or a subsystem (e.g., “That’s a large-scale recycling; it’s not just about keepingmy house dust free”). Turn-by-turn analysis was conducted to identify the number of comments related to eachcategory that were elicited by the teacher and by students, including statements, ideas, and questions.The next step of analysis focused on understanding how the talk in DCS influenced subsequent smallgroup interaction. This step was informed by and sociolinguistic analysis of discourse (Erickson, 2004) andinteraction analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) in that is focused on identifying how events were structured,how artifacts and tools were used, and how participants were making sense of each other’s actions as theyrelated to collaborative design processes. In keeping with the goals of these analytical frameworks, I examinedsocial interaction in the focal collaborative groups prior and subsequent to DCS to identify regularities in howparticipants within and between groups utilized social and material resources available in the context in whichthey were operating (e.g., ideas generated in DCS). Making extensive memos and annotations, I examined waysin which the three focal groups took up opportunities that were afforded in the three DCS for learning andmaking progress with their robotic engineering design project. Finally, I identified progress on each group’sproject pre- and post-critique design sessions. Throughout analysis, trustworthiness was addressed throughprolonged engagement, analysis of multiple data sources to triangulate emerging interpretations, and multipleviewing of recording with peer reviewers.FindingsComments Elicited During Design CritiquesTable 1 shows the number of comments offered by the teacher and by students during the design critiquesessions as they related to structures, behaviors, and functions of the three focal groups’ design solutions. It thusprovides an overview of what was discussed as well as an indication of how discourse about design solutionschanged over time. Overall, more talk focused on structures (total of 78 ideas) than behaviors (total 53) orfunctions (total 44). Teacher comments were more evenly spread across the three categories (48:34:39), whilemore than half of the student comments pertained to structures (30:19:5). This finding is consistent with pastresearch that novices tend to focus on perceptually available system components (i.e., structures), whereasexperts cohesively integrate structural, functional, and behavioral elements (Hmelo-Silver & Pfeffer, 2004).Across the three DCS, the number of SBF comments generated in each session dropped for all three groups.Also, the proportion of teacher-generated ideas decreased over time, relative to student-generated ideas, in allthree groups. For the Water Washer and Claw Grabber groups, more comments were elicited from students thanfrom the teacher in DCS3.Table 1: Ideas elicited across three design critique sessionsWater Washer GroupClaw Grabber GroupRecycling Rover Group*DC1 DC2 DC3DC1 DC2 DC3DC1 DC3TeacherStructures 10161Structures411Structures96generatedBehaviors864Behaviors550Behaviors60ideasFunctions2311Functions610Functions70DC1 DC2 DC3DC1 DC2 DC3DC1 DC3StudentStructures2811 Structures201Structures33generatedBehaviors341 Behaviors134Behaviors12ideasFunctions300 Functions100Functions10*note that the DCS sessions were only convened for the Recycling Rover group two timesICLS 2014 Proceedings1168© ISLSThe Water Washer group garnered the largest number of SBF comments in all three DCS. Their earlystruggles to design a robot that met the specification to address an environmental problem were evident in thefirst DCS, during which the teacher presented 28 ideas related to the function of this group’s design (“a robot toheat and cool and clean your pool”). That the group successfully re-tooled the function of their robot subsequentto DCS1 is reflected in a shift in DCS2 and DCS3 toward comments about structural aspects of their design.The Claw Grabber group garnered the lowest number of SBF comments from the teacher and fromtheir classmates. Their total of 35 ideas was far less than the 110 garnered by the Water Washer group and evenless than the 40 garnered by the Recycling Rover Group in just two DCS. Perhaps the teacher and students alikeshied away from critiquing this group in which one member, Adriana, became visibly upset after the teachernegatively critiqued the group’s original design for a robotic tire pressure reader. Although the teacher endedthis group’s DCS1 with, “I’m going to have you all work on that a little bit more,” the group ultimately droppedthe idea. Following DCS1, they went back to the drawing board and brainstormed an initial conception of theirClaw Grabber robot. This idea was ratified by the teacher in a small-group meeting prior to DCS2, which mightbe why the teacher contributed fewer SBF comments during this group’s DCS2. The majority of commentsoffered to this group during DCS2 were about behaviors as the teacher questioned how the group could maketheir robot turn when they had only three motors (a design constraint), and the class struggled to understand howa person with mobility impairments could operate the remote control. Many comments during DCS2 expresseddoubt about how the group planned to use a sound sensor as part of their propulsion system, an idea the grouplater abandoned when the programming proved too difficult.How Ideas Were Taken UpIdeas from the design critiques were taken up by all three focal groups following each DCS in which a grouppresented, though not always in expected or productive ways. Across the three DCS, groups seemed to increasetheir ability to take up teacher and peer feedback from DCS. Additionally, the largely positive affect with whichthey interpreted their DCS experiences was reflected in subsequent interviews. To illustrate, the followingexcerpt shows the integrated response of the Water Washer group to a suggestion made by a classmate about astructure associated with their design solution (i.e., the shape of their paddles).Excerpt 1 (Water Washer group post-DCS3)Ida:Adam raised his hand and said how about make them oval shapes, so that's what I think we shoulddo.Bobby: He said it should be oval.Dante: That's not oval.Interviewer: What did you guys think when Ms. Stevens asked the class if they had any suggestions?Ida:I thought there would be a lot more people giving suggestions.Roy:I like Adam's//Dante: //I didn't think there would be a whole lot of suggestions though.Roy:Me neither, but I liked that they were giving us ideas. But I think the tire might be a little heavy.Dante: Yeah, because I think it'll spin and then this would leak, push it through the water faster and havemore power so it'll go faster. And then I started to agree with my group because tires they're toothick and they make too much splash and it might not move through the water.Roy:Yeah, I think it was a good idea, but I think we should stick to our sticks, but//Ida://It's a good idea, but still, that's more weight adding up, though.Roy:Yeah.Ida:It's just more weight adding up. It was a good idea though.Bobby: Yes it was.Roy:It was a very good idea.Conclusions and ImplicationsThis study is one step in a line of scholarly inquiry investigating the influence of whole-class social interactionin learning to engage in collaborative design projects. Findings contribute to understanding how talk elicited inDCS influence the design activity of early adolescents learning to engage in collaborative engineering design bycategorizing the nature of talk in DCS by the teacher and students relative to the nascent design solutions ofthree focal groups, and by examining the subsequent discourse in small-group work sessions to see what ideasstudents took up as well as how they took them up and to what effect. The ultimate value of the study is itspotential to impact learning-teaching practices related to engaging in collaborative engineering designprocesses. For instance, results could guide strategies for (a) structuring public critique processes to enhancestudents’ learning to design and learning from design, and (b) helping students make use of critique insubsequent collaborative sessions. Findings may also illuminate learning-teaching processes in art settings,composition classes, or design studios - contexts in which public design critique is a long-standing practice.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1169© ISLSReferencesBers, M. U. (2008). Blocks to robots: Learning with technology in the early childhood classroom. New York:Teachers College Press.Bransford, J. D., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. (1999). How people learn: Brain-mind experience and school.Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Darling, A. L., & Dannels, D. P. (2008). A report on the role of oral communication in the workplace.Communication Education, 52, 1-16.Demirbas, O. (2001). The relation of learning styles and performance scores of the students in interiorarchitecture education. Unpublished PhD dissertation, Bilkent University, Ankara.Dorst, K. (2003). The Problem of design problems. Design thinking research symposium, Sydney, 17(19-11).Erickson, F. (2004). Talk and social theory. Malden, MA: Polity Press.Fleming, D. (1998). Design talk: Constructing the object in studio conversations. Design Issues, 14(2), 41-62.Greeno, J. G. (2006) Learning in activity. In K. Sawyer (Ed.) Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 79-96).Oxford: Cambridge.Greiffenhagen, C. (2012). Making rounds: The routine work of the teacher during collaborative learning withcomputers. International Journal of Computer-supported Collaborative Learning, 7(1), 11-42.Hmelo, C. E., Holton, D. L., & Kolodner, J. L. (2000). Designing to learn about complex systems. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 9 (3), 247-298.Hmelo-Silver, C. E. & Pfeffer, M. G. (2004). Comparing expert and novice understanding of a complex systemfrom the perspective of structures, behaviors, and functions. Cognitive Science, 28, 127-138.Jonassen, D. H. (2000). Towards a design theory of problem solving. Educational Technology, Research andDevelopment, 48(4), 63-85.Jordan, B. & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundation and Practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4, 39-103.Jordan, M. E. (in press). Exploring how public design critique processes shape fifth graders’ peer interactionduring collaborative engineering projects. ASEE proceedings, Indianapolis, IN.Jordan, M. E. (2014). Interweaving the digital and physical worlds in collaborative project-based learningexperiences. In D. J. Loveless, B. Griffith, M. Berci, E. Ortlieb, & P. Sullivan (Eds.), Academicknowledge construction and multimodal curriculum development (pp. 266-284). Hershey, PA: IGI.Jordan, M. E. & Babrow, A. S. (2013). Communication in creative collaborations: The challenges of uncertaintyand desire related to task, identity, and relational goals. Communication Education, 62(2), 105-126.Jordan, M. E. & McDaniel, R. R. (in press). Managing uncertainty during collaborative problem solving inelementary school teams: The role of peer influence in robotics engineering activity. Journal of theLearning Sciences.Kafai, Y. B., & Ching, C. C. (2004). Children as instructional designers: Apprenticing, questioning, andevaluating in the Learning Science by Design project. In N. M. Seel & S. Dijkstra (Eds.), Curriculum,plans and processes of instructional design (pp. 115-130). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Kafai, Y. B., Fields, D. A., & Burke, W. Q. (2010). Entering the clubhouse: Case studies of young programmersjoining the online Scratch communities. Journal of Organizational and End-User Computing, 22(2),21-35.Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., & Holbrook, J. (2003). Problem-based learningmeets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom: Putting learning-by-design intopractice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(4), 495-547.Laursen, S., Liston, C., Thiry, H., & Graf, J. (2007). What good is a scientist in the classroom? CBE-LifeSciences Education, 6(1), 49-64.National Research Council. (2009). Engineering in K-12 education: Understanding the status and improving theprospects. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Otto, K. N. & Wood, K. L. (2000). Product design techniques in reverse engineering and new productdevelopment. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.Pendleton-Julian, A. & Brown, J. S. (2011). Design unbound: Evolving deign literacy pathways of efficacy.Draft manuscript, Charleston, SC.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking. New York: Oxford University Press.Roth, W.-M. (1995). Inventors, copycats, and everyone else: The emergence of shared resources and practicesas defining aspects of classroom communities. Science Education, 79, 475-502.Sawyer, K. (2012). Learning how to create: Toward a learning sciences of art and design. Proceedings of theInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 33-40). Sydney, Australia.Shaffer, D. W. (2003). Portrait of the Oxford design studio: An ethnography of design pedagogy (Workingpaper No. 2003-11). Madison, WI: Wisconsin Center for Education Research.Uluoglu, B. (2000). Design knowledge communicated in studio critiques. Design Studies, 21(1), 33-58.	  	  	  	  ICLS 2014 Proceedings1170© ISLS