“We Should all Help Each Other”: Latina Undergraduates’ Practicesand Identities in the Figured World of ComputingHeather Thiry, University of Colorado, Boulder, UCB 580, Boulder, CO, 80309, heather.thiry@colorado.eduSarah Hug, University of Colorado, Boulder, UCB UCB 322, Boulder CO, 80309, hug@colorado.eduAbstract: The number of Latinas earning computing degrees and entering technical careers isstubbornly low. This study uses Holland, Lachicotte, Skinner, and Cain’s (1998) concepts ofidentity and figured worlds to explore the experiences of 22 Latina undergraduates incomputing majors. Using semi-structured, focus group interviews, this paper describesparticipants’ identity production as empowered computer scientists. Results indicate thatLatinas faced many cultural constraints within the landscape of computing, includingisolation, marginalization and microaggressions, yet they also described practices andrelationships that helped them to persist in their majors. Successful disciplinary performancesand access to Latina role models were pivotal in students’ adoption of empowered identities.Study participants challenged the notion of computing as a competitive, individualisticenterprise that permeated the local and global computing communities in which they operated.Instead, they developed identities as engaged, community-oriented computer scientists andenacted these identities through their everyday practices in their departments and in the localcommunity.IntroductionLearning involves more than the acquisition of technical knowledge and disciplinary expertise. Though theseelements are important aspects of the learning process, learning also involves identification with a discipline,profession, or community; in short, “becoming” a certain type of person. In scientific, mathematical,engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines in higher education, learning encompasses an interrelatedprocess of developing accountable disciplinary knowledge, identifying with the discipline, and navigatinginstitutional and disciplinary contexts (Stevens et al., 2008). While undergraduate students must successfullynavigate institutional and disciplinary benchmarks, such as core courses and requirements, the process ofbecoming a scientist occurs within the everyday practices, relationships, and interactions that studentsexperience in the cultural context of their discipline.This paper focuses on the underrepresentation of Latinas within the field of computing and explores theways in which Latina undergraduates come to see themselves, and to be seen, as successful and empoweredcomputer science students. The larger purpose of the study was to understand how Latinas negotiateddisciplinary cultures that subordinated them as women and as individuals of Hispanic origin. Throughinterviews with Latina computing majors, we explored the barriers and supports they encountered in authoringcompetent identities in technical fields. The research questions that drove this investigation were:•••How do Latinas negotiate the figured world of academic computing, particularly in regard to theircomputing expertise?What social and cultural practices support Latinas in taking up professional identities in computing?How does the intersectionality of race, class, and gender influence the position of Latinas in the figuredworld of academic world of computing and the identities that they craft within the discipline?Social and Cultural Barriers in STEM disciplines Faced by Women and Latino/asPathways in STEM fields are especially difficult for underrepresented minority students and women (Gasbarra& Johnson, 2008; Wajcman, 2010). Women are underrepresented in scientific, technology, engineering, andmathematics (STEM) careers in 121 developed and developing countries (UNESCO, 2009), within theEuropean Union (European Commission, 2009), and in the US (National Science Board, 2012). Inequities incomputing—the disciplinary site of this study—are especially grim. Only 7% of baccalaureates and less than1% of doctorates in computer science in 2012 were granted to Hispanic US citizens (National Center forEducation Statistics, 2012), though Hispanics represent 16% of the total US population, and nearly one quarterof the youth population (US Census, 2011). The National Center for Women and Information Technology(NCWIT) reported that only one percent of the information technology jobs in the US are held by women ofHispanic origin (NCWIT, 2004).Historical-cultural views on what kind of work is appropriate for women foster gendered expectationsthat, in turn, profoundly affect the numbers of women in computing fields. For example, in the US, the dominantview of computing is that it is an asocial, highly technical, masculine pursuit (Barker & Aspray, 2006). AICLS 2014 Proceedings214© ISLSnumber of processes including early socialization (Clewell & Braddock, 2000), perceptions of and actualinstructor bias (Beyer, Reynes and Haller 2004), and negative departmental and classroom climates (Margolis &Fisher, 2002; Seymour & Hewitt, 1997), work in tandem with these historically and culturally engrained viewsto discourage women from pursuing computing degrees and careers.In addition, Latino/as face a number of sociocultural, economic, and educational obstacles in highereducation degree attainment (Hurtado, Carter, & Spuler, 1996; Oseguera, Locks, & Vega, 2009). Lack of facultysupport, discomfort on the university campus, and financial struggles contribute to high attrition rates (Gloria etal. 2005; Santiago & Treindl, 2009). In STEM disciplines, cultural incongruence between minority communitiesand academic departments has been argued to contribute to the underrepresentation of Latino/as, AfricanAmericans, and Native Americans in these majors (Bonous-Hammarth, 2000; Cole & Espinoza 2008). Latino/astudents are less likely to have completed college-ready coursework upon high school graduation (Tyson, et al.,2007). Additionally, K-12 schools with sizeable numbers of students from non-dominant communitiesemphasize basic skills over higher-order thinking (Sleeter, 2005). Racial and ethnic disparities in computingeducation can also be attributed to the stubborn persistence of the digital divide (Margolis, 2008; Warschauer,Knobel & Stone, 2004).Research on STEM education has elucidated historical and cultural factors that contribute to the lack ofwomen and minorities in technical fields and identified strategies for supporting students once they haveenrolled in STEM majors. However, researchers have not often focused on the ways in which specificunderserved populations in STEM, such as Latinas in computing, experience intersectionality, negotiatebarriers, and craft identities in fields in which they are overwhelmingly underrepresented. In this paper, weidentify the life history experiences that are associated with the development of empowered identities forLatinas in computing fields.Conceptual FrameworkWe use Holland, Lachicotte, Skinner, and Cain’s (1998) concepts of identity and figured worlds to explore theexperiences of Latinas within computing majors. Identity is formed within certain figured worlds throughroutine interactions, activities, and relationships. Figured worlds are socially and historically situated realms ofhuman activity with their own sets of values, norms, and expectations. Figured worlds may be broad, such asacademia, or local, such as a student club within a campus department. People enter into or are recruited intofigured worlds and they “come to identify themselves as actors of more or less influence, more or less privilege,and more or less power in these worlds” (Holland et al, 1998, p.60).Identity is a valuable construct for interpreting the experiences of actors with less privilege and powerwithin dominant cultural contexts, such as Latinas in computing. According to Holland, et al. (1998), peoplemay challenge taken-for granted notions and cultural constraints through the process of identity development.For example, Latinas may accept traditional, masculine notions of a computer scientist as a white or Asian male“hacker” or they may negotiate new definitions of computer scientist as activist and engaged with youth,education, or community outreach. Identities, including ways of becoming a computer scientist, are not staticand fixed, nor do they spring from some “essential” characteristic such as gender or race. Instead, identities areworks in progress and are formed in and through everyday practices and interactions.Identity involves not only actively identifying oneself as an actor within a specific social and culturalfield, but also being seen by others as such. While this notion of identity allows for agency within peoples’ lives,individuals are not free to adopt any identity they want. Indeed, they are constrained by given social andhistorical conditions; but, they may also “improvise” and act creatively within those conditions. The concept ofidentity within figured worlds allows us to examine hierarchy, status and power within specific cultural realmsof activity, such as academic departments or disciplines. This lens provides a framework for exploring theintersection of agency and structure and the ways in which individuals negotiate power within cultural domains.In this study we use the concepts of identity and figured worlds to explore how Latinas navigate oftentimesdifficult academic pathways and craft identities that value the intersectionality (Crenshaw, 1991) of being Latinain the figured world of computing.Research Design and Data SourcesWe conducted semi-structured interviews to investigate—from the perspective of Latina actors in the figuredworld of computing—the interactions, practices and relationships that facilitated or hindered their identificationwith the discipline. All of our study participants were involved in the Computing Alliance of Hispanic-ServingInstitutions (CAHSI), a National Science Foundation-sponsored consortium of ten Hispanic-serving Institutions(HSIs). CAHSI implements a number of pedagogical innovations that support the recruitment, retention, andadvancement of Hispanics in computing. Participating institutions span the cultural and regional diversity ofLatino/as in the US, from a university in Puerto Rico, to ethnically diverse urban institutions in California, toICLS 2014 Proceedings215© ISLSuniversities in Florida with significant numbers of Cuban, Central, and South American students, and borderuniversities in Texas and New Mexico with large populations of Mexican-American students.Latina undergraduates are severely underrepresented in the fields of computer science and computerengineering. For example, Latinas accounted for less than one percent (only 64 out of 8977 total graduates) ofbachelor’s degrees in computer science or computer engineering from U.S. institutions in 2012 (NCES, 2012).CAHSI serves as a national hub for Hispanic computing students, faculty, and professionals to support andnetwork with one another. Due to the dire underrepresentation of Latina undergraduates in computing fields,CAHSI was an ideal site through which to identify research participants.We conducted focus group interviews with all of the female participants from CAHSI (n=22) at anacademic conference for underrepresented minority students and faculty in STEM disciplines. We sought tointerview all female participants at this professional meeting to not only explore Latina’s experiences ascomputing students, but to investigate how their participation in the professional conference may haveinfluenced their identification with the discipline. We scheduled focus groups with all 22 women from seveninstitutions who attended the conference. Participants met with female peers from their institution whenapplicable, in groups from one to six total participants. Two interviewers conducted the focus groups, with oneresearcher chosen beforehand to lead the discussion. Of the 22 female focus group participants, almost all wereundergraduate students (81%) and self-identified as Hispanic (77%). Almost all participants were enrolled incomputer science (CS) or computer engineering (CS) majors, although two students were enrolled in computerinformation systems (CIS) and one was a mathematics major with an emphasis in computer science. Interviewslasted 45 to 90 minutes, were digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim. Interviews focused on participant’sexperiences within their departments and the larger field of computing. Sample interview questions include:“How did you first become interested in computer science?” “Where do you ‘fit’ in your department?” “Do yousee any barriers that impact you as a Hispanic woman in computing?” and “What has supported you in yourpursuit of a computing degree?” All research procedures were approved by the human subjects institutionalreview board. Pseudonyms have been used to protect the confidentiality of participants.Analysis MethodsInterview transcripts were coded using domain analysis (Spradley, 1980). Researchers searched for units ofmeaning within the data, coding interview transcripts for examples of “cover terms” within broader “domains.”Taxonomies were then constructed linking coded examples to domain categories through a semantic relationshipsuch as “is a kind of” or “is a way of doing.” Domains were generated both deductively, based on our researchquestions and our conceptual framework, and inductively, based on emergent themes from the data. Forexample, some deductive domain categories from our analysis include: Barriers in Computing, Supports inComputing, and Professional Identity. Some inductive domain categories include: Gendered Expectations andFamily Influence. Two researchers generated the initial codebook in NVivo qualitative software based on theresearch questions and conceptual framework. The researchers initially coded transcripts in tandem to identifyemerging domains and to gauge inter-rater reliability. The researchers then divided the rest of the interviews andcoded them separately, eventually merging them into one NVivo project. Throughout the coding process, theresearchers met regularly to discuss emerging findings.ResultsPower and Status in the Figured World of ComputingThrough the formal support provided by CAHSI and informal support fostered within peer networks, somewomen experienced shifts in identity similar to the Chicano activists/educators described by Urrieta (2007), whotook up an activist identity with a desire to educate others and give back to their community. However, the lifeexperiences that fostered these shifts among our study participants were different from those in Urieta’sresearch, with the exception of the experience of oppression.As Latinas in computing, the undergraduates described their experiences of oppression in theirdiscipline. They discussed isolation, marginalization, and microagressions, meaning “brief and commonplacedaily verbal, behavioral, or environmental indignities” that highlight difference and power (Sue, et al., 2007p.271). The women in this study encountered these slights in both local and global figured worlds of computingand often narrated their experiences with a focus on gender. For instance, Elisa recounted an experience at aconference where she felt ignored and invisible to a male professor, in stark contrast to the attention he gave toher male peers. This microagression highlighted her subordinate status as a woman in the realm of computing.When we come to other conferences or other universities, I sometimes feel like, “I’m awoman.” I’ve run into people, like other professors at other universities, and they don’t payattention to things I have to say. I just had that experience yesterday, actually. I was reallyICLS 2014 Proceedings216© ISLSbummed out. I had to introduce myself to a PhD professor, and I was explaining, “This iswhat I’m interested in.” He went on to the next student, went to the next student, and then hecomes back to me and he was like, “Did you already introduce yourself? Did you already tellme about yourself?” He gave everybody information about scholarships, and I was like, “I’mthe only one without a paper.” I don’t know if it was because I was female or what. Just littlethings… it’s not very nice.The women also became aware of their subordinated status as women in computing through difficultinteractions with male peers within the competitive landscape of undergraduate computing classes, as describedby Terese and Josefina. Some male peers accepted them as computer scientists, while others held lowerexpectations or were dismissive of them. These interactions highlighted the devalued status of women withincomputing.Josefina:One thing that I notice, in any of my CS classes, there’s a few guys that treatus maybe as equals. There’s like five guys that are like, “Yes, they can dowhat we can do.” But then the other ones, it seems like you have to dobetter. You have to study harder and you have to get better, or the samegrades to be considered like, “oh, maybe they can do it.” Then sometimesit’s like, still not, they’re still just a girl.Most of the time I do better than all of them… But at the same time, it’s thisdisconnect. It’s this competitiveness where they don’t want anybody beingbetter than them, especially females. But it shouldn’t be like that. Weshould all help each other.Terese:In the exchange, Josefina and Terese lament the lack of support from male peers and contrast the value that theyplace on community with the competitive identities of many of their male peers. In turn, they propose new waysof becoming a computer scientist within academic spaces.In these cases, and many others recounted by our focus group participants, gender—rather thanethnicity, class or other socially constructed categories—became the salient aspect of their identity throughwhich they initially experienced power relationships in computing. Their focus on gender subordination mayresult from their attendance at Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI) in which Hispanics comprise at least 25% ofthe student population. Additionally, they participated in CAHSI, an organization dedicated to creating acommunity of Hispanic computing students, faculty, and professionals.Becoming Computer ScientistsIdentity shifts that expanded women’s notions of what it means to “be” a computer scientist, and “who” can be acomputer scientist, were often fostered by interactions with role models. Interactions with role models also ledthe students to a greater understanding of the intersectionality of their identity within the landscape ofcomputing, and the complex way in which class, race, gender, and language may all play a role in subordination.Participants came to understand the role that race, ethnicity, nationality, and other factors played in conferringdiminished status in the field of computing. For instance, Julia commented on how hearing role models’ storiesat conferences helped her to situate herself within the field and envision that it is possible to be a successfulLatina computing professional.Julia:I think the conference is really good about exposing young females to PhDs that arealso females, and have prominent positions in the universities. I think that’s reallyexciting. I come from a university where I’m almost the only girl in all my classes,and I’m particularly the only Hispanic girl, sometimes even the only American. It’snice to see people that are like me, who have similar backgrounds, who havesucceeded. It’s very inspiring, because you go through all these troubles, and you’restarting out with your family, and not having too much money and all that stuff. Youhear their stories, and they sound the same. I came from that background. Seeingpeople who have accomplished that, and who have gotten a PhD, it’s very inspiring,to a lot of girls.Emma: It’s really exciting. Sometimes you just need to see that it’s possible.Benita: It gives you hope.ICLS 2014 Proceedings217© ISLSLatina role models helped the women to frame their experiences of oppression in terms of theintersectionality of race, class, and gender. Some of the women also credited the systemic support they receivedfrom CAHSI—which facilitated their involvement in disciplinary research, travel to conferences, andinteractions with Latina role models—with their consciousness of underrepresentation. Dolores commented thataccess to the tools and practices of her discipline in her research experience had helped her successfully navigatethe academic pathway. Her research mentor also raised her awareness of the underrepresentation of Latinas incomputing.I love my degree and I’m really glad that CAHSI is helping our communities because we weretalking about it in the research lab a few days ago, that not only the fact that there’s no women[in computing] but no Hispanics, and [my mentor] was talking about how underrepresentedwe are. I’m glad that CAHSI is actually helping, because it feels encouraging that we actuallycan get somewhere, right? Because with no help, I mean, nobody would get anywhere. I’mreally thankful for the opportunity.Thus, many of the Latina undergraduates became critically aware of social and cultural inequitieswithin the figured world of computing. Some women attributed their persistence in the major to this process ofidentity production, where they became critically conscious of power within the realm of computing, yet alsogained confidence that they could successfully navigate—and possibly subvert—those power relationships.Participants gained confidence through successful performance in the field and recognition, similar to thewomen of color in Carlone and Johnson’s (2007) study of science identity development.As the Latinas in our study displayed competence and mastery in their disciplinary knowledge throughresearch experiences and conferences, not only did they come to see themselves differently, others began toview them differently as well. Rosa described a shift in the way that her male peers perceived the Latinas in herdepartment. The student’s engagement in professional activities had conferred status to them within the localfigured world of their department and others began to see them as successful computer science students.Some of (our male peers), they don’t know us, and I guess they don’t know what we’re doingand, I guess they judge us. Or they have this stereotype of the girls who are not good enough.…they treat me with respect now, ‘Oh, wow, you’re going to conferences, that’s really cool.Wow, I’ve never done that before. You must be really smart, you work really hard.’”In this way, many participants gained status within their departments, seeing themselves, and beingseen, as successful computer scientists.Crafting Empowered IdentitiesAt four institutions, these shifts in identity sparked a more empowered stance among participants. As alreadynoted, the women often felt isolated, disenfranchised, and disrespected by some of their male peers and in someinteractions outside of their departments. As a result of their critical awareness of the intersectionality of genderand race within the figured world of computing, they began to subvert these power relationships by creatingacademically-oriented clubs and other supportive peer networks. Terese, one of the founders of a computingclub on her campus, described its goals of creating a stronger sense of community in the department, not just forwomen, but for all students.Basically the goal is to create this sense of community within the department for students tofeel comfortable. We have study sessions before the meetings, so students can just come, sittogether with other students, and do their homework together. It’s great because within thatmix there is some lower classmen and upper classmen, and so there’s always help there,because everybody is friendly.Terese reflected on her reasons for attending a conference dedicated to the advancement ofunderrepresented populations in scientific fields. Her motivations reflect her burgeoning understanding of thecomplex intersecionality of gender and ethnicity within computing. She hoped to take her new understanding ofthe positionality of Latinas in computing to encourage underrepresented minority girls in her local area to enterinto and persist in STEM fields. Though she embraced some aspects of the traditional culture of computing, andhad a professional goal of working at Google as a programmer, Terese had begun to incorporate outreach,mentoring, and local activism into her computer science identity.ICLS 2014 Proceedings218© ISLSWhat I can take back [from the conference] is getting girls and minorities [into computing].Where we work is a HSI, Hispanic-serving institution, primarily, so since not only are womenunderrepresented but also minorities, what we can take from this conference is to help thestudents and the girls and the kids in our area. That’s what I’m hoping to get out of theconference is new ideas, because it’s so hard to keep using the same old ones. When you feellike they’re only helping so much.On another campus, the women negotiated a new organizational identity for their campus computerscience club. Aida described how the former student president of the club was a “little iffy, and he was onlywanting to do game stuff. He was like, ‘We’re going to have some LAN parties, and just get together and gameall day.’ That was all he was about. I was like, ‘Yes, that would be fun to do, but we need to do other stuff.’” Agroup of undergraduate women, mostly Latina, assumed the leadership of the club and created a space whereoutreach, community service, and professional development were valued. They shifted the values of the clubaway from an individualistic focus on technical proficiency to a focus on community.Last year, and this year, we have a woman president and vice president. Last year, Ana waspresident and I was vice president. This time around, I’m president and Sofia is vicepresident. We’re showing a bigger appearance for women in the CS area, and wanting to domore things. But part of our club, part of our goal, is not just to help you tutor or program orsomething like that. We try and get all the CS people together outside of classes, and outsideof school work, and socialize, get to know each other. It’s been a great way to get to knowpeople. Every year it seems like the officers seem to be getting better, and having the interestsof the club members in mind. We got more involved with community service and did relayfor life. Last year, we actually took charge of doing a trip for the computer science club. Wewere able to raise money throughout the year, and we went up to an advanced computingcenter. 	  At other institutions, students did not start formal extra-curricular clubs, but developed informal peernetworks for support. Academically-inclined Latinas developed relationships with each other in the academicspaces of research groups, conferences, or classes. These networks provided personal support andencouragement. Leticia commented on an informal network of women in her computer science department.We know that within our group, we are there for the same reasons. We need to just help eachother and find support when somebody may need tutoring or something you are struggling in.Or just like a conversation, a cup of coffee, in those types of things I really find support.In the local figured worlds of their academic departments, some women began to organize theirsubjectivities around the issue of underrepresentation in computing, and thus enacted identities that valued beinga Latina in computing. As Holland et al. (1998) theorized, the social interactions in the localized and temporalspaces of the computing clubs and informal peer networks gave voice to the lived experiences of Latinas incomputing. In this process, some women gained a deeper understanding of the cultural, political, and historicallandscape of Latinas in computing, and produced identities that contested the privileging of white and Asianmale “hacker” culture in computer science. Much like the role models that they accessed through conferenceswho helped to foster their own shifts in identity, some of the Latina undergraduates served as “significantnarrators” to younger students of local figured worlds in which they participated (Urrieta, 2007). In this way, theLatinas produced identities that recognized the intersectionality of race and gender within computing, and redefined computer scientist as someone who values community, outreach, and mentoring over individualism andcompetition.ConclusionThe Latinas in our study shared several common threads in their life history experiences that facilitated shifts intheir identity within the professional and academic landscape of computing. The four life experiences related toprofessional empowerment were: 1) experiencing discrimination and oppression, 2) gaining a criticalunderstanding of oppression through interactions with role models from similar backgrounds, 3) engaging insuccessful disciplinary performances, and 4) teaching or mentoring others. The Latinas in our study recountedmany instances of bias and microaggressions. Yet participants’ shift away from isolation and marginalizationwas fostered by interactions with Latina role models who situated the student’s negative experiences withininequitable social, cultural, and historical legacies in computing. Participants began to see that their struggleswere not isolated or unique. The role models served as catalysts to transform the student’s understanding of theirown experiences and helped to re-define their professional identities as Latinas in computing. Additionally,ICLS 2014 Proceedings219© ISLSsuccessful disciplinary performances in research and at conferences were pivotal in conferring status to thewomen within their departments and the broader landscape of computing. These two experiences—interactionswith role models and successful disciplinary performance—helped the women to see themselves, and to be seen,as competent computer scientists. Finally, participants enacted their professionally empowered identities byteaching and mentoring others. These experiences represent shifts away from an individualistic, isolatedexperience of computing to one defined by reflection, community, and teaching.The Latinas in this study challenged the taken-for-granted notion of computing as a competitive,individualistic enterprise that is the domain of white or Asian, male hackers. Some of the students craftedidentities as engaged, community-oriented computer scientists and enacted these identities in their departmentsand local communities. This study provides a glimpse into the way in which interactions and practices canfoster, or impede, identification with the discipline for underrepresented students in computing. The researchliterature in STEM education has extensively explored the positive effects of role models but has rarelyexamined the ability of role models to illuminate social and cultural disparities and empower novices. However,through their interactions with role models and successful disciplinary performances, participants re-definedwhat it means to be a computer scientist and shaped computer science identities that value community, outreach,and cooperation over individualism and competition.ReferencesBarker, L.J. & Aspray, W. (2006). The state of research on pre-college experiences of girls with informationtechnology. In Women and information technology: Research on the reasons for under-representation.Cohoon, J & Aspray, W. (eds.), 1-53. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Beyer, S., Raines, K., & Haller, S. (2004). Deterrent to women taking computer science courses. IEEE Societyand Technology. 23, 21-28.Bonous-Hammarth, M. (2000). Pathways to success: Affirming opportunities for science, mathematics, andengineering majors. The Journal of Negro Education, 69, 1/2, 92-111.Carlone, H. & Johnson, A. (2007). Understanding the science experiences of successful women of color:Science identity as an analytic lens. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44(8), 1187-1218.Clewell, B.C. & Braddock, J.H (2000). Influences on minority participation in mathematics, science, andengineering. In Access denied: race, ethnicity, and the scientific enterprise. Campbell, G., Denes, R. &Morrison, C. (eds). pp. 89-137. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.Cole, D. & Espinoza, A. (2008). Examining the academic success of Latino students in science, technology,engineering and mathematics (STEM) majors. Journal of College Student Development. 49(4), 285300.Crenshaw, K. (1991). Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity politics, and violence against women ofcolor. Stanford Law Review, 43, 1241-1299.European Commission (2009). She Figures 2009: Statistics and indicators on gender equality in science.Retrieved on 1/22/13 fromhttp://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/document_library/pdf_06/she_figures_2009_en.pdfFontana, A. & Frey, J.H. (2000). The interview: From structured questions to negotiated text. In N.K. Denzin &Y.S. Lincoln, (Eds.), Handbook of Qualitative Research (2nd ed.), 645-672. Thousand Oaks: Sage.Gasbarra, P., & Johnson, J. (2008). Out Before the Game Begins: Hispanic Leaders Talk about What’s Neededto Bring More Hispanic Youngsters into Science, Technology and Math Professions. A Public AgendaReport Prepared for America’s Competitiveness: Hispanic Participation in Technology CareersSummit. Palisades, NY.Gloria, A., Castellanos, J., Lopez, A.G., & Rosales, R. (2005). An examination of academic nonpersistencedecisions of Latino undergraduates. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 27(2), 202-223.Holland, D., Lachicotte, W., Jr., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Hurtado, S., Carter, D.F., & Spuler, A. (1996). Latino student transition to college: Assessingdifficultiesand factors in successful college adjustment. Research in Higher Education, 37(2), 135-157.Margolis, J. (2008). Stuck in the Shallow End: Education, Race, and Computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Margolis, J. & Fisher, A. (2002). Unlocking the Clubhouse: Women in Computing. Cambridge,MA: MIT Press.National Center for Education Statistics (NCES), (2010-2011). Digest of Education Statistics. Washington,D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department ofEducation.National Center for Women and Information Technology (NCWIT) (2004). Revolutionizing the face oftechnology. Retrieved on 2/5/13 from www.ncwit.org.National Science Board (NSB). 2012. Science and Engineering Indicators Digest 2012. Arlington VA: NationalScience Foundation (NSB 12-02).ICLS 2014 Proceedings220© ISLSOseguera,L., Locks, A., & Vega, I. (2009). Increasing Latina/o Students' Baccalaureate Attainment: A focuson Retention. Journal of Hispanic Higher Education, 8, 23 – 53.Santiago, D, & Treindl, T. (2009) Taking Stock: Higher Education and Latinos. Excelencia in Education,Washington, DC: December, 2009.Seymour, E. & Hewitt, N. (1997). Talking about leaving: Why undergraduates leave the sciences. Boulder:Westview Press.Spradley, J. P. (1980). Participant Observation. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.Stevens, R., O’Connor, K., Garrison, L., Jocuns, A., & Amos, D.M. (2008). Becoming an engineer: Toward athree dimensional view of engineering learning. Journal of Engineering Education, 97(3), 355-368.Sue, D. W., Capodilupo, C. M., Torino, G. C., Bucceri, J. M., Holder, A., Nadal, K. L., & Esquilin, M. (2007).Racial microaggressions in everyday life: implications for clinical practice. American Psychologist,62(4), 271-286.Tyson, W., Lee, R., Borman, K. & Hanson, M.A. (2007). Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics(STEM) Pathways: High School Science and Mathematics Coursework and Postsecondary DegreeAttainment. Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk (JESPAR), 12(3), 243-270.UNESCO Institute of Statistics (2009). UIS Fact Sheet. No 2, October, 2009. Retrieved on 1/22/13 fromhttp://www.bpf.cas.cn/zlyj/200910/P020091023325511624098.pdfUnitedStatesCensus(2011).AmericanFactFinder.Retrievedon9/15/13fromhttp://www.factfinder2.census.gov.Urrieta, L. Jr. (2007). Identity production in figured worlds: How some Mexican Americans become Chicana/oactivist educators. Urban Review, 39(2), 117-144.Wajcman, Judy (2010) Feminist theories of technology. Cambridge journal of economics, 34 (1). 143-152.Warschauer, M., Knobel, M. & Stone, L. (2004). Technology and Equity in Schooling: Deconstructing theDigital Divide. Educational Policy, 18(4), 562-588.ICLS 2014 Proceedings221© ISLS