What Do They Do?:Tracing Students’ Patterns of Interactionswithin a Game-Based Intelligent Tutoring SystemErica L. Snow, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, 85283, Erica.L.Snow@asu.eduG. Tanner Jackson, Educational Testing Services, Princeton, NJ, 08541, gtjackson@ets.orgDanielle S. McNamara, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, 85283, Danielle.McNamara@asu.eduAbstract: The authors examine patterns of interactions within the game-based intelligenttutoring system, iSTART-ME. Forty high school students from a mid-south urbanenvironment interacted with iSTART-ME across eight training sessions. Transitionalprobabilities were calculated based on students’ system interaction patterns, focusing on fourtypes of game-based features: generative practice, identification mini-games, personalizablefeatures, and achievement screens. The results revealed how students transitioned from onetype of interaction to another and how those interaction patterns varied as a function of themost recent action performed.IntroductionRecently, educational designers and researchers have investigated the implementation of game-based featuresinto adaptive learning environments (Jackson & McNamara, 2013). This work has provided valuable insightinto how game-based features can influence student engagement and learning. However, despite the rapidexpansion of this research, relatively little work has been conducted to investigate the patterns of choices thatmanifest while students interact with game-based systems. The current study aims to gain a deeperunderstanding of these emergent patterns by examining students’ interactions with various game-based featuresacross multiple sessions within iSTART-ME (i.e., Interactive Strategy Training for Active Reading andThinking – Motivationally Enhanced).iSTART-MEiSTART-ME (Interactive Strategy Training for Active Reading and Thinking - Motivationally Enhanced) is anintelligent tutoring system that utilizes embedded game-based practice. This game-based environment has beenshown to be effective at teaching students how to use self-explanation strategies to improve their readingcomprehension (Jackson & McNamara, 2013). Within this system, students can choose to interact with variousgame-based features. Some of the available options include: customizing the interface, generating their ownself-explanations and playing educational mini-games (Snow, Likens, Jackson, & McNamara, 2013).Current StudyStudents have previously reported that they enjoyed interacting with the iSTART-ME system and itscorresponding components (Snow, Jackson, Varner, & McNamara, 2013). However, one area of research thathas not been investigated is how students chose to interact with the various types of game-based featuresembedded within the system interface. The aim of the current study is to investigate the nuanced interactionpatterns that are formed through students’ engagement with the various game-based components embeddedwithin iSTART-ME.MethodParticipants40 students (50% male, mean grade level of 10, mean age of 15.5 years; 17% were Caucasian, 73% wereAfrican-American, and 10% reported other nationalities) interacted with iSTART-ME as part of an was an 11session study. Students’ interactions within the iSTART-ME system were logged and recorded throughout theirtime in training. Every interaction in which students engaged involved one of four types of game-based features:generative practice games, identification mini-games, personalizable features, and achievement screens.Quantitative MethodThe current study utilized time-stamped log data to chronologically categorize each student’s interaction choicesacross the multiple training sessions (2 through 9). The sum of all interactions for the 40 students resulted inover 11,000 interaction choices. A statistical sequencing procedure, detailed within D’Mello, Taylor, andGraesser (2007), P(Xt+1| It), utilized this extensive logging database to calculate the conditional probability of astudent’s action when provided with the previous action.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1481© ISLSResultsIn the current study, we examined the patterns that emerge while students engaged with a game-based system.Using the statistical sequencing procedure previously described, we investigated the manifestation of students’choice patterns across time and how those selections varied as a function of students’ most recent selection.Probability of InteractionsWe examined the state transition likelihoods between (and within) features (see Figure 1 for complete set oftransition probabilities). Figure 1 provides a visual display of the transition likelihoods, with numbers inside abox representing the likelihood of selecting the same feature again, and numbers near a line indicating thelikelihood of transitioning from one feature to another. Summing the probabilities on the left side of Figure 1,approximately 74% of all interactions occurred within a loop between the mini-games and generative practiceenvironments. These interactions consisted of staying within or transitioning between the mini-games andgenerative practice environments (i.e., 74% constitutes the sum of all transition values within and between thetwo boxes). This result reveals a practice interaction loop, where students most often sought some form ofstrategy practice and occasionally alternated between the two different types. This analysis also demonstratesthat, compared to the practice features, students were less likely to interact with non-practice features in theenvironment (i.e., personalizable features and achievement screens).Figure 1. Overall probabilities of interactions (sum of all transitions equals 1).DiscussionThe analyses presented in the current work are one of the first to categorize and trace users’ patterns of choiceswithin an adaptive system. The initial results presented here provide valuable insight into how users choose tointeract with various game-based features. In addition, this innovative method for assessing users’ choicepatterns may afford learning scientists the opportunity to better understand learners’ behaviors over time.However, future work is needed to examine how these patterns may vary as a function of individual differencesand evolve over longer periods of interaction. Understanding the way in which students choose to engage withinadaptive systems will afford researchers the opportunity to improve the design and adaptability of game-basededucational systems.ReferencesD’Mello, S. K., Taylor, R., & Graesser, A. C. (2007). Monitoring affective trajectories during complex learning.In D. S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the CognitiveScience Society (pp. 203-208). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.Jackson, G. T., & McNamara, D. S., (2013). Motivation and Performance in a Game- based Intelligent TutoringSystem. Journal of Educational Psychology.Snow, E. L., Jackson, G. T., Varner, L. K., & McNamara, D. S. (2013). The impact of system interactions onmotivation and performance. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on HumanComputer Interaction (HCII). (pp. 103-107). Heidelberg, Berlin, Germany: Springer.Snow, E. L., Likens, A., Jackson, G. T., & McNamara, D. S. (2013). Students' walk through tutoring: Using arandom walk analysis to profile students. In S. K. D'Mello, R. A. Calvo, & A. Olney(Eds.), Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Educational Data Mining (pp. 276-279).Heidelberg, Berlin, Germany: Springer.Rai, D., & Beck, J. (2012). Math learning environment with game-like elements: An experimental framework.International Journal of Game Based Learning, 2, 90-110.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1482© ISLS