The Impact of Text Genre on Science Interest in an AuthenticScience Learning EnvironmentSteven McGee, The Learning Partnership, Westerns Spring, IL, mcgee@lponline.netAmanda M. Durik, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL, adurik@niu.eduDena Ann Pastor, James Madison University, Harrisonburg, VA, pastorda@jmu.eduAbstract: A gap exists between research on learning and research on interest. Cognitiveresearchers rarely consider motivational processes, and interest researchers rarely considercognitive process. However, it is essential to consider both since achievement and interest arein fact intertwined. In this paper we (1) discuss a theoretical model that intertwines cognitiveand interest development, (2) describe how that model informed the development ofeducational materials, and (3) report on the results of the motivational components of arandomized research study examining the impact of text genre on interest. We hypothesizedthat students with low levels of interest would receive greater benefit from narrative textformats, whereas students with high levels of science interest would benefit more fromexpository text formats. The results of this research showed the opposite effect. Students withhigh levels of interest perceived the narrative texts as more interesting and useful for learning.Significance of the ProjectResearch on the low levels of science proficiency and motivation, overall, as well as the findings on the gapsbetween White and African American/Hispanic students provide an important backdrop to the myriad ofnational reports making clarion calls for increasing the number of students who pursue careers in science(Robelen, 2010). The recommendations stemming from these reports tend to focus either on increasing studentachievement in science or increasing student interest in pursuing a career in science. However, these reportstend to ignore research indicating that achievement and interest are in fact intertwined (Hidi, 1990). This bodyof research has shown that as student achievement in science increases, students tend to value science more. Inparallel, the development of interest in science increases the selection of opportunities to further develop skills,such that individuals who value math and science are more likely to seek out additional math and sciencecourses. For example, high school students who aspire to major in science tend to take more advanced sciencecourses in high school (Simpkins, Davis-Kean, & Eccles, 2006), thus performing better on college achievementtests (Easton, Ponisciak, & Luppescu, 2008).These findings suggest that both motivational and cognitive processes need to be examined together. Inthis paper we (1) discuss a theoretical model of interest development that intertwines learning and interest, (2)describe how that model informed the development of educational materials about the life history of a variety ofconsumer species in the El Yunque rainforest in Puerto Rico, and (3) report on the preliminary results of themotivational components of a randomized research study examining the impact of those materials on students'interest in science. Future reports will incorporate analyses related to the impact on learning outcomes.Four-Phase Model of InterestHidi and Renninger (2006) articulated a phase-based model of interest development describing howinstructional elements interact with both interest and cognitive development. They make a distinction betweensituational interest, which is supported primarily by the environment, and individual interest, which is driven byinternal characteristics. In addition to describing the phases of the model, they specify which instructionalsupports are likely to facilitate interest development at each phase. A key element of the model is that theeducational supports for situational and individual interests are not the same. Therefore, instructionalenhancements will only promote interest if they are customized to learners’ existing levels of individual interest.In the case of situational interest, it is primarily the characteristics of instructional materials that triggerinterest. Situations that are rich in novelty, surprise, and incongruity as well as group work, hands-on activities,fantasy contexts, and narrative texts can trigger situational interest, which is the first phase of situational interest(see Schraw & Lehman, 2001 for a review). Triggered situational interest is a short-term experience of focusedattention and involvement that is supported almost entirely by features of the situation (Hidi & Renninger,2006). If individuals become sufficiently involved in the material and find the content meaningful, they mightexperience maintained situational interest, the second phase of situational interest, and continue to engage in thematerial or choose to enter very similar situations in the future.On the other hand, the phases of individual interest are supported more by factors inside the person.Individuals with individual interest have some stored knowledge of the content area and value that knowledge.They have also developed some fluidity in the way they work with domain content. However, individual intereststill requires some external support. Specifically, the presence of factors such as expert models, challengingICLS 2014 Proceedings713© ISLSgoals, and opportunities for knowledge building can promote the development of individual interest.Given this framework and the variability between instructional supports that enhance situational versusindividual interest, a critical question is how to design instructional materials to support the development ofinterest for all learners. An assumption underlying most instructional materials and most research on the factorsthat can promote interest is that “one size fits all.” In most of the prior experimental research testing the effectsof situational factors on interest, pre-existing individual interest, if measured, is not tested as a moderator of theeffects of situational factors (e.g., Harp & Mayer, 1997). In other words, there is an assumption that learnerswill respond to situational enhancements with greater interest regardless of their level of individual interest.Consistent with the four-phase model, evidence is beginning to accumulate that the effects ofsituational enhancements work differently depending on individuals’ pre-existing orientations towards the task(Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). For example, learners with low individual interest in math, showed highersituational interest after learning the material with colorful versus plain instructional materials, whereas learnerswith high individual interest in math showed the opposite pattern. In addition, learners with high individualinterest in math showed higher task interest after learning how a new math technique could be personally usefulto their lives (Durik & Harackiewicz, 2007). In other words, the effect of situational enhancements designed toraise interest in educational contexts seem to work best if the type of enhancement is paired with learners’existing level of individual interest.Implication of Four-Phase Model of Interest on the Design of Instructional TextsThe four-phase model of interest development suggests that students' interest in any given learning task is afunction of the task characteristics and students' prior individual interest in the subject of study. The genre of areading passage is a task characteristic that has been shown to influence interest. Research in which bothexpository and narrative texts are included often shows that readers find narrative texts more interesting thanexpository texts (Dai & Wang, 2007). Several characteristics of narrative texts have been identified to increasetext interest (see Schraw & Lehman, 2001), such as, rich detail about concepts and ideas (Schraw, 1997), as wellas suspense and resolution (Iran-Nejad, 1987). Coherence is also a critical variable related to text interestbecause texts that readers perceive to be coherent are more interesting (Sadoski, Goetz, & Rodriguez, 2000).On the other hand, narrative texts can be more challenging than expository texts in supporting readingto learn (Lee & Spratley, 2010). Expository texts tend to be organized around the structure of the subject matterto be learned, whereas narrative texts can lead readers astray from the main ideas conveyed in a text (Kintsch,1998). Consistent with this, Harp and Mayer (1997) measured two kinds of self-reported situational interestfollowing a reading activity in order to separate the affective and cognitive value of texts. They found thatseductive details, which are common in narrative texts, increased affective interest (enjoyment) but decreasedcognitive interest (utility). In this study, we also examine the effects of text characteristics (i.e., narrative orexpository genre) on cognitive and affective situational interest. We also expand on prior research by testingwhether the effects of genre differ depending on initial levels of individual interest.Design of Instructional TextsThe four-phase model of interest development and the empirical research on the impact of text characteristics onlearning and interest provide a framework for the design of instructional materials that can be used to enhanceinterest and learning at different phases of interest. For students who are low in science interest, it is importantto maximize the instructional enhancements that will promote interest and engagement. For students who arehigh in individual science interest, it is important to provide students with challenging material.In this paper, we describe an effort to modify the background materials in a middle school, inquirybased curriculum unit called Journey to El Yunque (http://elyunque.net). We have developed two parallel forms(narrative and expository) of the background readings. The narrative form describes the life history of eachspecies by presenting anthropomorphic characters that show students key limiting factors through vivid imageryand rich descriptions. The narrative version contains the text-based features that prior research has shown totrigger situational interest in students with low individual interest. In contrast, the expository versions presentthe same key limiting factors as in the narrative form, but the information is conveyed as a general description.The expository version minimizes the text-based features that prior research has shown to be distracting forstudents with high individual interest. We will now describe the context of the Journey to El Yunque programand outline the creation of parallel narrative and expository versions of the background readings.The Journey to El Yunque program aims to improve middle school students’ understanding of thedynamic interrelationships among organisms and the environment. The four-week, web-based unit exposesstudents to authentic research practices at the Luquillo Long-Term Ecological Research station in Puerto Rico,commonly known as El Yunque. It is the only tropical rainforest among 25 sites within the overall Long-TermEcological Research network. El Yunque is the site of some of the earliest ecosystem-level studies in ecology(Odum, 1970). More recently, El Yunque has been struck by two severe hurricanes (Hurricane Hugo in 1989and Hurricane Georges in 1998). Researchers in El Yunque have provided comprehensive studies of theICLS 2014 Proceedings714© ISLSresilience of ecosystems to natural disturbances like hurricanes. The research surrounding these hurricanerecovery periods provides a rich example of basic ecosystem processes at work.Journey to El Yunque engages students in the same problems that researchers in El Yunque areinvestigating. The program consists of four modules that support the overarching goal of investigating what willhappen to the rainforest if severe hurricanes end up striking the rainforest more frequently, as suggested byclimate models. The introductory module introduces students to the historical patterns of hurricane frequencyand damage in El Yunque. In the second module, students investigate what happens to the producers in ElYunque after a hurricane. In the third module, students investigate what happens to the consumers in El Yunqueafter a hurricane. In the fourth module, students explore the impact of a hurricane on an entire food chain.The background readings in this study come from the third module on consumers. Prior to engaging inmodeling activities, students are presented with background readings about the life history of each species. Theprogram introduces students to six consumer species that are representative of the types of hurricane responsesresearchers have found in El Yunque. There are two decomposers, two primary consumers, and two secondaryconsumers. As part of the investigation cycle, students read about the life history of their assigned consumer,make a prediction about the population dynamics after hurricane Hugo, and explore a model of populationdynamics to explain what happened to their species after hurricane Hugo.When investigating population dynamics after a disturbance, scientists in El Yunque typically considerchanges to five primary limiting factors for a given species: access to prey, avoidance of predators, directmortality from the hurricane, and suitability to changes in environmental conditions, in particular droughtconditions and the influx of forest debris from the hurricane. Each species has five background readings focusedon providing the life history of each limiting factor. During the modeling activities, students manipulateparameters related to these five limiting factors and investigate the impact on population dynamics.Parallel ReadingsIn order to address the need to have instructional texts that can accommodate students with either low or highindividual interest, we developed parallel background readings (narrative or expository) for each of the fivelimiting factors for each of the six species. There are three dimensions on which we ensured that the readingswere parallel: reading complexity, word length, and idea units. We developed the readings to be at a 5th gradereading level to ensure that the readings would be within the reading range of most middle school students. Weused the Lexile text score to measure reading complexity (Smith, Stenner, Horabin, & Smith, 1989). The Lexilebases text difficulty on the average sentence length and the complexity of the text vocabulary. In classroomsettings, teachers can assess students' reading abilities on the same Lexile scale. Therefore, students’ readingabilities can be matched to text difficulty. The interquartile Lexile range for 5th grade students is 565L –910L(1). Books that are more than 50L above students' Lexile scores are considered too complex for students toread (2). Therefore, each of the background readings was developed to have a Lexile score between 565L and910L and the Lexile scores for the parallel versions were within 50L points of each other to be consideredequivalent.At the end of 5th grade, the average student’s reading fluency for a 5th grade text is 139 words correctper minute (Hasbrouck & Tindal, 2006, Table 1, p. 69). Based on that result, we assumed that most middleschool students would be able to read a 5th grade text at 125 words per minute. Therefore, five 500-word essayswould take students about 20 minutes to complete. We limited the word length differences between the parallelversions to be within 12 words for each reading, which would correspond to a 30-second differential for theaverage student when reading about all five limiting factors for one species.In order to ensure that the readings had parallel content, we first outlined the key concepts for eachspecies. These content outlines were provided to a professional fiction author. He created narrative,anthropomorphic characters and situations to convey the life history of the species. Next, the narrative storiesand the content outline were provided to a science textbook writer, who developed a parallel expository versionthat was within the word length and reading complexity parameters of the narrative version. Lastly, the narrativeand expository versions were reviewed by an ecologist who studies El Yunque to ensure that the content wasscientifically accurate and the content was parallel across both versions. Through this process we developed fivenarrative and five expository readings for each species that are parallel in text complexity, word length and ideaunits. Therefore, the primary difference between the parallel versions is the genre — narrative or expository.MethodThe study was conducted during the 2012-13 school year in 20 seventh and eighth grade classrooms from 7different middle schools in the Midwest. Five of the seven schools were urban elementary schools with greaterthan 90% of the students eligible for free or reduced lunch. One school was a Catholic elementary schoolsituated in an urban neighborhood with a 20% poverty rate. The remaining school was a suburban junior highschool with 0% of the students eligible for free or reduced lunch.ICLS 2014 Proceedings715© ISLSThe intervention took place over five class periods. During the first class period, students completedpre-surveys and on the fifth class period, students completed post-surveys. During the middle three days of theintervention, students studied three of the six species—one species on each day (randomly assigned at theclassroom level to ensure generalizability across species). Students within classrooms were randomly assignedto read either narrative or expository versions of the readings. In order to ensure that levels of prior individualinterest in ecology were evenly distributed across conditions, we did blocked random assignment on students'prior individual interest (see the Measures section below for a description of the prior interest survey).The delivery of the educational materials was conducted through a web-based system. Once a studentwas assigned to a treatment condition, an account was created for the student and the account was assigned toreadings associated with the assigned experimental condition. The experimenter provided students with theirlogin information at the start of class period 2. Class periods 2-4 took place in a computer lab setting in whichparticipants in the same class were reading about the same species, but presented in different genres. All of theexperimental instructions were delivered via text. The experimenter monitored the students as they participatedin the activities and took note of any behavior that fell outside of the study protocol, such as students talkingwith each other, obvious distractions, and technical problems.For class period 2, students logged in to the system and went through an initial 5-minute introductionand training on the system. Then, the system presented students with the activities for the first of the threespecies they had been assigned. The timing and structure of the activities was the same regardless of whichgenre students were presented based on their experimental condition.The students were instructed that they had 20 minutes to read the articles associated with the specieswith the goal of learning about the factors that affect the size of the population and then applying thatinformation to make a prediction about what happened to that species after Hurricane Hugo. At the end of 20minutes, the students were automatically moved to the next step. If students finished early they could move onto the next step. We controlled for time on task by obtaining the actual time spent on the reading task, whichcould be used as a control variable in the analyses. Students were able to take notes on a paper-based worksheetthat contained a column for the limiting factors included in the reading and a column for taking notes about thatlimiting factor. The paper notes could be used during subsequent activities related to the species.Once the students completed the reading and note-taking task, they completed a comprehension task bysummarizing the main factors that affect the survival of the species. After completing the comprehension task,we gauged students’ situational interest by first asking them to describe anything they were curious about. Next,students responded to situational interest survey questions (see measures below). After completing thesituational interest survey, the system presented students with the prediction activity, which is an application oftheir reading comprehension. Students were instructed to use what they learned from the background readings todraw a prediction of what the graph of the population looked like after Hurricane Hugo. The students used theinteractive graphing tool in Journey to El Yunque to draw a graph predicting what the populations levels wouldbe each quarter over a 60-month period. After the students completed their drawing, they developed andsubmitted a justification for their prediction. Once they completed the graph and submitted the justification, theprogram overlaid a graph of the actual population on their graph of the predicted population. The students thengenerated a hypothesis that used what they had learned about the species from the background reading toexplain how changes in the limiting factors affected the population. The students repeated the same protocol onclass periods 3 and 4 for the second and third species they been assigned respectively. In this paper, we focus onthe interaction of prior individual interest and genre on students' situational interest.MeasuresThe pre- and post-surveys contain measures of individual interest and general ecology knowledge. The presurvey also measures students' reading fluency and collects demographic information. Since this study focuseson individual and situational interest, the individual and situational interest measures are described below.Self-report measure of individual interest. Individual interest in ecology was measured on the presurvey with 6 items that were adapted from prior research (Harackiewicz, Durik, Barron, Linnenbrink-Garcia, &Tauer, 2008). Half of the items focused on feelings associated with the domain (e.g., “How much are youinterested in ecology?”) whereas the other half focused on meaningfulness of the domain (e.g., “How importantis ecology as a subject”). The response options ranged from 1 (Not at all ___) to 7 (Very ___) and the anchorlabels were tailored to each item (e.g., Not at all interested to Very interested). Prior to answering the questions,students were given a basic definition of ecology. The reliability for the scale for the current sample, asmeasured by Cronbach’s alpha, was 0.80.Self-report of cognitive and affective situational interest. Two types of situational interest weremeasured on each day after students completed the reading tasks (Harp & Mayer, 1997). Cognitive situationalinterest refers to the extent to which individuals believe that the learning materials helped them learn the content(e.g., “How much did the readings help you understand this topic?”). Affective situational interest reflectsstudents’ beliefs that the material was interesting and entertaining (e.g., “How interesting was the material in theICLS 2014 Proceedings716© ISLSreadings?”). Participants rated each item on the same 7-point scale as used for individual interest, and eachconstruct was tapped with two items. The reliability estimates for cognitive and affective interest for each daywere high, with Cronbach’s alphas exceeding 0.84 for each scale on each day.PopulationThere were 488 students who participated in the intervention. There were 321 students included in the analyses.Students were dropped from the analyses if they did not provide informed consent or were absent on the day ofthe pre-survey. Of the participating students a little over half were girls (52%). The largest racial group wasHispanic (57%), followed by Caucasian (33%), and African American (18%). Around 6% of the studentsindicated membership in other racial groups. The percentages add up to more than 100% since students wereable to indicate more than one racial group. Students who were designated as special education or EnglishLanguage Learners (6%) were also included in the study. In addition to blocking on prior interest, students werealso blocked during the random assignment process based on their special population status.ResultsIn our analyses, we explored the impact of prior individual interest and genre on students' cognitive andaffective situational interest related to the background readings about the species. The overall averages for bothcognitive and affective situational interest was above the scale midpoint (4.0) on each day, indicating in generalthat students found the readings enjoyable and useful for learning. Prior to examining the interaction effect, weexplored the main effect of three factors: group of readings, genre, and prior individual interest.The first factor we examined was whether there were any differences in cognitive or affectivesituational interest depending on which species the students read about. The six species were organized into twogroups of readings (A or B). If there are minimal differences between the groups then we can combine the twogroups for subsequent analyses. We conducted separate ANOVAs for cognitive and affective situational interestfor each day using group as the independent variable (Tables 1 and 2 report the means and standard deviations).For affective situational interest, there were no statistical differences between the two groups on any of the threedays of the intervention (see Table 1). For cognitive situational interest, there were no statistical differencesbetween the two groups on the first two days of the intervention (see Table 2). However, on the third day,students found the snails readings slightly more beneficial for learning than the mushroom readings, with asmall effect size, F(1,300) = 3.94, p<.05, d=0.2. Given that there was only a small difference on one dimensionof situational interest for one of the species, we combined the two groups for all subsequent analyses.Table 1: The effect of group, genre, and prior individual interest on affective situational interestDay123GroupGroup AGroup B4.3 (1.5)4.5 (1.4)4.7 (1.5)4.6 (1.5)4.4 (1.6)4.5 (1.5)GenreNarrativeExpository4.3 (1.4)4.5 (1.5)4.4 (1.6)4.8 (1.4)4.5 (1.6)4.4 (1.5)Prior InterestSlope (R2)0.09* (20%)0.13* (36%)0.13* (35%)Table 2: The effect of group, genre, and prior individual interest on cognitive situational interestDay123GroupGroup AGroup B4.8 (1.3)5.0 (1.1)5.0 (1.3)5.0 (1.2)4.7 (1.4)5.0* (1.2)GenreNarrativeExpository4.8 (1.2)5.0 (1.2)4.8 (1.3)5.2* (1.2)4.8 (1.4)4.9 (1.3)Prior InterestSlope (R2)0.07* (14%)0.08* (22%)0.08* (21%)The second factor we examined was whether there was a main effect of genre on cognitive or affectivesituational interest related to the background readings. We conducted separate ANOVAs for cognitive andaffective situational interest for each day using genre as the independent variable (Tables 1 and 2 report themeans and standard deviations). For affective situational interest, there were no statistical differences betweenthe narrative and expository readings on any of the three days of the intervention (see Table 1). For cognitivesituational interest, there were no statistical differences between the narrative and expository readings on thefirst and third days of the intervention (see Table 2). However, on the second day, students found the expositoryreadings slightly more beneficial for learning than the narrative readings, with a small effect size, F(1,285) =7.8, p<.01, d=0.3. Given that there was only a small difference on one dimension of situational interest for oneof the days, we concluded that there was no main effect of genre on situational interest. Given our hypothesisthat there is an interaction effect between prior individual interest and genre, it is possible that that the effects ofgenre are masked by the interaction.The third factor that we examined was whether there was a main effect of prior individual interest oncognitive or affective situational interest related to the background readings. We conducted separate regressionsICLS 2014 Proceedings717© ISLSon cognitive and affective situational interest for each day using prior individual interest as the independentvariable. Tables 1 and 2 show the beta coefficients and R2 values for each regression. Overall, prior individualinterest in ecology was a strong predictor of both cognitive and affective situational interest related to thebackground readings on each of the three days of the intervention. Students with higher levels of individualinterest found the readings to be more enjoyable and useful for learning than students with lower levels ofindividual interest.In order to analyze the interaction between genre and prior individual interest on situational interest,there are two primary issues that negate the appropriateness of conducting separate analyses for each day usinglinear modeling. First is that days are not independent of each other. Days are embedded within students.Students' experiences on one day may impact their experiences on subsequent days. Second, due to absencesfrom one day to the next, there is variation in the number of observations on each day. A dataset that onlyincludes students who were in attendance on all three days would be significantly reduced. Hierarchical linearmodeling (HLM) addresses both of these issues. HLM analysis constructs a growth model for each student,which includes an intercept and a slope for each student. These individual growth models can be constructedeven if students were not in attendance on all three days. These intercepts and slopes for each student can thenbe analyzed at the student level for interactions between prior individual interest and genre. Tables 3 and 4 showthe results of the HLM analyses for affective and cognitive situational interest. For ease of presentation, wecomputed the expected values of the intercepts and slopes for students whose prior individual interest was at theaverage of the population (medium), one standard deviation above the average (high) and one standard deviationbelow the average (low). The growth models were centered at the first day of the intervention, so that theintercepts represent the expected values on the first day of the intervention.Table 3: The interaction of prior individual interest and genre on the intercepts and slopes related to affectivesituational interestPriorIndividualInterestLowNarrativeExpositoryInterceptSlopeInterceptSlope3.7-0.124.0-0.12Medium4.40.094.7-0.07High5.10.305.4-0.01Table 4: The interaction of prior individual interest and genre on the intercepts and slopes related to cognitivesituational interestPriorNarrativeExpositoryIndividualInterceptSlopeInterceptSlopeInterestLow4.3-0.154.5-0.07Medium4.8-0.0024.9-0.08High5.40.155.2-0.09There is a statistically significant interaction effect between prior individual interest in ecology andgenre of the background readings. Students with higher levels of prior individual interest tended to rate thenarrative readings higher by the end of the intervention than the expository readings and students with lowerlevels of prior individual interest tended to rate the expository readings higher by the end of the interventionthan the narrative readings. Figures 1 and 2 provide a graphical representation of these results. The intercepts foraffective situational interest show a positive main effect for expository over narrative and a positive main effectfor prior individual interest, but no interaction effect. The intercepts for cognitive situational interest show amain effect for prior individual interest in ecology and an interaction effect with genre. Students with lowerlevels of prior individual interest rated the expository readings more helpful for learning whereas the studentswith higher levels of prior individual interest rated the narrative readings as being more helpful for learning.The slopes for both affective and cognitive situational interest show an interaction effect. In theexpository condition, students' ratings of both cognitive and affective situational interest generally decreasedover the course of the three-day intervention. However, in the narrative condition, the change in situationalinterest over time depended on students' prior individual interest in ecology. Students in the narrative conditionwith high prior individual interest showed positive growth in both cognitive and affective situational interest tothe point that they rated their narrative readings higher than the high interest students in the expositorycondition. In contrast, students with low prior interest in both the narrative and expository condition showednegative growth in both affective and cognitive situational interest over the three days.ICLS 2014 Proceedings718© ISLSFigure 1. Interaction effect of prior individual interest and genre on affective situational interestFigure 2. Interaction effect of prior individual interest and genre on cognitive situational interestConclusionThe four-phase model of interest development (Hidi & Renninger, 2006) suggests that students' interest in anygiven learning task is a function of the task characteristics and students' prior individual interest in the subject ofstudy. Task interest for students with low individual interest in a subject area is increased through taskenhancements that are outside of the subject of study. Prior research on text characteristics has found thatnarrative texts with rich descriptions are generally more interesting than expository texts (Dai & Wang, 2007),and could be used as enhancements to trigger situational interest in a science text among students with lowindividual interest. On the other hand, for students with high individual interest in the subject area, creatingchallenging learning tasks enhances task interest. Narrative texts can be more challenging in a scientific contextthan expository texts because they can lead readers astray from the main ideas conveyed through a narrative text(Kintsch, 1998).The results of this study support the conclusion that students' task interest in reading about the lifehistory of species in El Yunque is dependent on their individual interest in ecology and the characteristics of thetext. We attempted to vary text characteristics so as to optimally support the task interest of students who werelow or high in individual interest in ecology. For students who were low in individual interest in ecology, boththe narrative and expository readings triggered at least some level of interest at first (3.5-4.0 out of 7 onaffective interest and 4.0-4.5 out of 7 on cognitive interest). However, neither genre of reading was able tomaintain the triggered interest of students who were low in individual interest in ecology. The ratings ofsituational interest for both narrative and expository decreased as the intervention progressed. These results arenot consistent with prior research indicating that narrative texts tend to be more interesting than expository texts.Further work needs to be done to uncover the characteristics of science tasks that will both trigger and maintainsituational interest for students who are low in individual interest in science.On the other hand, for students who were high in individual interest in ecology, both the narrative andexpository readings triggered high levels of interest at first (5.0-5.5 out of 7 on both affective and cognitiveinterest). As was the case for students low in individual interest in ecology, the expository readings were notICLS 2014 Proceedings719© ISLSable to maintain the triggered interest of students who were high in individual interest. The ratings of situationalinterest for the expository readings decreased as the intervention progressed. In contrast, the narrative readingsdid maintain and even increase the triggered situational interest of students who were high in individual interest.When viewing these results through the lens of prior research that characterizes the challenge of extractingimportant ideas from narrative texts, these results seem to be consistent with the four-phased model of interestdevelopment. Hidi and Renninger (2006) suggest that challenging tasks heighten the level of task interest forthose students who are already high in individual interest in a subject area. These results raise interestingpossibilities about the use of narrative texts in science as a means to challenge students with high individualinterest in science.Endnotes(1) http://lexile.com/about-lexile/grade-equivalent/grade-equivalent-chart/(2) http://lexile.com/using-lexile/lexile-at-home/reading-outside-of-your-lexile-range/ReferencesDai, D. Y., & Wang, X. (2007). The role of need for cognition and reader beliefs in text comprehension andinterest development. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 32(3), 332-347.Durik, A. M., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2007). Different strokes for different folks: How individual interestmoderates the effects of situational factors on task interest. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99(3),597-610.Easton, J., Ponisciak, S., & Luppescu, S. (2008). From High School to the Future: The Pathway to 20. Chicago:Consortium on Chicago School Research at the University of Chicago. Retrieved March 23, 2011 fromhttp://ccsr.uchicago.edu/content/publications.php?pub_id=126.Harackiewicz, J. M., Durik, A. M., Barron, K. E., Linnenbrink-Garcia, L., & Tauer, J. M. (2008). The role ofachievement goals in the development of interest: Reciprocal relations between achievement goals,interest, and performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100(1), 105-122.Harp, S. F., & Mayer, R. E. (1997). The role of interest in learning from scientific text and illustrations: On thedistinction between emotional interest and cognitive interest. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89,92-102.Hasbrouck, J., & Tindal, G. A. (2006). Oral reading fluency norms: A valuable assessment tool for readingteachers. [Article]. Reading Teacher, 59(7), 636-644.Hidi, S. (1990). Interest and Its Contribution as a Mental Resource for Learning. Review of EducationalResearch, 60(4), 549-571.Hidi, S., & Renninger, K. A. (2006). The four-phase model of interest development. Educational Psychologist,41(2), 111-127.Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Promoting interest and performance in high school scienceclasses. Science, 326, 1410-1412.Iran-Nejad, A. (1987). Cognitive and Affective Causes of Interest and Liking. Journal of EducationalPsychology, 79(2), 120-130.Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A Paradigm for Cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.Lee, C. D., & Spratley, A. (2010). Reading in the Disciplines: The Challenges of Adolescent Literacy. NewYork:CarnegieCorporation.RetrievedMarch18,2011fromhttp://carnegie.org/fileadmin/Media/Publications/PDF/tta_Lee.pdf.Robelen, E. (2010, September 14). Advisory Panel to Offer Obama Ideas for Advancing STEM Education.http://blogs.edweek.org/edweek/curriculum/2010/09/stem_ed_conference.htmlSadoski, M., Goetz, E. T., & Rodriguez, M. (2000). Engaging tests: Effects of concreteness oncomprehensibility, interest, and recall in four text types. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92, 85-95.Schraw, G. (1997). Situational interest in literary text. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 22, 436-456.Schraw, G., & Lehman, S. (2001). Situational interest: A review of the literature and directions for futureresearch. Educational Psychology Review, 13, 23-52.Simpkins, S. D., Davis-Kean, P. E., & Eccles, J. L. (2006). Math and science motivation: A longitudinalexamination of the links between choices and beliefs. Developmental Psychology, 42, 70-83.Smith, D. R., Stenner, A. J., Horabin, I., & Smith, M. (1989). The Lexile Scale in Theory and Practice. FinalReport. Washington, DC: MetaMetrics.AcknowledgmentsThe research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,through Grant R305A110810 to The Learning Partnership. The opinions expressed are those of the authors anddo not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.ICLS 2014 Proceedings720© ISLS