Time Needed: Growth of Preservice Science Teachers’ Knowledgeof Inquiry and Practice of Lesson DesignAugusto Z. Macalalag Jr.Arcadia University, 450 S. Easton Road, Glenside, PA 19038, macalalaga@arcadia.eduAbstract: Recent reforms in science education require teachers to develop their notions ofscientific inquiry and design effective inquiry-based lessons. This study examined the wayspreservice teachers’ knowledge of model-based inquiry (MBI) and their ability to use thisknowledge in designing lessons developed over time. This study involved 15 preserviceteachers enrolled in four consecutive methods courses in the biological certification program.Qualitative procedures were employed to analyze teaching philosophy papers and clinicalinterviews. Research findings provided evidence to support growth in preservice teachers’knowledge of MBI and its implementation in lesson designs: (a) from teacher-centered andactivity-oriented to more student-centered lessons with modeling, and (b) from scripted tomore sophisticated modeling practice. This study has the potential to contribute to teachereducation research by uncovering the effects of subject-specific methods courses andfieldwork on the development of teacher knowledge and lesson planning practices.Introduction: The Use of MBI in Preservice Science Teacher EducationCurrent reforms advocate for science teaching that emphasizes the development of scientific knowledge throughengagement in core scientific practices such as modeling, developing explanations, and engaging inargumentation (NRC, 2011). The pedagogical approach associated with teaching science as model building andtesting is termed model-based inquiry or MBI (Cartier, Rudolph & Stewart, 2001). MBI in the classroom entails(a) the use of students’ prior knowledge to pose problems and generate data, (b) the search for patterns in data,(c) the development of causal models to account for patterns, (d) the use of patterns in data and models to makepredictions, (e) the design and conducting of experiments to test models, (f) the revision of models based onevidence, and (g) the conducting of argumentation in light of new evidence (Windschitl & Thompson, 2006).MBI is different from the traditional scientific method approach in that questions are derived from a model thatrepresents observable (e.g., balloon expanding) or unobservable (e.g., collision of molecules inside the balloon)phenomena in the world, rather than being based on what teachers conceive as interesting or doable (Windschitl,2004).Teaching through inquiry has a long history in science education. From the early 1960s until today,researchers and educators developed curricula (e.g. Elementary Science Study [ESS] and Biological ScienceCurriculum Study [BSCS]), standards (e.g., National Science Education Standards and AAAS’ Literacy Maps),and professional development programs to help teachers to incorporate inquiry in the classroom (Duschl et al.,2007). MBI has stemmed from research in the philosophy of science that has argued for the central role thatmodels play in scientific inquiry, both in terms of artifacts of scientific thought and as fodder for new scientificexplorations. “A scientific model is an abstraction and simplification of a system that make its central featuresexplicit and visible, allowing someone—the inquirer (a scientist, a teacher, or a learner) – to illustrate, generateexplanations, or make predictions about natural phenomena” (Harrison & Treagust, 2000, p.2). A model is a setof conceptual understandings that (a) can be used to explain natural phenomena, (b) is continuously assessedand revised in light of new data and evidence, and (c) can be used to make predictions about natural phenomenaand thus become a useful guide for future research studies (Cartier et al., 2001).Theoretical FrameworkLesson planning is a ubiquitous practice for teachers and lesson plans are important artifacts of teaching. Theprocesses of lesson design and the creation of lesson plans are windows into teaching philosophy and strategies.Lesson planning refers to teachers’ conceptualization and formulation of courses of action in a lesson, which inturn have a profound influence on teachers’ classroom behavior and students’ learning (Shavelson, 1987).Research studies have shown the different challenges that inservice and preservice teachers (PTs) faced whileengaging in lesson planning and design. Specifically, inservice teachers paid little attention to the scientifictheories involved in science lessons (Duschl & Wright, 1989) and were initially uncertain and unaware of thedifferent ways of thinking about concepts among their students (Kazemi & Franke, 2004). However, throughprofessional development, inservice teachers can begin to attend to their students’ thinking.In contrast, PTs have tended to design lessons that were teacher-centered, which did not considerstudents’ prior knowledge and the curriculum (Friedrichsen et al., 2009). In a study that helped PTs increasetheir knowledge of students, about one-third of the 32 PTs did not consider students’ conceptions whiledesigning lessons (Justi & Gilbert, 2002). On the other hand, studies have shown that it was indeed possible forICLS 2014 Proceedings559© ISLSPTs to conceptualize and design student-centered lessons (Etkina, 2010; Fernandez, 2010). Teaching sciencethrough inquiry and developing inquiry lessons specifically around models and modeling is equally challengingfor PTs. These challenges include (a) difficulty in letting go of the didactic approach to teaching and movingtoward more student-centered instruction (Hayes, 2002) and (b) not referring to scientific theories or models inplanning and performing their investigations (Windschitl, 2004). In studies that looked at the ways to improvePTs’ knowledge and language of models and modeling, Crawford (2004) was successful in developing PTs’ability to critically think about mechanisms involved in modeling after one semester of engaging in modelingexperiences, designing open-ended investigations, and building and testing their own dynamic computer models.However, PTs viewed models differently from the ways that scientists or researchers use models, there was littleindication of using modeling in PTs’ own teaching, and these PTs failed to use models to design their owninvestigations (Crawford, 2004; Justi & Gilbert, 2002; Whindschitl & Thompson, 2006). In terms of theteachers’ ability to design inquiry-based lessons, Schwarz and Gwekwerere (2007) showed that by using highlyscaffolded frameworks for instructional design, PTs were able to develop lessons that focused on the role ofstudents in the lesson, the progression of students’ conceptions in the lesson, and the increased use of differentmodels and modeling to engage students.In summary, designing and implementing MBI instruction is challenging particularly for PTs. In theMethods courses of my study, PTs engaged in designing, revising, and implementing inquiry based lessons infour consecutive courses. The intensive focus on lesson design was part of Methods II and Methods III, whichare described in the next section. Qualitative research methods allowed me to produce comprehensive, in-depth,and holistic descriptions of the growth in PTs’ knowledge of MBI and their ability to design lessons througheducational philosophy papers and clinical interviews that are meaning-rich (Merriam, 1988). Specifically, thefollowing questions guided my study: (1) In what ways do PTs’ knowledge, as demonstrated through courseassignments, of MBI develop over the four consecutive methods courses? (2) In what ways do PTs’ ability todesign model-based inquiry lessons and units change over time? I anticipated that the PTs in my study wouldincrease their attention to students’ learning, curricula, and scientific models in their lesson plan and design overthe four courses. More specifically, I hypothesized that the initial lesson designs would focus on the teachingmodels and didactic-approach similar to what Justi and Gilbert (2002) and Hayes (2002) found in their study.Given the findings from the studies by Etkina (2010) and Crawford (2004), I predicted that lessons would beginto focus on MBI with special attention to students’ learning and development throughout the lesson. However,compared to the findings of Schwarz and Gwekwerere (2007), I hypothesized that the PTs in my study willconsider a more sophisticated version of scientific models in their lesson design given time and emphasis intheir methods courses.Methods: Study ContextMy study involved a cohort of 15 PTs (4 male and 11 female) enrolled in a two-year biological sciencecertification program at a large university in the northeast U.S. This graduate program was geared towards twotypes of students— students that were juniors majoring in the biological sciences or a related field and seekingteacher certification in biological sciences (5-year undergraduate students), and students that had completed anundergraduate degree and were seeking certification (post-baccalaureate students). There were two tracks at thisuniversity for science certification—a physical science track to certify physics and chemistry teachers (Etkina,2010) and a biological science track to certify biology teachers. In both tracks, all PTs had completed at least 30credit hours in the subject matter (in this case, biology) before entering the teacher education program.As part of the certification program, the PTs completed four subject-specific methods courses inconsecutive semesters (Methods I–IV). In Methods I, PTs engaged in MBI activities, readings, and discoursedesigned to promote their understanding of scientific inquiry and engender a view of science as theory-building.The goal of the various activities was to provide the PTs with experiences of inquiry from a learner’sperspective, and to provide a model of what MBI teaching looks like. In addition to the inquiry activities, inMethods I, PTs also engaged in lesson critique and revisions—an important aspect of teacher preparation(Duncan, Pilitsis, & Piegaro, 2010). A more intensive focus on lesson design was part of Methods II andMethods III. Methods II was essentially a design-based course in which the PTs, in small groups, developedextended model-based inquiry units about selected topics in biology such as photosynthesis, ecosystems, etc. Inthis course, PTs were introduced to some design frameworks including Learning for Use (Edelson, 2001) andBackwards Design (Wiggins and McTighe, 2005). Lessons and activities in this course were scaffolded toincrease PTs’ repertoire in analyzing students’ prior conceptions and alternative conceptions (Crawford, 2004),decision strategies involved in incorporating models and modeling in lesson design (Schwarz & Gwekwerere,2007), incorporation of epistemological bases of scientific knowledge in lessons, and experience in teachinginquiry (Windschitl, Thompson, & Braaten, 2008). In Methods III, PTs further developed their abilities to teachinquiry-based lessons and assess students’ thinking during their supervised student teaching internship, whichlasted 15 weeks. In this course, PTs were given two opportunities to plan, implement, and critically examineextended model-based inquiry lesson sets.ICLS 2014 Proceedings560© ISLSData Sources and AnalysisIn order to capture changes in the 15 PTs’ notions of MBI and its implementation on lesson design, I chose datasources that were relevant to issues of lesson design. The data included educational philosophy papers andclinical interviews, each of which is described below.Semi-Structured Interviews. In Methods I, PTs were asked to address four questions in ateaching philosophy paper: (a) “What are the goals of biology education and what should be taught in highschool?” (b) “What are the problems with the current instructional methods?” (c) “What are the best ways tolearn and teach science?” and (d) “Describe an ideal lesson in biology.” While the questions did not explicitlyuse the words “scientific inquiry,” PTs’ answers to the questions gave insights about their implicit notions ofscience inquiry in the form of investigations or experimentation (not MBI) as well as the characteristics of agood lesson. The philosophy paper was written as a homework assignment and was submitted the second weekof Methods I.The analysis of educational philosophy papers represented a pre-instructional measure of PTs’ ideasabout the best ways to teach and learn science, as well as the components of an ideal lesson in biology. Thisbaseline point of analysis gave me insights into what PTs may or may not know about MBI and lesson design.The development of my coding schemes proceeded through an iterative process of application to the data set andrefinement of the codes to capture relevant emerging themes in the data (Merriam, 1998). I double coded thedata in instances when a statement fit into two different categories. I present a complete list of categories andexamples of them in the “Findings” section of this document.Clinical Interviews were conducted with each teacher at the end of each of the four methods courses.The interview protocol had four tasks: (a) defining model-based inquiry, (b) critiquing a lesson, (c) designing alesson, and (d) evaluating students’ written work examples. This paper involved analyses of the third interviewtask in order to get a sense of PTs’ knowledge of model-based inquiry and their ability to develop inquiry-basedlessons, respectively. During the third task, PTs were asked to design a lesson based on three objectives given tothem. PTs described outlines of a 2-3 day lesson set that would address the provided goals. These design taskslasted for about 15-20 minutes. Interviews were recorded using audio and video. All interviews were transcribedverbatim.Before conducting my analyses of the third task (designing a lesson), I blinded (removed names) andrearranged the transcripts from different methods courses to minimize bias. The first coding pass resulted in alist of the different activities in the lesson, such as teachers asking questions to gather students’ prior knowledge(naïve models), teachers delivering lectures and demonstrations, teachers voicing students’ ideas, hands-onexperiments, etc. Through constant comparison of transcripts from interviews at different points in time, I wasable to create categories and assign different levels to identify shifts in the nature and quality of teachers’ lessondesigns with regard to: (1) modeling (level 0—no modeling, level 1—script modeling, level 2A—modelingpractice, and level 2B— argumentation) and (2) student-centeredness of lessons (level 0—teacher-centered,level 1—partly student-centered, and level 2—student-centered). After coding all lesson design from theinterview transcripts, I identified trends in the categories and subcategories that I mentioned above from thedifferent methods courses. I describe and provide examples of each category and subcategory below.Findings: PTs’ Initial Ideas about Lesson DesignResearch questions were addressed by examining the PTs’ educational philosophy papers. These papersrepresent the PTs’ initial ideas about the components of an ideal lesson in biology, which I used as a proxy fortheir ideas of the best ways to teach and learn science. While the assignment did not directly ask for their ideasof MBI as it applies to designing lessons, the educational philosophy papers provided insights into what PTs’thought of as the ideal structure and components of science instruction. The figure 1 below illustrates the salientthemes that emerged from my analyses.With regard to the components of an ideal lesson in biology, the majority of PTs argued forexperiential learning through hands-on experiences and experimentation. They argued for the importance ofreal-life connections to motivate students to learn. A majority of PTs also mentioned lecture-presentation anddemonstration as part of the instruction. Several PTs discussed various methods of instruction and allowingstudents to work independently. These ideas, which reflected a blend of teacher lectures and students’ hands-onexperiences, seemed to hint, implicitly, at a general view of instruction that involves students, but is heavilydirected by teachers. The proposed investigations, discussions, and independent study were used merely toconfirm what teachers introduced during lecture presentation or demonstration.The components of lessons that PTs identified at this stage did not reflect MBI instruction in any way.Only two PTs mentioned the use of models and modeling as part of the lesson. Nora suggested using the modelof a cell to review its parts and structure: “Here, we could review the structure of a cell with a model. Looking atthe model, the class can locate the nucleus and the chromosomes.” However, Nora is using the model to conveyinformation and not as a generative tool to develop students’ own ideas. While Jackie, another participant,mentioned incorporating student-generated models in her lesson, she suggested comparing these with otherICLS 2014 Proceedings561© ISLSmodels or theories in order to provide different perspectives, which somewhat reflected what scientists do asthey use alternative models to compare their own:After preconceptions were cleared up, the teacher can use inquiry to try to help the studentform the concept somewhat by themselves. Then the teacher might want to show the studentsmodels and the different theories of the concept to give the students a unique way of lookingat the information. (Jackie, Educational Philosophy Paper, Methods I)Jackie’s use of models in her instruction fell short of how scientists use models—to formulatehypotheses from models as well as to test and revise them. The PTs’ initial ideas of science instruction invokedhands-on experiences but were heavily directed by teachers, which did not reflect an understanding or valuing ofMBI instruction.Figure 1. Science instruction based on the teaching philosophy papers.Model-Based InquiryIn Methods I, several lessons did not incorporate the modeling process (level 0). These lessons focused onhands-on investigations without eliciting students’ prior knowledge. By the end of Methods I and Methods II,PTs had begun to include the language of modeling in their lessons; however, the modeling process wasprescriptive and procedure-oriented (level 1). At this level, PTs mentioned the steps of modeling (e.g. gatheringnaïve models, testing and revising models) but failed to explicitly mention the scientific models that the studentswere working on. For instance, Patrick said that in the process of MBI, students engage in developing initialmodels, conducting research and experiments, revising models, and sharing of ideas with other students:With the initial model, maybe students would be a little to set to stick with their initial model.They should probably after research, after experiment be ready to develop a new model ... Allthe while this research and experimentation should be in a group... They are sticking in agroup talking to people. They are sharing ideas. And that’s it. (Patrick, Clinical Interviews,Methods I)In this example, Patrick fails to explicitly link the process of modeling to the science concepts thatstudents are working on. His modeling process is generic and prescriptive in that it could be used in any lessonor topic. On the other hand, lessons from interview transcripts in Methods III contained a more sophisticatedmodeling practice (level 2A) in which target models were explicitly described and connected to the overallmodeling practice. In Sean’s lesson below, he mentions that after modeling and argumentation, the modelsshould contain and explain the process of photosynthesis:After the group model is done, I would have them each group present to the class, post themaround the room, and then we would engage in classroom argumentation to see what thedifferences were and to see if we could reach a class consensus. The models should contain allthree of these aspects: how plants get and convert energy—that would be if they put thenutrients chlorophyll and light; equations—inputs and outputs and using glucose as a sourceof energy... If they explain what the end results are and why they have chosen these resultsthat answer should include— well I included glucose because that is a source of energy.(Sean, Clinical Interviews, Methods III)Sean’s views of models consisted of characteristics and explanations (how plants get and convertenergy), which reflected a good understanding of models. However, similar to the lesson sets, only a handful ofPTs mentioned argumentation (level 2B) as part of MBI lessons in clinical interviews. These PTs indicated theICLS 2014 Proceedings562© ISLSuse of evidence from experiments to revise and argue for or against a model. For example, Nora’s plan was forher students to examine data and use that information to justify their models:From that they can analyze that data and make some charts to see the correlation between thedifferent variables in the experiment. After that, I will have them share the results to the class.Every group would share and have the class argue using evidence from their experiments. Andhave them justify what their argument is about. After argumentation, I will ask them to revisetheir models. (Nora, Clinical Interview, Methods III)The majority of lessons did not include argumentation. They did not use evidence to inform theirdiscourse around models. Lessons ended with a revision of models or a lecture. For instance, Catherinementioned that after investigation, students will revise their models using data from their experiments. Then shementioned conducting a lecture to summarize the lesson:And then I was saying, after that [investigation], have the groups revise the model, then comeback and revise the model as a class, using the data. And then, have a benchmark lecture oncellular respiration. (Catherine, Clinical Interview, Methods III)In addition to lack of argumentation in lessons, there was a decrease in the number of lessons with level2 modeling (sophisticated modeling practice) and an increase in level 1 modeling (script modeling) in MethodsIV. It is not clear why, but this might have been be due to the lower motivation of PTs to complete the interviewsince this task was their final assignment in the program. Figure 1 shows changes in modeling as part of lessonsin clinical interviews.Figure 2. MBI based on clinical interviews.Designing Student-Centered LessonsWithin the student-centeredness of lessons category, PTs described their roles as well as their students’ roles inthe lesson. PTs’ descriptions of the lesson sequence encompassed the different degrees of their consideration ofstudents during instruction: from level 0— teacher-centered (lecture or demonstration) and level 1—partlystudent-centered (blend of lecture and student investigations), to level 2—student-centered (students’ modelingpractices) lessons. Lessons that were student-centered tended to have: (a) a decrease in the number of teachercentered lessons that did not include modeling, (b) an increase in student-centered approaches (e.g. elicitingstudents’ prior knowledge) to learning, and (c) an increase in PTs’ ability to anticipate what students knew orwould be able to do.Figure 3. Student-centeredness of lessons based on clinical interviewsICLS 2014 Proceedings563© ISLSInitially, the majority of lessons that the PTs designed in the first two courses were lecture-based anddid not consider students’ prior conceptions (level 0). At this level, teachers provided information to students ina lecture or demonstration and then asked them to conduct an investigation to confirm what was taught duringlecture. As an example, Ava came up with questions for a class discussion, an activity to look at labels in drinks,and a lecture:I will have quick question for them: “Where do people get their energy from?” They can lookat the ingredients in the labels of bottles of energy drinks and pick two or three ingredients andmaybe look for where glucose is coming from. And from there you can let them know thatthere is a process where glucose and oxygen can give energy and possibly create a naïvemodel of the process of respiration. And after they are done with more investigation, they cango back and revise their models and present them to class. (Ava, Clinical Interviews, MethodsII)Even when Ava’s language included the terms “models,” it is noticeable that her lesson was teachercentered in that the teacher provided the question and explanations to drive the science concepts, and that thelesson did not consider students’ models. Moreover, when the interviewer asked her about what she planned todo in between the naïve and revised modeling activities, she answered “that will be a quick lecture [about] theactual respiration process because some of it can be technical.” Lessons designed in Methods III and MethodsIV, however, had components that were teacher-centered as well as components that included student’s handson learning experiences (level 1). For instance, Nora described her instruction with the following components:eliciting student ideas, modeling, student investigations, data analysis and presentation, and a lecture to end thelesson:I will begin with a guiding question … how can a red wood tree grow so tall? Then I will askthem to create a naïve model to get their prior knowledge regarding the guiding question… Iwill then introduce an experiment of some sort about photosynthesis, plants, light, CO2,probes to get CO2. I will ask them to do an experiment of some kind that will show thechanging of concentrations of O2 and CO2 by keeping the probes there to see the changes andwhat is going on. From that they can analyze that data and make some charts to see thecorrelation between the different variables in the experiment. After that, I will have them sharethe results to the class... hopefully they are in the same page but if not I will end with a quickbenchmark lecture to get everyone in the same page. (Nora, Clinical Interviews, Methods III)While the lesson had components that were student-driven, the teacher provided the experiments andconnections for his/her students. On the other hand, half of the lessons developed in Methods III were studentcentered lessons (level 2). PTs’ lessons involved active participation of students: learners engaging inscientifically oriented questions, teachers eliciting students’ prior knowledge, learners developing or engaging inan investigation, learners gathering evidence and formulating explanation, and learners communicating andjustifying explanations. Moreover, these lessons included making connections to scientific knowledge, modelingpractices, and/or explicitly mentioned anticipated outcomes from students. Molly described a lesson in whichshe would elicit and adjust her activity depending on her students’ prior knowledge:So by starting with plants, you can get them thinking how they make their own food… andhow do we get our energy? … I would like to see their prior knowledge …if there is no clearunderstanding and there is really no prior knowledge then I wouldn’t have them model…depending upon their prior knowledge…I know this sounds crazy but I would probably givethem some experiments that scientists did to figure out how we get our energy…Like whatthey ate this for 20 minutes and they were fine or they ate this for 20 minutes and they didn’tfeel well. So on and so forth. Then I would see if we added something to that priorknowledge… (Molly, Methods III)Molly’s experiment or suggestions are meant to help her students think about the question. Mollydescribed how she would demonstrate an experiment, ask her students to design and conduct their ownexperiments, and end the lesson by re-visiting the students’ initial models:I was thinking maybe I would do some sort of small experiment in front of them some sort ofto get them going …maybe I would run in place and take my pulse... And then have themdesign an experiment… I want them to do [their experiments] to see what happens… [And]once they are finish with their experiments, I want us to get together and share what theyICLS 2014 Proceedings564© ISLSdid… [next] some sort of small benchmark lesson, just very short, maybe on oxygen, glucose,carbon dioxide and water and how those four work together that may get them thinking… Iwould have them go back and [and revise] their naïve models… (Molly, Methods III)Discussion and ImplicationsRecent calls to refocus science education have emphasized the development of scientific knowledge throughmodel-building and argumentation (Duschl et al., 2007; NRC, 2011). MBI instruction involves an understandingof scientific knowledge as ever-evolving conceptual models of natural phenomena and the scientific practicesused to generate, test, and revise those models. However, this type of instruction is difficult to successfullyimplement, especially for PTs who lack the knowledge, experience, and strategies to teach according to MBI.Specifically, it appears to be challenging for them to develop their own knowledge of scientific models andmodeling (Windschitl, 2004), design MBI lessons (Schwarz & Gwekwerere, 2007), and attend to studentthinking (Hayes, 2002).My analysis of the PTs’ educational philosophy papers revealed that their initial ideas about scienceinstruction were generally teacher-centered and did not incorporate key aspects of MBI. My findings are similarto those of Hayes (2002) who found that it was challenging for most of his PTs to let go of a didactic approachto teaching and move towards lessons that considered the development of students’ own interest. I found,initially, that a typical lesson developed by PTs during the study was mostly teacher-centered. These lessonsincluded teachers asking questions, followed by a lecture, and then guided practice, which ultimately revolvedaround the lecture material. In most cases, student participation during investigations, discussions, andindependent study were merely used to confirm what teachers covered during lectures. Moreover, the majorityof PTs in my study emphasized experiential learning through hands-on experiences and argued for theimportance of real-life connections and motivation for students to learn. These ideas of science instruction inlesson designs implicitly pointed to the PTs’ views of instruction that was heavily directed by teachers.Moreover, similar to the findings of Schwarz and Gwekwerere (2007) who saw that PTs could improve howthey think about models but still struggled to incorporate models into their lessons, I found that initially onlytwo PTs in my study mentioned the use of models as part of their instructions. These models were used toconvey information, not as generative tools developed from students’ ideas, and different from how scientistsuse models. However, contrary to Schwarz and Gwekwerere (2007), who found that PTs’ ideas of models werelimited to representing objects or phenomenon, I found that PTs in my study developed a more sophisticatedidea about models.Contrary to the PTs in the studies of Schwarz and Gwekwerere (2007), who attended only one methodscourse in science, PTs in my study had an opportunity to learn modeling and lesson design in an extendedperiod of time—four consecutive methods courses. However, the successes and struggles of PTs in my study interms of their knowledge of models, modeling, and lesson design in Methods I (in one semester) were similar tothose PTs in studies of Schwarz and Gwekwerere (2007) and Windschitl and Thompson (2006). Specifically,several lessons in Methods I did not incorporate the modeling process. My findings suggest that this kind oflearning takes time and that warranted careful scaffolding and multiple learning opportunities for PTs in severalmethods courses. However, my findings showed a shift from teacher-centered to student-centered lessons afterPTs participated in the lesson design and redesign activities, an internship seminar, and reflection assignments inMethods III and Methods IV.PTs encountered difficulty in embedding argumentation as part of scientific practice. In most cases,PTs ended the inquiry process in their lessons by asking students to revise their models and present them in frontof their classmates without any follow up argument or discussion around models and evidence. My findingsconfirmed what Windschitl et al. (2008) found with their PTs as they engaged, initially, in modeling andargumentation at the beginning of their methods course. Specifically, they also saw that the majority of their PTsmentioned discussing or stating what they learned from their experiments instead of using evidence and modelsto anchor their arguments.Teacher-educators can better prepare pre-service science teachers in planning for inquiry-basedinstruction by providing them with knowledge and experiences of inquiry that focus on science as modelbuilding and -testing. This entails developing PTs’ own knowledge of MBI and placing an emphasis onstudents’ active role in scientific practice. My research findings showed that learning takes time, and onemethods course in science is insufficient to change PTs’ knowledge and practice with regard to lesson designand students’ conceptions. Fostering knowledge of MBI and lesson design involves careful scaffolding ofactivities in consecutive methods courses. Specifically, PTs in my study had a chance to experience MBI aslearners and conduct clinical interviews with students to elicit students’ conceptions in Methods I, design unitsand lessons in Methods II and Methods III, conduct action research projects in Methods III, and analyzestudents’ thinking based on data collected during their internship seminar in Methods IV.ICLS 2014 Proceedings565© ISLSReferencesCartier, J., Rudolph, J., & Stewart, J. (2001). The Nature and Structure of Scientific Models. The NationalCenter for Improving Student Learning and Achievement in Mathematics and Science. Retrieved onDecember 4, 2010 from http://ncisla.wceruw.org/publications/reports/Models.pdfCrawford, Barbara (2004). Supporting prospective teachers’ conceptions of modeling in science. InternationalJournal of Science Education, 26(11), 1379–1401.Duncan, R.G., Pilitsis, V., & Piegaro, M. (2010). Development of Preservice Teachers’ Ability to Critique andAdapt Inquiry-based Instructional Materials. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 21, 81-102.Duschl, R.A., Schweingruber, H., & Shouse, A. (Eds.) (2007). Taking Science to School: Learning and teachingScience in grades K-8. Washington DC: The National Academy Press.Duschl, R.A. & Wright, E. (1989). A case study of high school teachers’ decision making models for planningand teaching science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 26, 467-501.Edelson, Daniel. (2001). Learning-for-Use: A Framework for the Design of Technology-Supported InquiryActivities. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(3), 355-385.Etkina, Eugenia. (2010). Pedagogical content knowledge and preparation of high school physics teachers.Physics Education Research, 6, 1-25.Fernandez, Maria Lorelei. (2010). Investigating how and what prospective teachers learn through microteachinglesson study. Teaching and Teacher Education, 26, 351-362.Friedrichsen, P.J., Abell, S.K., Pareja, E.M, Brown, P.L, Lankford, D.M., & Volkmann, M.J. (2009). DoesTeaching Experience Matter? Examining Biology Teachers’ Prior Knowledge for Teaching in anAlternative Certification Program. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(4), 357-383.Gilbert, J. & Boulter, C. (1998). Learning science through models and modelling. In Fraser, B. and Tobin, K.(Eds.), International Handbook of Science Education (pp. 53-66). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: KluwerAcademic.Harrison, A. G., & Treagust, D. F. (2000). A typology of school science models. International Journal ofScience Education, 22(9), 1011-1026.Hayes, Michael. (2002). Elementary Preservice Teachers’ Struggles to Define Inquiry-based Science Teaching.Journal of Science Teacher Education, 13(2), 147-165.Justi, R. & Gilbert, J. (2002). Science teachers’ knowledge about and attitudes towards the use of models andmodeling in learning science. International Journal of Science Education, 24(12), 1273–1292.Kazemi, E. & Franke, M.L. (2004). Teacher Learning in Mathematics: Using Student Work to PromoteCollective Inquiry. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 7, 203-235.Merriam, S. B. (1988). Case Study Research in Education: A Qualitative Approach. SF, CA: Jossey-Bass.National Research Council. (2011). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Schwarz, C.V. & Gwekwerere, Y. (2007). Using a Guided Inquiry and Modeling Instructional Framework(EIMA) to Support Preservice K-8 Science Teaching. Science Education, 91,158 – 186.Shavelson, R. J. (1987). Planning. In Dunkin, M. (ed). The International Encyclopedia of Teaching and TeacherEducation (pp. 483-486). Oxford, England: Pergamon.Wiggins, G. & McTighe, J. (2005). Understanding by Design (2nd ed.). Alexandria, VA: Association forSupervision and Curriculum Development.Windschitl, Mark (2004). Folk Theories of ‘‘Inquiry:’’ How Preservice Teachers Reproduce the Discourse andPractices of an Atheoretical Scientiﬁc Method. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(5), 481–512.Windschitl, M. & Thompson, J. (2006). Transcending Simple Forms of School Science Investigation: TheImpact of Preservice Instruction on Teachers’ Understandings of Model-Based Inquiry. AmericanEducational Research Journal, 43(4), 783-835.Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., & Braaten, M. (2008). How Novice Teachers Appropriate Epistemic DiscoursesAround Model-Based Inquiry for Use in Classrooms. Cognition and Instruction, 26, 310-378.AcknowledgmentsI owe tremendous gratitude to Dr. Ravit Golan-Duncan for guiding me in conceptualizing and framing thisresearch study. I also would like to thank Moraima Castro, Vicky Pilitsis, John Ruppert and Dr. Nicole Shea fortheir recommendations and insights on my literature review and analysis of data.ICLS 2014 Proceedings566© ISLS