Getting your Drift: Activity Designs for Grappling with EvolutionCorey Brady, Michael Horn, Uri Wilensky, Aditi Wagh, Arthur Hjorth, and Amartya Banerjee,Northwestern University, Evanston, ILEmail: cbrady@northwestern.edu, michael-horn@northwestern.edu, uri@northwestern.edu,aditiwagh2012@u.northwestern.edu, arthur.hjorth@u.northwestern.edu, amartya@u.northwestern.eduAbstract: This poster presents the design of activities for engaging with the evolutionarymechanism known as genetic drift. Operating in the informal learning setting of a naturalhistory museum, our design builds upon the theoretical notion of embodied modeling in anagent-based tradition, extending this foundation to address the special challenges associatedwith genetic drift and to take advantage of the affordances of immersive multi-touchtechnologies and of the museum setting.IntroductionThis poster presents the design of an activity for learners to engage with the phenomenon of genetic driftGenetic drift is a key mechanism of evolution involving traits that convey no survival advantage to organisms.The passage of such a trait to future generations is determined purely by chance and the distribution ofvariations in the population. However, against the intuitions of many, the feedback loop of this purelyprobabilistic selection process over time creates a population that is completely homogenous with respect to thetrait. Our design challenge is to develop activities that foreground genetic drift and enable visitors to engagewith this mechanism. This work is a part of a larger project to make key evolutionary mechanisms accessible ininformal settings and has been pursued in the context of a museum of natural history in a large Midwestern citywith visitor groups often consisting of families, siblings, or close friends.Major Issues AddressedAs the noted geneticist Theodosius Dobzhansky (1973) famously wrote, “nothing in biology makes sense exceptin the light of evolution.” At the same time, nothing is more controversial in the American education landscape.According to recent surveys (Gallup, 2012), 46% of Americans do not believe in evolution, and a shockinglysmall number, only 15%, say they believe in naturalistic evolution. Thus, one key barrier to increasingunderstanding of evolutionary mechanisms in the general public involves simply engaging with the conversationin an open spirit of inquiry. Beyond the barrier of acceptance or belief, educators and psychologists havedescribed a host of student misconceptions about evolution (e.g., Andrews et al, 2012; Catley et al, 2004;Sinatra et al, 2003; Wilensky & Novak, 2010). For the specific context of genetic drift, two of the mostimportant of these misconceptions involve difficulties with conceiving of randomness as playing a positive rolein producing emergent structure (Wilensky & Resnick, 1999) and challenges about conceptualizing the passageof “deep time” (Gee, 2000).Theoretical and Methodological ApproachesTo address the challenge of supporting learners in reasoning about genetic drift, our activity design extendsprinciples of embodied modeling (Wilensky & Reisman, 2006) within an agent-based approach (Epstein &Axtell, 1996) to biological systems. In agent-based modeling (ABM), elements of a system are represented bysimulated computational entities whose interactions result in emergent whole-system behaviors. ABM offersmany affordances for learning about complex systems, as it enables learners to tap into intuitions that they haveabout agent-agent interactions. In the context of genetic drift, however, it is not sufficient for learners to projectthemselves into the system as agents. In fact, the very premise of drift (i.e., that it involves traits that convey noadvantage) suggests that the agent-perspective will be indifferent about those traits. Our extension to embodiedmodeling with ABM involves introducing new perspectives within a simulated biological system that permitlearners to leverage practices of gaming to engage and reason about the phenomenon of drift in that system.Designing interactive experiences for museums offers a host of additional challenges includingsoftware usability issues and creating a socially engaging experience for diverse visitor groups that unfolds in avery brief timespan. In our activity, visitor dyads are recruited to engage in “games about evolution” on a largemulti-touch tabletop interface on the exhibit floor. Our initial game-scenario presents an ecosystem containing apopulation of lily-pad bugs that vary in the trait of body color (see Figure 1a), a trait which has no impact on thebugs’ chances of survival. Visitors are told that these bugs feed off of the algae that grows on the lily-pads, andthat when they have eaten enough they reproduce asexually by dividing. Visitors can move the lily pads aroundin the pond at any time, simply by dragging them (Figures 1b and 1c) with their fingers. Their goal is to keep asmany varieties of bugs alive as possible, for the duration of the game (600 ‘ticks,’ or about two minutes).Besides the pond-view itself, feedback on the bug population is given in numeric and graphical form.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1603© ISLSAfter the pair has explored this first game, they are invited to play a second game. Here, the twomembers of group are asked to position themselves on opposite sides of the tabletop display. This time, theirobjective is to end the 600-tick game with a population that exhibits exactly two of the five body-colorvariations. After the games, participants are asked to individually reflect on the experience and articulate theirreasoning and observations about what ideas they tried out and what happened to the bug populations.Figure 1a. Initial State of the game. Figures 1b and 1c. Configuring the pond.Discussion and SignificanceIn these activities, visitors engage with the bug population by controlling structural features of the environment.These interactions make salient the effects of key factors such as carrying capacity and geographical barriers onthe growth patterns of the population, and in particular on the emergence of drift effects. In the first game, driftis figured as the antagonist or opponent, as participants work against it to preserve diversity. In the second game,visitors work in a contrary direction, using drift as a tool to select two particular trait variations for survival. Inboth games, visitors have a tactile means of constructing environments with the goal of resisting drift orharnessing it as a mechanism to create desired population-level outcomes. These interactions offer the means tograpple with the notion of random factors operating on traits in populations; to engage with a range of geneticdrift effects within the brief timeframe that museum visitors typically spend with an exhibit; and to leave with avivid experience that remains open for reflection and interpretation by the friends-and-family group.ReferencesAndrews, T. M., Price, R. M., Mead, L. S., McElhinny, T. L., Thanukos, A., Perez, K. E., Herreid, C.F., Terry,D.R. & Lemons, P. P. (2012). Biology Undergraduates’ Misconceptions about Genetic Drift. CBE-LifeSciences Education, 11(3), 248–259. doi:10.1187/cbe.11-12-0107.Catley, K., Lehrer, R., & Reiser, B. (2004). Tracing a Prospective Learning Progression for DevelopingUnderstanding of Evolution. Paper Commissioned by the National Academics Committee on TestDesign for K-12 Science Achievement. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences.Dobzhansky, T. (1973). Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution. American BiologyTeacher, 35(3), 125-129.Epstein, J., & Axtell, R. (1996). Growing Artificial Societies: Social Science from the Bottom Up. Washington:Brookings Institution Press.Gallup poll (2012). As reported in http://www.gallup.com/poll/155003/hold-creationist-view-humanorigins.aspxGee, H. (2000). Deep time: cladistics, the revolution in evolution. London: Fourth Estate.Sinatra, G. M., Southerland, S. A, McConaughy, F., & Demastes, J. W. (2003). Intentions and beliefs instudents’ understanding and acceptance of biological evolution. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching 40: 510–28.Wilensky, U., & Novak, M. (2010). Understanding evolution as an emergent process: learning with agent-basedmodels of evolutionary dynamics. In R.S. Taylor & M. Ferrari (Eds.), Epistemology and ScienceEducation: Understanding the Evolution vs. Intelligent Design Controversy. New York: Routledge.Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep or a firefly: Learning biology throughconstructing and testing computational theories. Cognition and Instruction, 24(2), 171-209.Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in Levels: A Dynamic Systems Perspective to Making Sense ofthe World. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8(1).AcknowledgmentsResearch presented in this poster is funded under NSF DRL-1109834, support we gratefully acknowledge. Theviews presented here are those of the authors and do not reflect positions of the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1604© ISLS