Framing Reflections on Instruction: A Precursor to NoticingVicky Pilitsis, Ravit Golan Duncan, Rutgers University, New Brunswick NJEmail: pilitsisv2@yahoo.com, ravit.duncan@gse.rutgers.eduAbstract: Noticing is the ability of teachers to attend and interpret student thinking to guideinstructional design (van Es & Sherin, 2002). The skills involved in noticing can bechallenging to develop in teacher education programs because of the cognitive load involvedin attending to the context of the real classroom environment. Teacher education programs canthereby study a precursor to noticing, such as framing. Framing instruction involvesdeveloping a range of “seeing” events in the classroom. Thus, preservice teachers must frametheir teaching experience in ways that privilege student thinking. In our investigation, wecharacterized the frames preservice teachers employed in their reflection paper. We found thatpreservice teachers who used frames that were more attentive to student ideas were morecapable at analyzing student understanding in written student artifacts.IntroductionOver the past three decades, standards documents have emphasized the importance in engaging students withthe epistemology and practices of scientific inquiry (National Research Council [NRC], 1996, 2007, 2011).Since teachers mediate students’ science learning, teachers must develop the knowledge and practices toimplement inquiry teaching (Abd-El-Khalick & Lederman, 2000). An essential component in theimplementation of inquiry-based teaching is the ability to attend to and interpret student ideas and to use suchinterpretations to guide instructional design (van Zee & Minstrell, 1997). The idea of attending to studentthinking is not new- it has been a core aspect of pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) models for decades (e.g.,Grossman, 1990; Magnussion, Krajcik, & Borko, 1999). More recently, Windschitl et al. (2012) advocated forinstructional tools that support ambitious teaching, including practices that help teachers attend to student ideas.However, despite the need and benefits of attending to student thinking, this practice poses a major obstacle forexperienced teachers and is even more difficult for preservice teachers (PTs) (Chamberlin, 2005). In particular,PTs struggle to make sense of student ideas and to develop these naïve ideas towards more normativeunderstandings (Friedrichsen et al., 2009). Given these obstacles, we investigated whether and how PTsattended to student understanding in a science classroom.Theoretical FrameworkIn every field, experts have the ability to notice and interpret events in their domain- they have “professionalvision” (Goodwin, 1994). van Es and Sherin (2002) developed the framework of “noticing” to capture thenotion of professional vision in teaching. The ability to notice consists of three sub-skills: (a) identifying what isimportant, (b) making connections between the specifics of classroom interactions, and (c) using what oneknows about the context to reason about the classroom situation. Sherin et al. (2008) argued that thedevelopment of these skills poses challenges because classroom interactions, the fodder for noticing, are oftenfleeting and several occur simultaneously. It is even more challenging to help PTs develop these skills due to thecognitive load involved in attending to the messy contexts of real classroom interactions. Obtaining videos ofPT instruction can also pose logistical challenges in some districts. To circumvent these issues, teachereducators can focus on the development of precursors to noticing. Framing instruction as being about studentthinking may be a precursor to noticing. Hammer et al. (2005) termed frames as lenses to instruction and arguedthat framing involves developing a range of “seeing” events in the classroom. Therefore, a frame refers toexpectations an individual has about a situation that affects what they notice and how they act. In order todevelop the skills necessary for noticing, PTs must first frame their teaching experience in ways that privilegestudent thinking such that they observe these ideas and are subsequently able to interpret and respond to them.Levin, Hammer, and Coffey (2009) found that PTs have the ability to attend to student thinking, but what theynotice in class depends in part on how they framed the lesson.Most research that studied framing used video; however, in our investigation, we wanted to see if wecould measure framing through written reflection papers. Researchers (i.e., Cavanaugh & Prescott, 2010; Hatton& Smith, 1995) have advocated for the use of reflection in teacher education programs as a vehicle to shift PTsattention away from themselves and towards attending to student thinking. Further, reflection fosters personaland professional growth, which has shown to improve teachers’ knowledge and awareness of their classroompractices, including developing an awareness of student ideas (Baird et al., 1991). Engaging PTs in reflectivepractices could enhance the precursors of noticing, specifically framing, because how the reflection is framedplaces an emphasis on learning through questioning and investigation since it occurs after the lesson was taught,ICLS 2014 Proceedings158© ISLSthereby, eliminating all time constraints and other classroom pressures. By characterizing the frames that areexpressed, teacher educators will be able to examine the various ways PTs attend to student ideas as well asstudy the development of framing, which could be a precursor to noticing. Therefore, our research questions forthis study are:••To what extent do PTs’ framing of their lesson reflections account for student thinking?How do the frames expressed by PTs change over the course of a two-year teacher educationprogram?MethodsStudy ContextThis study was conducted in the context of a two-year Ed.M. certification program for secondary biologyteachers. There were 16 PTs enrolled in the program. Four of the PTs were males and twelve were females.Fifteen of the PTs were Caucasian while one was of Asian descent. All of the PTs’ undergraduate degrees werein the biological sciences with nine having biology degrees, three having animal science degrees, three havingenvironmental science degrees, and one having a molecular biology degree.The two year Ed.M. program included four life science methods courses that were taken in sequence(including a seminar that accompanied student teaching). The methods courses were geared to the developmentof knowledge and practices of model-based inquiry instruction. Each methods course had a slightly differentfocus. The first course, Methods I, focused on developing PTs knowledge of the nature of scientific inquiry.Methods II was a design course in which the PTs worked in groups to design an extended inquiry-based unit aswell as implemented a short inquiry-based lesson. Methods III, which accompanied the student teachinginternship, focused on the implementation of inquiry-based instruction as well as reflecting on their instructionalmethods. The majority of the PTs (15 out of the 16) completed their student teaching practicum in suburbanhigh schools in the northeast while one of the PTs completed the requirement at an inner city high school in thenortheast. Finally, the last course, Methods IV, engaged teachers in action research using data they had collectedduring their student teaching internship. The data that we used in this study was taken from Methods II andMethods III.Data CollectionIn this study, we used four assignments from Methods II and Methods III: (a) teaching experiment reflectionpaper from Methods II, (b) lesson set I and II reflection papers from Methods III and (c) reflective journals fromMethods II and Methods III.Teaching Experiment ReflectionThe PTs were required to teach a lesson during the second methods course as part of their fieldwork and wereasked to write a reflection paper about their experience. The reflection paper was divided into three sections. Inthe first section, the PTs were asked to provide a description of what went well and what did not go well in thelesson. In the second section of the reflection paper, the PTs were asked to select written student artifacts fromthe lesson and analyze the artifacts for student understanding in terms of scientific practices and content. In thethird section of the paper, the PTs were asked to reflect on the revisions they would make to this lesson. In thisstudy we analyzed the first two sections of the reflection paper.Lesson Set Reflection I and IIDuring the third methods course, the PTs were asked to develop and implement two inquiry-based lesson setsduring their student teaching practicum. Lesson set I was completed early in the semester (weeks 4-7) whilelesson set II was completed towards the end (weeks 10-14). The lessons had to focus on model-based inquiryinstruction. After implementing the lessons, the PTs were asked to provide a description of the lesson as well asto select written student artifacts from the lesson to analyze for student understanding in regard to scientificpractices and content. We analyzed their descriptions on their lessons as well as their analysis of studentartifacts.Reflective JournalsThe PTs were required to maintain a reflective journal throughout the two courses and to provide entries ofabout 250-300 words weekly. There were two types of journal entries: (a) answers to prompted questions thatwe asked several times during the course (i.e. what are the features of a scientific argument) and (b) personaland ‘free-style” reflections on that week’s class.ICLS 2014 Proceedings159© ISLSData AnalysisWe initially blinded all data sources in terms of PT and reflection paper. Using a constant comparative method(Glaser, 1965), we read through the sections of the reflection papers in which the PTs were asked to describe thepreviously implemented lesson. We noted any emergent frames (lenses) the PTs expressed. A frame was definedas the interpretative viewpoints PTs expressed while reflecting on lessons. For example, a focus on studentparticipation or students staying on task would be categorized as an engagement frame. We identified sixdistinct frames, which we describe in the results section.We then un-blinded the data to look for any trajectories of change in frames the PTs employed over thecourse of the teacher education program. We were interested in examining whether there were any clearpatterns or shifts in the frames the PTs expressed. We noticed that three of the PTs did not hand in one of theirreflection papers and another two of the PTs did not follow a clear pattern of change- they regressed and thenprogressed. Therefore, we selected the remaining eleven PTs for a more in depth analysis of shifts, seven ofthese PTs continually progressed towards framing instruction in ways that were more attentive to studentthinking while the other four PTs selected did not progress (i.e., they either regressed continuously or used thesame frame) in the frames they employed. For those selected PTs, we then analyzed the section of theirreflection papers in which they were asked to analyze student understanding in written student artifacts that theyhad collected. We were interested in exploring whether those who employed frames that were more attentive tostudent thinking were more capable at identifying what students understood in the lesson. We read through thatsection of the reflection paper and using a constant comparative method (Glaser, 1965) noted any observeddifferences.For the final part of our analysis, we wanted to examine whether the content of the different frameschanged throughout the course of the teacher education program. We constructed tables for each frameaccording to the reflection papers (i.e., three tables for each frame) and highlighted the content that the PTswrote about. For example, many PTs wrote about student participation when employing an engagement framefor all three reflection papers. The tables that we constructed consisted of the aspects of participation the PTswrote about such as working collaboratively, quietness of students, and attentiveness of students in the teachingexperiment paper and how students asking questions turned the lesson into a heated debate in lesson set IIreflection papers. We reported the observed differences in the results section.We triangulated the data by reading through journal entries that were written at the time of theimplemented lessons (i.e., same time point as the reflection papers) to determine whether PTs expressed similarframes in the journals as were expressed in the reflection papers. We established inter-coder reliability byhaving two independent coders code the reflection papers (reliability ranged between 95-97%); anydisagreements were resolved and codes were adjusted to reflect the consensus.Results and DiscussionTo What Extent to PTs’ Framing of Their Lessons Account for Student ThinkingWe identified six emergent frames described in table 1. We found that the PTs accounted for studentunderstanding and student ideas to varying degrees. Table 1 presents the frames from the least to most attentiveto student understanding. For example, PTs who employed the engagement frame focused on the students’interest and participation in a lesson with not much emphasis on student thinking. On the other hand, framessuch as scientific practices- students and building ideas accounted for student understanding in eitherpedagogical practices or content. These results are encouraging because it revealed that PTs are able to attend tostudent thinking and that attention to thinking is a salient aspect of teaching for them. However, some PTstended to express frames that did not account for student ideas, such as activity sequence frame. Davis (2006)argued that when PTs attend to learners their reflection centers on students’ interest and motivation rather thanlearning content, which we also observed here. In our triangulation, we identified the same type of frames inboth data sets (i.e., reflection papers versus reflective journals). In general, we found that PTs tended to expressone frame or at most two. It also seemed that the PTs tended to employ the same frame regardless of theassignment (i.e., reflection paper versus journal prompts that were written around the same time as the reflectionpapers).Table 1: Descriptions of emergent frames observedFrameDescription of the FrameActivity SequenceCharacterized by a focus onproviding a narrative or descriptionof the lesson with minimalICLS 2014 Proceedings160Example from Reflection Paper“The students worked with the personthey were sitting next to and talked aboutwhat they think happened in the story.After a little bit of time, volunteers readaloud their answers.” (Nina, Lesson SetII)© ISLSFrameScientific Practices- TeacherDescription of the FrameCharacterized by a focus on theteachers actions as they related toscientific practices, such asmodeling, argumentation, etc.EngagementCharacterized by a focus on studentinterest, participation, and staying ontask.AccuracyCharacterized by a focus onobtaining the right answer. Teacherinterprets student understanding in abinary way, either as correct orincorrect.Characterized by a focus onstudents’ actions whileimplementing scientific inquirypractices such as modeling andevidence-based argumentation.Scientific Practices- StudentsBuilding IdeasExample from Reflection Paper“I handed each student modelingworksheets. Being as modeling is notsomething my students are familiar with, Ifelt it was necessary to help get themstarted so I wrote down the first two stepsin the sequence of a fever with arrows onthe board.” (Jake, Lesson Set I)“The story part went well, both periodswere quiet, listening, and for the most partseemed interested.” (Molly, TeachingExperiment Paper)“The students demonstrated a basic formof knowledge of the content but did notgo into much detail at all. A few studentscame up with the idea that antibodieswere in the body.” (Bani, Lesson Set I)“None of the students used the data forgenerating evidence for claims, likeviruses have various proteins…they [thestudents] failed to connect (link) data toevidence when making individualmodels.” (Patrick, Lesson Set I)“By evaluating the worksheets I was ableto provide material to help them [thestudents] more fully understand theimplications of their solutions on thesystem as a whole by providing examplesof previous attempts and solutions oradditional data about the factors theyinvolved.” (Rachel, Teaching ExperimentPaperCharacterized by a focus on takingstudents’ knowledge and buildingupon it. Teacher interprets student’scurrent level of understanding anddescribes possible connections toother content or suggests material tofacilitate desired connections.How Do the Frames Expressed by PTs Change Over the Course of a TeacherEducation ProgramPTs tended to express different frames throughout the teacher education program (Table 2). It seemed thatinitially the PTs tended to focus on the interest and participation of the students and there was a small shifttowards focusing on student thinking. In general, we found that PTs tended to express one frame or at most two.It also seemed that the PTs tended to employ the same frame regardless of the assignment (i.e., reflection paperversus journal prompts that were written around the same time as the reflection papers).Table 2: Frames observed according to reflection papersFrameTeaching ExperimentPaperActivity Sequence0Lesson Set ILesson Set II33Scientific PracticesTeacherEngagement1301333Accuracy230Scientific PracticesStudentsBuilding Ideas136113ICLS 2014 Proceedings161© ISLSWe then looked at how individual PTs shifted throughout the course of the teacher education program(Table 3). We noticed that many of the PTs used different frames than they had employed in their first reflectionpaper. For example, during Methods II Sean wrote, “The lesson flowed smoothly. The students were engagedand the transitions between activities really caught their attention.” Sean expressed an engagement framebecause his focus was on the alertness and time on task of his students. Conversely during Methods III, Sean’sfocus completely shifted. He stated “The best part of the lesson was when the students were working with theirmodels. They were able to construct logical representations of the material we had just covered.” Here, Seanexpressed a scientific practices- student frame because his focus was now on how the students constructedmodels rather than their interest in the lesson. We observed this change in both the reflection papers and thereflective journal entries.Similarly, Jackie in her teaching experiment paper wrote “I found the students were very willing toparticipate in a respectful manner, raising their hands before speaking or calling out when there were no otherhands raised.” Like Sean, Jackie expressed an engagement frame because her focus was on the students’participation in the lesson. However, Jackie’s lesson set II reflection paper had a completely different focus. Inthis reflection paper, Jackie was concerned with what the students were saying and how that related to theiroverall learning process. For example, she stated:“I made a concept map on the board but the map was really made entirely by the students as Iwould not write anything on the board until they discussed the ideas and concluded it wasimportant to include. The students were able to take their initial ideas and elaborate and buildupon them until they fully expressed their understanding.”In this example, Jackie expressed a building ideas frame because her focus in the lesson was now about thestudents elaborating and connecting their ideas. Further, we observed this shift in both the reflection paper andreflective journal prompts. It seemed that as the PTs gained more experience working with students in aclassroom, they began to shift their focus from students being on task to becoming more aware of what studentswere actually saying and how their ideas related to core concepts. Thus, more classroom experience supported ashift from a focus on themselves to a focus on students’ thinking (Berliner et al., 1988).Table 3: Frames expressed by PTs throughout the teacher education programChristinePatrickTeachingExperiment PaperEngagementMISSING DATAJackieEngagementNinaJackCatherineSeanEngagementEngagementEngagementEngagementNoraEngagementMollyEngagementLesson Set IActivity SequenceScientific PracticesStudentsScientific PracticesTeacherEngagementAccuracyEngagementAccuracyScientific PracticesTeacherBaniScientific PracticesStudentsEngagement/Scientific Activity SequencePractices- StudentsEngagement/Scientific Scientific PracticesPractices- TeacherStudentsEngagement/Accuracy AccuracyJakeEngagement/Accuracy Scientific Practices-NadiaAvaICLS 2014 Proceedings162Lesson Set IIEngagementEngagementBuilding IdeasActivity SequenceBuilding IdeasActivity SequenceScientific PracticesStudentsActivity SequenceScientific PracticesStudentsBuilding IdeasScientific PracticesStudentsScientific PracticesStudentsScientific Practices© ISLSClareEngagementTeacherEngagementRachelAnnaBuilding IdeasMISSING DATABuilding IdeasActivity SequenceStudentsScientific PracticesStudentsMISSING DATAEngagement*We assigned a “missing data” code if PTs did not submit an assignmentWe next wanted to explore whether the content of the different frames changed throughout the courseof the teacher education program. We found that PTs began to be more elaborate and detailed in theirdescriptions of students’ ideas in certain frames, specifically scientific practices- students and building ideas.Initially many of the PTs, who employed these frames, commented that the students had a difficult timeexplaining their models. They made statements like “the students did not explain or justify their models.”However, in later reflections the PTs became more nuanced and explicit about the ways in which the studentshad difficulty using data stating that, “the students’ content knowledge ability impacts how they understand thedata and how they support their models” and “the students interpreted the data from the experiments andactivities we performed in class and were able to incorporate this data to provide evidence based explanations.”It seemed that the PTs began to see how different aspects of their students’ learning process impacted theirmodeling skills. Overall, this shift was observed by all the PTs who employed scientific practices- students andbuilding ideas frames in Methods III.In addition, we found that there was a shift in the frequency with which PTs used students’ responses inthe form of quotes or comments from lesson activities when comparing the teaching experiment paper and thelesson sets. Initially, none of the PTs cited student responses in their reflection papers written for Methods II,while the majority of PTs used statements from students in their Lesson Set II reflection papers (Table 4). Itseemed that as the PTs gained more experience in the classroom through their student teaching practicum, theybecame more aware of what students were saying and began to use the students’ responses as evidence forjustifying their reflections.Table 4: Number of PTs who cited student responses in their reflection papersNumber of PTs WhoUsed Student ResponsesTeaching ExperimentPaper0Lesson Set ILesson Set II1314Although we did not observe a significant trajectory of change throughout the teacher educationprogram, we wanted to explore what was different about the reflections written by the PTs who progressedtowards framing instruction in ways that were more attentive to student thinking such as Sean, Ava, and Molly(to name a few). We found that in the earlier reflection papers, there were “seeds” of frames that were moreattentive to student ideas. For example, in the teaching experiment paper, Sean’s main focus was how thestudents participated in the lesson (engagement frame) but there were several statements about “bringing outstudent ideas.” Additionally, Ava’s main concern in the teaching experiment paper was about the students beingon task during the activity (engagement frame) but Ava made several comments about “connecting ideasamongst topics as an effective instructional strategy”. Overall, it seemed that in order to progress toward framesthat were more attentive to student ideas there has to be an initial “seed” that becomes more prominent withexperience.For the final part of our analysis, we analyzed the section of the reflection papers in which the PTswere asked to analyze student understanding in the lesson. We wanted to explore if the PTs who progressedtowards framing instruction in ways that were more attentive to student thinking such as Sean, Ava, and Molly(to name a few) were more capable of identifying what students understood or did not understand in theiranalysis as compared to PTs who did not progress in how they framed their lesson reflections such as Catherine,Nina, Nora, and Christine. In general, we found that PTs who progressed in how they framed instruction weremore capable at identifying what students did not understand, commenting on students’ prior knowledge orsuggesting what topics should be stressed to learn the material. We also observed that the PTs were moreinterpretative of student understanding as the frames they employed were more focused on student thinking.For example, in his teaching experiment paper, Sean, who progressed in the frames he employed,commented on what the students were not grasping in the lesson stating, “Every student verbally told me thatonion cells do not have chloroplasts and elodea cells do, but many of their diagrams of onion cells includedchloroplasts so I don’t know where the disconnect is.” Conversely, Catherine, who did not progress, commentedICLS 2014 Proceedings163© ISLSin the teaching experiment paper, “I think the students have a general understanding of what makes up avertebrate” with no further elaboration. In both these instances, Sean and Catherine both employed anengagement frame when reflecting on their lessons but there is a significant difference in how they interpretedstudent thinking with Sean being much more specific about what the students were not understanding andprovided evidence to support his claim.In the final reflection paper, lesson set II, Sean, who employed a scientific practices- students frame,stated in his analysis of student understanding:“The models [that students drew] imply that the dots and lines among the required species areadditional species (ancestors to humans), but the students do not label as such and do notexplain them in their description. This shows that these students are missing a concept and are“filling in the blanks” of their understanding with these “dots and lines”.Here, Sean interpreted student understanding based on the lack of details in the students’ models, which hebelieved indicated a missing connection amongst scientific ideas, in this case the evolution of species fromcommon ancestors. In Catherine’s final reflection paper (she employed an activity sequence frame), she stated,“Initially a majority of the students thought that bones are alive. They justified their opinion with correct ideasabout the characteristics of living things.” Catherine further elaborated her analysis by citing a student responsefrom the lesson stating: “In Mala’s model she wrote, “I think they [bones] are (alive) because when the bodygrows the bones grow too. All living things that have bones grow.” However, although Catherine’s analysis ofstudent understanding was more evidence based (i.e., provided a response from a student) than in her initialreflection paper, she was still not as attentive to student understanding in regards to the students’ overalllearning process, whereas, Sean was much more analytical in his reflection by providing suggestions for whatmissing details in students’ models suggested about their overall learning. In general, it seemed that the PTs whoprogressed in using frames that were more attentive to student thinking were more analytical in theirexamination of student understanding.Conclusions and ImplicationsWe observed a slight shift towards employing frames that were more attentive to student thinking as the teachereducation program progressed. This finding suggested that teacher education programs should provide PTs withinstructional tools when reflecting on lessons. Providing these tools will encourage PTs to employ frames thatattend to student thinking and thus PTs will be more capable of analyzing student understanding in writtenstudent artifacts, an essential skill they will need in their future teaching career. Additionally, our findingssuggested a methodological implication. In the past the notion of framing has been studied using videotapeanalyses but our results indicated that framing can be examined through analyses of written work, such asreflective practices.These findings suggest that teacher education programs should provide PTs with instructional tools whenreflecting on lessons. Providing these tools will encourage PTs to employ frames that attend to student thinkingand thus PTs will be more capable of analyzing student understanding in written student artifacts, an essentialskill they will need in their future teaching career.ReferencesAbd-El-Khalick, F., & Lederman, N. G. (2000). Improving science teachers’ conceptions of the nature ofscience: A critical review of the literature. International Journal of Science Education, 22, 665-701.Baird, J., Fensham, P., Gunstone, R., &White, R. (1991). The importance of reflection in improving scienceteaching and learning. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28, 163-182.Berliner, D. C., Stein, P., Sabers, D. S., Clarridge, P. B., Cushing, K. S., & Pinnegar, S. (1988). Implications ofresearch on pedagogical expertise and experience in mathematics teaching. In D. A. Grouws & T.Cooney (Eds.), Perspectives on research on effective mathematics teaching (pp. 67–95). Reston, VA:National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.Cavanagh, M., & Prescott, A. (2007). Professional experience in learning to teach secondary mathematics:Incorporating pre-service teachers into a community of practice. In J. Watson & K. Beswick (Eds.),Mathematics: Essential research, essential practice: Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of theMathematics Education Research Group of Australasia, Vol. 1 (pp. 182–191). Adelaide, SA: MERGAInc.Chamberlein, M. (2005). Teachers’ discussions of students’ thinking: Meeting the challenge of attending tostudents’ thinking. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education,8, 141-170.Davis, E.A., Petish, D., & Smithey, J. (2006). Challenges new science teachers face. Review of EducationalResearcher, 76 (4), 607-651.ICLS 2014 Proceedings164© ISLSFriedrichsen, P., Abell, S., Pareja, E., Brown, P., Lankford, D., & Volkmann, M. (2009). Does teachingexperience matter? Examining biology teachers’ prior knowledge for teaching in an alternativecertification program. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46, 357-383.Glaser, B. (1965). The constant comparative method of qualitative analysis. Social Problems, 12, 436-445.Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96, 606-63.Grossman, P.L. (1990). The making of a teacher: Teacher knowledge and teacher education. NewYork/London: Teachers College Press.Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R., & Redish, E. (2005). Resources, framing, and transfer. In J. Maestre (Ed.),Transfer of learning: Research and Perspectives (pp. 1-26). Greenwich, CT: Information AgePublishing.Hatton, N., and Smith, D. (1995). Reflection in teacher education: Towards definition and implementation.Teaching and Teacher Education, 11, 33-49.Jacobs, V., Lamb, L., & Phillip, R. (2010). Professional noticing of children’s mathematical thinking. Journal ofResearch in Mathematics Education, 41, 169-202.Levin, D.M., Hammer, D., and Coffey, J.E. (2009). Novice teachers’ attention to student thinking. Journal ofTeacher Education , 60, 2, 142-154.Magnusson, S. Krajcik, J. & Borko, H. (1999). Nature, sources and development of pedagogical contentknowledge for science teaching. In J. Gess-Newsome & N. G. Lederman (Eds.), Examiningpedagogical content knowledge: The construct and its implications for science education (pp. 95-133).Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.National Research Council. (2011). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,and core ideas. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.National Research Council (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching in grades K-8. Washington,DC: National Academy Press.National Research Council. (1996). National science education standards. Washington, DC: National AcademicPress.Sherin, M., Russ, R., Sherin, B., & Colestock, A. (2008). Professional vision in action: An exploratory study.Issues in Teacher Education, 17, 27-46.Simmons, P.E., Emory, A., Carter, T., Coker, T., Finnegan, B., Crockett, D. Richardson, L., Yager, R., Craven,J., Tillotson, J., Brunkhorst, H., Twiest, M., Hossain, K., Gallagher, J., Duggan-Haas, D., Parker, J.,Cajas, F., Alshannag, O., McGlamery, S., Krockover, J., Adams, P., Spector, B., LaPorta, T., James,B., Rearden, K., & Labuda, K. (1999). Beginning teachers: Beliefs and classroom actions. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 36, 930-954.Tabachnick, B.R., & Zeichner, K.M. (1999). Idea and action: Action research and the development ofconceptual change teaching of science. Science Education, 83, 309-322.van Es, B., & Sherin, M. (2002). Learning to notice: scaffolding new teachers’ interpretations of classroominteraction. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 10, 571-596.van Zee, E., & Minstrell, J. (1997). Using questioning to guide student thinking. Journal of the LearningSciences, 6 (2), 227-269.Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., Braaten, M., & Stroupe, D. (2012). Proposing a core set of instructional practicesand tools for teachers of science. Science Education, 96, 878-903.ICLS 2014 Proceedings165© ISLS