Family Creative Learning: Engaging Parents and Children asLearning Partners an Creative Technology WorkshopsRicarose Roque, Natalie Rusk, and Luisa Beck, MIT Media LabXiaodi Chen, Harvard Universityria@media.mit.edu, nrusk@media.mit.edu, emmi.beck@gmail.com, xic815@mail.harvard.eduAbstract: In this poster, we present preliminary findings from Family Creative Learning, aseries of intergenerational workshops for parents and children to participate in design-basedactivities using creative technologies such as the Scratch programming language and theMaKey MaKey invention kit. The workshops are collaboratively and iteratively designed withstaff at community centers that serve families with limited resources and social support aroundcomputing. Case studies of families’ participation highlight the ways in which parents andchildren can support each other in their learning experiences with computing.Introduction and BackgroundDesign-based activities with computing can introduce young people to creative possibilities, enabling them tonot only read, or use and interact with technology, but to write: to create and express themselves withtechnology. As they create with technologies, they learn computational concepts and practices and gain newperspectives into the dynamics and processes behind the technologies they use (Brennan & Resnick, 2012; Wing,2006). Such fluencies are essential in our increasingly digital society.While many youth are interacting with technology, studies suggest that only some youth are engagingin design-based activities with computing (Livingstone & Helsper, 2007). Youth with social networks who canhelp them navigate information and opportunities to further engagement, such as parents with careers intechnology-related fields, are at a greater advantage to deepen their interaction with technology (Hargittai, 2008).And while researchers have investigated the kinds of roles parents can play—from acting as resource brokers toserving as collaborative learning partners with young people (Barron, Martin, Takeuchi, & Fithian, 2009)—these studies often examine families where at least one parent has a job in the technology sector.This research explores how to provide opportunities that support the engagement of families who havelimited resources and social support around computing. This paper describes Family Creative Learning, a seriesof intergenerational workshops that engage children and parents in design-based activities with computing usingtools such as Scratch, a programming language for children to create their own interactive media such as games,animations, and stories (Resnick et al., 2009). These workshops are designed in partnership with communitycenters that serve primarily low-income families of color, who have limited access to resources and socialsupport around computing. The current study focuses on the following research question: How do parents andchildren support each other in the collaborative design-based activities of the workshop series?Workshop DesignFamily Creative Learning consists of five workshops in which parents and children engage in design-basedactivities with technologies. The workshops are grounded in constructionist learning theory, which argues thatpeople learn best when they build personally meaningful artifacts in collaboration or interaction with others(Papert, 1980). Each session builds on the previous one to support parents’ and children's development not onlyin using the tools, but working together to create projects with those tools. The format of each workshop sessionis split into four parts: (1) Eat: Families eat dinner together provided by a local restaurant; (2) Reflect: Parentsand children divide into two groups and facilitators “check-in” with parents and children separately; (3) Make:Families engage in design-based activities using Scratch programming language and MaKey MaKey inventionkit; (4) Share: Families share their projects and ask each other questions or give feedback.In the first two days, parents and children work separately on simple Scratch projects. On the third day,parents and children work together on a Scratch and MaKey MaKey project. On the fourth day, parents andchildren design their own projects with the tools to share at a community showcase on the fifth day.Methods and ParticipantsWe used qualitative methods to document the workshop process and understand the participants’ experiences.During the workshop series, we gathered observations from facilitators and conducted group interviews withparents and children separately during the 15 minute “Reflect” part of the workshop. After the workshop, weconducted 1-hour semi-structured individual interviews with parents and children about their participation.We implemented the workshops of the current iteration in a Computer Clubhouse that is housed in acommunity center for urban youth. Computer Clubhouses are informal learning centers where youth engage increative activities with technology (Kafai, Peppler, & Chapman, 2009). In the community served by thisICLS 2014 Proceedings1623© ISLSClubhouse, at least 80% of the members live in households that are under 200% above the poverty line. At leasthalf of the members live in single-parent households, of which at least 90% are single-mothers. We primarilyrecruited children between the ages of 8 and 12, but welcomed their younger and older siblings to join theworkshop. Five families participated in the workshop series for a total of 15 unique participants with fiveparents (4 mothers, 1 father; ages 31 to 58) and 10 children (4 girls, 6 boys; ages 3 to 13). Four of the parentswere women, and two were single mothers. Three of the families self-reported as Hispanic/Latino and werefirst-generation immigrants. The other two families self-reported as White. All five families continuedparticipating through the last day with the community showcase.Case Studies of Family ParticipationIn this poster, we share case studies (Yin, 2009) of families from the workshop series. These case studiesdescribe their attitudes before the workshop, their experiences working with the computing tools andcollaborating on a project, and their reflections on their experiences.Overall, we found that families interacted in a variety of ways that reflected how families can applyexisting learning dynamics—dynamics that they may use during existing activities like homework help—into anew context like computing. At the same time, they could try out new practices as learning partners. Forexample, in one family, Rosa, a mother of two, came into the workshop feeling that she had nothing tocontribute because her daughters were more savvy with technology. However, after working with her daughterson Scratch and MaKey MaKey projects, she began to see how her supportive learning practices, such as givingfeedback, providing encouragement, and knowing when to step in to help them and step back when they wereprogressing on their own, could also be helpful in supporting her daughters’ learning and designing withtechnology. Meanwhile, her eldest daughter, Clara, was trying on new learning dynamics as she supported hermother in getting started with Scratch. While she described feeling “kind of weird” helping her mother, who wasolder and usually the helper, Clara expressed how proud she felt—and noticed it made her mother happy too.DiscussionThis research highlights design considerations in supporting learning experiences for families as a unit,particularly in the context of design-based activities with computing. Often computing outreach programs servechildren or parents alone, without integrating the larger learning ecology that sustains learning in such activities(Barron, 2004). These workshops leverage the learning dynamics that families already use in activities likeliteracy development and support families in using them in the context of computing.The case studies of families in these workshops suggest possibilities for intergenerational learning withcomputing. While parents initially described feeling unable to help their children with technology, they saw howthey could apply practices they already used to help children learn. In addition, the design-based context enabledfamilies to experience new dynamics, adding to their repertoire of family learning practices.ReferencesBarron, B., Martin, C. K., Takeuchi, L., & Fithian, R. (2009). Parents as learning partners in the development oftechnological fluency. The International Journal of Learning and Media, 1, 55-77.Brennan, K., & Resnick, M. (2012). New frameworks for studying and assessing the development ofcomputational thinking. Paper presented at annual American Educational Research Associationmeeting, Vancouver, BC, Canada.Kafai, Y. B., Peppler, K., & Chapman, R. (2009). The computer clubhouse: Constructionism and creativity inyouth communities. New York: Teachers College Press.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernandez, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., et al. (2009). Scratch:Programming for all. Communications of the ACM, 52, 60-67.Silver, J., Rosenbaum, E., & Shaw, D. (2012, February 19–22). Makey Makey: Improvising tangible and naturebased user interfaces. Paper presented at the Sixth International Conference on Tangible, Embeddedand Embodied Interaction, Queen’s Human Media Lab, Kingston, Ontario. Proceedings of theInternational Conference on Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction. New York: ACMYin, R.K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods. (4th ed.) Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.Wing, J. (2006). Computational thinking. Communications of the ACM 49 (3):33–35.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank our community partners and volunteers as well as the families who participated in ourFamily Creative Learning workshops.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1624© ISLS