Contradictions on the Process of Becoming a Physics TeacherGlauco Silva, CEFET/RJ-Campus Petrópolis, Rua do Imperador, 971, glaucosfs@gmail.comAlberto Villani, University of São Paulo, Rua do Matão, tr R, avillani@if.usp.brAbstract: Our objective is to focus on contradictions of the process of learning and becominga physics teacher. We undertook this research at undergraduate course called "Practices onPhysics Teacher" addressed to third-year pre-services teachers. Data were gathered byrecording classes and interviewing students. Using cultural-historical theoretical and analyticalframework, we will point out macro and micro-levels contradictions of becoming a physicsteacher.IntroductionPhysics Teacher Education in Brazil has been taking part in research agenda on Science Education for manyyears (Villani et al, 2009). However, it does not mean all themes have been investigated. Considering that, inthis paper we present findings from a study conducted with the purpose to investigate Physics TeacherEducation Program (PTEP) in which undergraduate students had to take their practicum in a High School. UsingCultural-Historical Activity Theory (CHAT), we will reveal some contradictions present on the process oflearning and becoming physics teacher. Based on Engeström (1987)'s ideas we will point out two set ofcontradictions: (i) those present on macro-structure of activity; (ii) those present on micro-structure which arerevealed by subjects' actions and speech.Methodological ProtocolsOur research is undertaken in course entitled Practices on Physics Teaching addressed to third-yearundergraduate physics students (pre-service physics teachers) at a Brazilian public university. Events oflessons,- in which students and the professor gathered every fifteen days to discuss different sorts of topics inphysics education,- and interviews were taken as our object of research.Based on the qualitative methods we collected our data by videotaping classes at university, in which 75 peoplewere involved and 70 hours of video were recorded. In the end of academic year, we interviewed 10 of thosestudents (who accepted our invitation). Interviews followed a semi-structured protocol wherein questions wereabout: reasons of choosing a Physics (PTEP), their perceptions about how teachers should be educated, (early)teaching experience, solving problems during the practicum. Analysis is oriented event-based (TOBIN &RITCHIE, 2012), that is, we select events happened on the classes in which contradictions come out in order tounderstand what was going on at that moment.Theoretical FrameworkThis research (design, methods and analysis) draws on the Cultural-Historical Activity Theory (CHAT) whosefoundation emerged from Vygotsky’s idea who argued the relationship between the subject and object is alwaysmediated by instruments. Stating that Vygotsky “maintained the human beings are agents who react to and actupon mediating objects of the environment such as tools, signs, and instruments leading to an outcome”(Nussbaumer, 2009). Other elements were added to Vygotsky’s idea by Leontiev (2009) such as the motive thatorients the activity and conducts the guided action and automatic operations. Over the past two decades,Engeström (1987) proposed a complementation of these ideas when he introduced the community, rules andvalues, and division of labor as part of the human activity structure. These elements are underneath by eithermediating the relation between subject and object or “reciprocally influence the achievement of the object andthe final outcome” (Nussbaumer, 2009).The arousal of inner contradictions is the consequence of this set of mediations within a complexhuman activity. For instance, Roth & Lee (2007, p. 203) say "activity systems harbor inner contradictions,which come with the coexistence of mutually exclusive elements". They also state "when inner contradictionsare conscious, they become the primary driving forces that bring about change and development within andbetween activity systems. Generally overlooked is the fact that contradictions have to be historicallyaccumulated inner contradictions, within the things themselves rather than more surface expressions of tensions,problems, conflicts, and breakdowns".In this same perspective Engeström (1987)'s ideas of inner contradiction of human activity points outthe cultural-historical aspect. He quoted "the basic internal contradiction of human activity is its dual existenceas the total societal production and as one specific production among many. This means that any specificproduction must at the same be independent of and subordinated to the total societal production (...). Within thestructure of any specific productive activity, the contradiction is renewed as the clash between individual actionsand the total activity system." (p.52).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1627© ISLSDiscussions and FindingsThese set of contradictions are related to the historical perspective of the activity system. According toEgenström (2001), "contradictions are not the same as problems or conflicts. Contradictions are historicallyaccumulating structural tensions within and between activity systems". Considering that, for this paper wecarried out our analysis by selecting events and charactering them as our data in two general set of contractions.From the video analysis, but mainly the interview, we are able to distinguish contradictions in two differentlevels, macro and micro, which are going to be defined in the following.Contradictions at Macro-LevelsTherefore within Teacher Education activity system macro-level contradictions are: (i) attending to PhysicsTeaching Program does not mean to be a teacher; (ii) the locus for educating, physics department or school ofeducation; (iii) theory and practice; (iv) conflicts between scientific carrier and teachership. For instance, wepresent below a fragment of one pre-service teacher's interview, in which he speaks about his choices so that ispossible to highlight contradictions (i) and (iv):Researcher: Tell me a little bit about your choices, I mean why did you choose a Physics TeacherEducation Program? Have you always meant it?Moises: Actually, in the very beginning I didn't want to pick this carrier [PTEP] I even didn't know whatthis carrier was as the majority of people who gets in here. I wanted engineering instead, mainly because ofstatus of being an engineer or earning a good salary. (...) I realized my scores wouldn't be enough to applyto engineering so I though what am I gonna do? I wondered to apply to maths and I did it, but I failed. ThenI start wondering to apply to physics, but I didn't want to PTEP. I'd like to get in the scientific carrier. So Iended up in PTEP because of my scores, I mean I was afraid of not have enough and applied to PTEP.Contradictions at Micro-Level: "I Don't Know to Be a Constructivist Teacher. I Guess IWill Be a Traditionalist One"This is Igor's quote, one of pre-service teachers. By the time he exclaimed it, he had been asked to sketch aplanning class about electromagnetism. It means he was working on a kind subject-matter should be taught atHigh School physics lessons and which strategies would be better to employ. Igor was in involved in smallgroup discussion and they struggled to figure out how to do that task. Following is Igor's transcriptionIgor: I don't know how to be a constructivist teacher!Student 2: such as Paulo Freire, Piaget?Igor: Nop! I don't think Piaget is that constructivist ... and I don't know how to teach with Paulo Freire, butI know to do it in a class like STS. Do you know what is it? [he asks to student 2] Science, Technology andSociety ... I think I am more, you know, traditionalist although.The contradiction present in the Igor's quote is about being and not being, it means, mutually exclusiveaspects of activity. Also, Igor reveals in his practice the contradictions "between individual actions andthe total system" (Engeström, 1987, p. 52). In the other words, being either constructivist or traditionalist is hisindividual action so that to pursue one or another he has to follow specific rules. Rules are a socio-historic(collective) construction which makes subjects to belong to a specific group (of those who are constructivist ortraditionalist, for instance). On the other hands, rules are related to the totality of the system. Then ways of(not) being is related to ways of belonging and so does to ways of becoming. We think these triplekinds of ways are what support human beings' practice. Hence Igor's case highlights exactly the microlevel contradictions. As a result a subject learns and becomes (a physics teacher) in a practice in whichthose layers (macro and micro) of activity are integrated to each other and in which contradictions come out.ReferencesEngeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research.Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit.Engestron, Y. (2001). Expansive Learning at work: toward and activity theoretical reconceptualization. Journalof Education and Work. 14(1), 133-156.Leontiev, N. L. (2009). Activity and consciousness. Pacifica-CA: Marxists Internet Archive.Nussbaumer, D. (2011). An overview of cultural historical activity theory (CHAT) use in classroom research2000 to 2009. Educational Review, 1-19.Roth, W-M., E Lee, Y-J. (2007). Vygotsky's neglected legacy: Cultural-Historical Activity Theory. Review ofEducational Research, 77(2), 186-232.Tobin, K., Ritchie, S. M. (2012) Multi-method, multi-theoretical, multi-level research in the Learning Sciences.The Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, (21)1, 117-129.Villani, A., Pacca, J. L. A., Freitas, D. (2009) Science teacher education in Brazil: 1950-2000. Science&Education, (18)1, 125-148.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1628© ISLS