Examining the Use of Technology:Affordances and Constraintsin a Blended Learning EnvironmentDéana Scipio, University of Washington, Box 353600, descipio@uw.eduAnnie Camey Kuo, University of Washington, Box 353600, anniekuo@uw.eduAbstract: Project-based learning environments that leverage technology have the potential tobring experts into classrooms, introduce youth to contemporary writing practices, and createavenues to participate in the information economy. This study focuses on the affordances andconstraints within a blended learning environment for youth from two settings that bothclaimed to be one-to-one laptop schools. Preliminary findings show students were caught inthe digital divide because of their school’s definitions of appropriate technology use.Proponents of Connected LearningA blended learning environment seeks to bring together the best of the classroom and the affordances oftechnology integration. This study explores the student experiences of blended learning environments at Rubyand Sapphire, which were both one-to-one laptop schools engaging in a six-week project-based curriculum. Thephenomenon of the digital divide intersects with the notion of being a one-to-one laptop school especially whenlearners encounter barriers to participation.Challenges and Affordances of Blended Learning EnvironmentsWith this analysis, we hope to draw attention to the affordances and constraints of blended learningenvironments in one-to-one laptop schools and to highlight the ways in which learning context and structurematter. We propose that the students in the schools were caught up in the digital divide because of their school’sdefinitions of appropriate technology use and the ways that the schools were equipped to support teachers andstudents use of technology.Ruby was a large comprehensive public high school serving over 2000 students. Demographics fromthe 2010-2011 school year, the most recent data available on the school website, show that the schoolpopulation was 27% White and 73% Students of color from a wide variety of ethnic backgrounds. There wasalso a large free and reduced lunch and ELL population. Ruby’s district was in the beginning stages of a oneto-one laptop program at the school, which assigned a laptop to each incoming ninth grader. Teachers were alsoequipped laptops and Smart Boards in their classrooms.Sapphire, the second context, was a girls-only independent school serving 100 young women in gradesfive through eight. Although it was located in a diverse neighborhood near the center of the city it served arelatively upscale student population with 35% students of color. They had a commitment to providing 30% oftheir student body with need-based financial aid. The school offered students a large degree of autonomy, trust,and responsibility. Sapphire does not give grades instead teachers write narratives that describe student’sstrengths, weaknesses, areas for improvement, and chart their participation in class projects over the course ofthe quarter.We collected data from both schools during the implementation of a project-based learning unitdesigned for the English language arts classroom as part of a larger research study. The unit incorporatestechnology to cultivate thriving social networks and leverages video, disciplinary tools to help youth progressalong competency pathways, the use of experts to provide feedback to students for multi-faceted learningsupports, and positions students with multiple ways of expression. Materials for the six-week unit were loadedinto a platform called Canvas, which students and teachers accessed on a daily basis.Theoretical and Methodological Approaches PursuedWe viewed the classroom as an activity system with various components interacting with one another. YorjoEngeström (2008) generated activity theory to represent how learning is a process driven by tensions andcontradictions within an activity system. The system is composed of a number of components utilized by anindividual or a group working towards a shared object to obtain a desired outcome. Cultural historical activitytheory (CHAT) stems from Vygotsky’s activity theory where “human behavior results from the integration ofsocially and culturally constructed forms of mediation into human activity” (Lantolf, 2000, p.8). CHAThighlights the development of various components such as tools, division of labor, goals, outcomes, subjects,rules, and community to understand an activity system and the activities that occur within the system. Weemployed CHAT to represent the classroom-learning environment and the challenges and affordances forstudents with regards to the technology used within the PBL space. The components of the system representedby Engeström triangle are subjects, tools, rules, community, division of labor, objectives, and outcomes. Wewill show the mapping of each classroom setting using these elements to highlight the affordances andICLS 2014 Proceedings1663© ISLSconstraints for students. The data sources in the analysis include video recordings of the classroom during theimplementation, focus groups with students after the completion of the unit, teacher interviews, and field notesof daily classroom interactions with students.Preliminary Findings and ImplicationsThis comparison between research context is not intended to establish a deficit framing for the students orteachers at the comprehensive high school or set them in direct competition with the outcomes at theindependent high school rather we seek to compare the activity systems surrounding both implementationcontexts. Our intent is to highlight the ways in which the tools, rules, community, division of labor, had animpact on the objectives, and outcomes in each context. These findings suggest the need for newimplementation strategies for blended learning environment designers, the design of curriculum, as well aschoice of educational technology platforms that lead to sustainability of use amongst all student populations.We noticed vast differences in technological literacy, school infrastructure and teacher familiaritywhich all had an impact on students’ experience of the blended learning environment in the classroom. We alsonoticed that the schools had different expectations of classroom regulation and the purposes for technology inthe classroom.At Ruby, the PBL unit was the very first unit of the year. We started working with students during thesecond week of their ninth grade year. We worked with a single teacher, Ms. Prince, who had three sections ofFundamentals classes. There were 20-23 (total 63) students in each class from a variety of linguistic and culturalbackgrounds. Ms. Prince was very motivated to do this curriculum with her students. She saw the collaborationwith our program as an opportunity to develop her technology implementation skills. She was particularlyinterested in working with the SMART board and students laptops more effectively. She bemoaned the fact thather school had very little support for teachers who wanted to learn about blended learning environments.The students at Ruby were assigned a laptop at the beginning of the year, however, the integration oftechnology was a challenge for the teachers and the staff. The students’ school emails could only reach otherstudents, teachers, and staff within the school and did not connect to the outside world. Many of the studentsleft their laptops in their lockers overnight. And while the students were tech savvy with utilizing technologyfor non-academic purposes, they were inexperienced with the use of technology connected with academiclearning. We attributed this lack of familiarity with the school’s insufficient facilitation of the use oftechnology.Our collaborating teachers Ms. Fenrich and Ms. Archer at Sapphire were used to designinginterdisciplinary project-based units and working with a mixed specialty team. We worked with the entireeighth grade, 35 students total who were divided into two groups called cores.The students at Sapphire were high functioning and autonomous in their academic endeavors and werefocused on applying to high school at the end of their fall quarter when we were there. Sapphire was also a oneto-one laptop school that provided every student with an Apple MacBook Pro. The students were not allowedto bring their computers home, however, most if not all had access to technology at home. Because they werefamiliar with technology use in academic settings, the students were at ease with accessing the platform todownload materials, conduct online research and reviewing websites, and exchange messages with the experts.Given our experiences in these vastly different implementation contexts, we would advocate for thedesign of a mobile application as a platform that could be more sustainable across our study population.Literature on the digital divide can foreground the ways in which certain segments of the population haverestricted access to computers and other technologies, whereas this study explores the larger activity systemsnecessary to support teachers and students’ use of computers in sustainable ways.Relevance To Conference ThemeOur study is connected with the conference theme “Learning and Becoming in Practice” because we arecontributing to the body of literature that examines learning environments that foster disciplinary engagementwith technology. We compare the curriculum implementation of the same unit in two different settings withspecific focus on the technology use of teachers and students. Our students are positioned in the environment tobecome digital experts but experience challenges due to the school structure.ReferencesEngeström, Y. (January 01, 2008). Enriching activity theory without shortcuts. Interacting with Computers, 20,2, 256-259.Lantolf, J. (Ed) (2000) Sociocultural theory and second language learning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1664© ISLS