Authenticity Matters: Youth and Science Participation inDesign-Based Learning EnvironmentsGavin Tierney and Déana Scipio, University of Washington, 1100 NE 45th Street, #200, Seattle, WA 98105gtierney@uw.edu, descipio@uw.eduAbstract: This paper reinterprets the notion of the “competent outsider” (Feinstein, 2010)through the lens of authenticity. We present a three-pronged conceptual framework aboutauthenticity: to the domain, to the world, and to students. Data from Project COOL and theKnowledge In Action Project raise questions about power and ownership of “authentic”science. Findings suggest considering these multiple aspects of authenticity can help in designand instruction of formal and informal science learning environments.Major Issues AddressedWhen educators and designers of learning environments ask kids to take on the task of solving problems inScience Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines, we are also asking them to choose toparticipate in particular ways. The ways that we frame problems for youth, the tools we offer them, the authoritywe grant, and the ways we hold them accountable are all influenced by our ideas of what it means for students tobe or become a version of themselves that can participate in the real world. These ways of participating arehoused within the domain and linked to a variety of disciplinary practices, thus when we think about authenticdisciplinary practices we need to consider the types of authentic problems, practices, and identities that we areasking students to take on/ become. Learning in practice raises questions about the kinds of practice-linkedidentities that youth are encouraged to take on (Eisenhart, 1996; Nasir, 2002; 2013).Youth might understand themselves as doing science practices but still not feel they are being scientists(Barab & Hay, 2001). van Eijck & Roth (2009) traced the trajectory of a young man from the Salish tribe toexplore the impact of “authentic science experiences” on his scientific literacy development as well as hisscience career choices. Even though he participated in experiences that would be considered authentic basedupon disciplinary and scientific measures, he did not persist in the field. In a related study (van Eijck, Hsu &Roth, 2009) the researchers while exploring the relationship between youth’s experiences of science practicesand how they translated them into images of science practice, discovered that engagement in science practicescan serve to calcify youth’s images of science. A longitudinal study conducted in the UK around youth identityand STEM participation highlighted a "mismatch between popular representations of science, the manner inwhich it is taught, and the aspirations, ideals, and developing identities of young adolescents" (Archer et al,2010). This paper approaches this mismatch between science practices and students lives through the lens ofauthenticity, looking at authenticity in science, authenticity in the real world, and in students’ worlds. This paperleverages data from two empirical studies to answer the research question: How do students’ perceptions ofauthenticity within project-based curricula influence their disciplinary participation?Potential SignificanceUnderstanding the ways that youth experience authenticity in their lives is an important consideration fordesigners of learning environments. Our data suggests strong links between youth engagement, sense ofauthenticity, and choices to increase or sustain participation. These findings raise new questions for educatorsand designers of learning environments that seek to involve youth in STEM practices. This raises manyquestions: To what end? To whose end? What is the goal of STEM education? Is it transfer into everydaypractices? Are we trying to create scientists, or competent outsiders? Feinstein (2010) argues for a reimagination of the utility of science, based in the everyday lives of students. Feinstein calls scientifically literatecitizens “competent outsiders” and advocates for student voice and connections to relevant everyday settings.We leverage Feinstein’s ideas and reinterpret them through the lens of authenticity, considering authenticity ofproblems, practices, roles, and settings. We offer a three-pronged framework for thinking about authenticity:authenticity to the domain, authenticity to the world, and authenticity to students. We suggest ways, throughexamples from data, in which these three types of authenticity can be used in educational design and instruction.Theoretical FrameworkTo explore the ways youth participate in authentic project-based curricula we have used Productive DisciplinaryEngagement (PDE) (Engle & Conant, 2002) as our theoretical lens. Engle and Conant define PDE as makingintellectual progress or getting somewhere (productive), a connection between what the students are doing andthe practices and discourse in the discipline (disciplinary), and making substantial coordinated contributions thatinclude emotional displays and spontaneous re-engagement over time (engagement) (Engle & Conant, 2002, p.402). PDE is linked to authenticity in that when students are productively engaged in the discipline, they areICLS 2014 Proceedings1077© ISLSpursuing the same authentic practices and tasks as disciplinary experts. In our analysis we specifically look atyouth conceptions of what constitutes productivity. The discipline of science has defined and evolvingdefinitions of what is productive in the discipline. We were interested in exploring students' goals, and thus theirconcepts of productivity, as they engaged in the discipline.By exploring students’ concepts of productivity, we can also see also see what is valuable, relevant,and authentic to students. In this paper we suggest that authenticity is not a property of a learning space butrather an ever-changing practice around which components of social learning can be organized. This is true forall three prongs of authenticity we consider in this paper. Just as the discipline is in constant change, so to is theworld at large and students’ worlds, meaning that what is authentic to any of these domains is also in flux. Weconceptualize authenticity to students as in what is considered authentic and relevant to them. Though a nuancedpoint, we believe that authenticity to students requires projects or activities to leverage students’ out-of-schoollives, but not necessarily integrate their out-of-school lives into the projects. Previous research on contextualizedscenario-based learning has demonstrated ways in which students can feel an activity or simulation is authenticbecause of the authentic roles they are given or the authentic performances required at the end (Cognition andTechnology Group at Vanderbilt, 1992; Rivet & Krajcik, 2008). Put another way, we consider authenticity tostudents as what ‘feels real’ to students, looking at the ways this form of authenticity connects to whatdisciplinary experts believe is authentic to the discipline and what teachers, mentors, and designers believe isreal to the world at large.Project DescriptionsThe two projects in this analysis are both design-based research projects which leverage project based learning.The Knowledge In Action Project is a project-based Advanced Placement (AP) Environmental Sciencecurriculum. Chemical Oceanography Outside the Lab (COOL) is a self-choice, afterschool chemicaloceanography program for middle school youth. Designed environments focused on project-based learning haveparticular affordances for being and becoming in practice. The two projects for this analysis were chosenbecause both offer students opportunities to participate in projects and activities that are authentic to the Sciencediscipline and the real world. The two projects were also chosen to represent a school setting (Knowledge InAction) and an out-of-school setting (COOL). Finally, the projects were chosen so we could explore authenticityacross a larger sample of qualitative data (Knowledge In Action) and a single case study (COOL).AP courses are typically known for the vast amount of information that students are asked to learn forthe AP test taken at the end of the year. The Knowledge In Action Project proposed that by putting students inroles and asking them to tackle challenging, authentic projects that they would do as well or better on the APtest and, compared to conventional AP courses, would connect what they learned to their out-of-school lives.COOL is a design-based research study focused on approaches to broadening participation in thegeosciences for youth from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines. COOL proposed thathybrid learning environments designed to have youth and STEM mentors work collaboratively would provideyouth with models of participation and create opportunities for explicit conversations between youth andmentors about ways of navigating into new discipline-linked identities. In this learning environment, mentors’interactions with youth occupy a hybrid space between academic and interpersonal relationships. COOL soughtto leverage these hybrid relationships to bring youth and mentors together to engage in authentic STEMpractices. Here authenticity means projects that simultaneously hold personal, community, and disciplinaryrelevance for all participants.Data and AnalysisData for this paper were pulled from larger Design-Based Implementation Research projects on studentlearning and engagement. Specific data for this analysis were chosen based on previous work in each project.We chose data that highlighted the link between authentic contexts or activities and student participation. TheKnowledge In Action Project used data from youth individual interviews, youth group (“fishbowl”)interviews, and teacher interviews across three years. Project COOL used data from youth and mentorinterviews and video observations. All data Video and audio records were transcribed verbatim and thencollected in a hermeneutic unit in computer programs for qualitative analysis. There were two distinct phasesof analysis. In the first phase, research teams on each project utilized a grounded theory approach, focusingon student engagement and identification with the discipline as foundations for beginning codes. Then eachresearch team included an initial set of code categories based on each research group’s research questions,including codes around engagement, identity, transfer, disciplinary thinking, identification with the domain,positioning, stance, and citizenship. Coding was iterative and collaborative, with research group membersproposing new codes and code categories, negotiating codes and their definitions, and co-producing analyticcomments and memos. Analysis proceeded until no new codes were needed to characterize the data. Patternsfor The Knowledge In Action Project included student reports of transfer, proposed solutions toenvironmental science problems, and identification with certain disciplinary practices. Patterns for ProjectICLS 2014 Proceedings1078© ISLSCOOL included deepening participation in STEM practices, identification with the domain of science, andsharing chemical oceanography information with new communities i.e. home and school.In the second phase of analysis, the authors reanalyzed sections of data across the two projects throughthe lens of productive disciplinary engagement and the three prongs of authenticity. We analyzed the projectsproposed goals and curriculum for opportunities for authentic practice. We then identified moments in the datawhere the participants talked about their perceptions of the authentic opportunities provided them. Thesemoments were coded using open and theoretical codes based on Productive Disciplinary Engagement (Engle &Conant, 2002). Patterns in the data were explored using discourse analytical techniques and, when applicable,connecting perceived patterns with video of youth participation in the Project COOL. Discourse analysisincluded exploring language around agency and identity and the contexts and scenarios referenced during thoseinstances. Patterns across data sets included students’ perception of authenticity of tasks extending beyond tasksonly being authentic to the discipline. Tasks that were authentic to the real world and students’ worlds increasedperceived relevance and identification with certain disciplinary practices.FindingsWe present data from the two projects, exploring the ways in which authenticity to the domain, to the real world,and to students’ worlds were present and how these forms of authenticity impacted the students’ STEMengagement and identification. The Knowledge In Action Project highlights student responses to a redesign ofan AP Environmental Science unit that asked students to use authentic disciplinary practices and thinking toaddress real world problems within the context of their home lives. Project COOL was chosen as a comparisonbecause it presents a close analysis of the mechanisms of sense of authenticity as it related to the student’sidentification with the domain of chemical oceanography. In both projects students use practices and thinkingthat designers saw as authentic to the scientific disciplines. Both projects also asked students to tackle authenticreal world problems around human’s impact on the environment. Finally, students from both projects saw theproject activities as authentic to their worlds as students. In The Knowledge In Action Project students used datafrom their own lives to address the real world problem of sustainability. In Project COOL the student saw theactivity as personally authentic because it was a performance that mattered. These two cases, taken togetheroffer a broad picture (APES) and a close analysis (COOL) of the impacts of sense of authenticity on student’sparticipation.Authenticity in the Real World — Authenticity in Students’ WorldsIn The Knowledge In Action Project AP Environmental Science (APES) course the projects begin locally, withstudents analyzing environmental science issues in their own lives. The projects then grow in scope, until, at theend of the year, the students are looking at environmental science on a global scale. In contrast to more hardsciences, Environmental Science focuses far more on citizen science or how to be a scientifically informedsustainable citizen. This is particularly the case in the project-based APES curriculum, which contains a coursemaster question of “How can we live more sustainably?” With a focus on sciences and sustainability in theworld, authenticity within the course typically refers to authentic scientific practices and authenticity to the realworld. Authenticity to the real world encompasses a number of project qualities: authentic real world roles,authentic challenges, authentic overarching questions (master course question), and authentic real worldproblems that the students are asked to tackle in the projects.In previous analysis however (Nolen et al., 2013), the authors have seen that the part of the APEScourse that is the most memorable to students and has the strongest impact on their daily lives is the one inwhich they do not take on a role, but analyze their own practices. In the first project of the AP EnvironmentalScience course, titled “Ecological Footprint”, the students are asked to analyze the daily habits of themselvesand their families. This starts with the students calculating the number of earths that would be needed ifeveryone on the planet lived the way they do. Then, analyzing different areas of consumption such astransportation or electricity use, the students propose a change to their family.In our analysis of the first year of the Ecological Footprint cycle we saw the ways in which the projectimpacted the students practices outside of school. One female student from the second year of the courseimplementation talked about the relevance to her life:I feel as if the things that we’re learning really relate to me, especially like the mobilityanalysis, the water usage, and the electricity usage. I can totally see how that relates to me,and how that impacts my life because I can see, ‘Oh! This is how much gas I use. This is howmuch I don’t walk (November 14, 2011).The authenticity real world problem of sustainability connected directly to the student’s life and practices. Thisis contrasted with the first year of the curriculum, where, for the Footprint cycle, students were put in anauthentic real world simulation (planning an eco-friendly wedding) that did not relate to their own authenticICLS 2014 Proceedings1079© ISLSlives. One student commented on that version of the cycle: “I didn't see the connection to that and anything thatI could take away from that and to the future. It was very irritating” (May 10, 2011). The first year version of thecycle seemingly contained authenticity to the domain, incorporating various scientific thinking and practices andit was authentic to the real world, with the authentic problem of sustainability and the authentic real worldcontext. However, it was not until the second year, when the cycle was redesigned to also include authenticity tothe students’ worlds, that the impact of the cycle was felt. A male student in the second year of the projectdiscussed the connections between science practices, the real world problem of sustainability, and his own life.[In class] we had to write down… a whole list of electrical appliances that we might use, andso we put in how long each day they’re used or plugged in. And then we put it in this Excelsheet and got the math of how many kilowatt-hours are being used from that, and then weprinted it out and made a pie graph. I immediately showed that to my mom and she wasamazed and right off the bat we just started changing the way that we use stuff, and started tounplug stuff when we weren’t using them (October 31, 2011).By connecting authentic citizen-scientist practices with the students’ lives the project became authenticto not just the real world, but also the students’ real world. The Ecological Footprint cycle introduced numerousauthentic scientific concepts and practices, such as collecting, analyzing, and interpreting their own data (NAP,2011), however, the authenticity of the project rested on the reality of issue of sustainability in the world and thestudents’ day-to-day practices. In thinking about the ways students adopt authentic scientific practices into theirdaily lives and into their developing ideas of what it means to be a citizen and a scientist, it may be useful tothink about the ways authentic scientific practices connect to authentic experiences in students’ lives.Authenticity in Performance Spaces — Authenticity in Students’ WorldsIn the second year of Project COOL, one of the young women in our study- Kelly (pseudonym) stood out as acase of how sense of authenticity can lead to deepening participation in STEM contexts. As a context COOLgave her opportunities to engage with “real” data, participate in scientific communication, discover new things,and to be trusted in places where her actions could have real consequences. Kelly, commented on the sense ofnewness she felt within COOL and went on to explain, “the school doesn't teach us this types of stuff and justbecause a lot of the experiments that we did, they were stuff that you guys didn't know either. Whereas at schoolwe're learning stuff but it's experiments and the results that the teacher already knows” (2011). Kelly mentioneda field trip we took to the ocean sciences department of a local university in her follow up interviewdemonstrating that place was also an important component of her sense of authenticity: “Especially the sterilearea it shows like, like how, how little you can do to mess up to like, the littlest thing can destroy a wholescience project over something that people have been working on for months” (Kelly, 2011). For Kelly, visitingthe sterile area and understanding that “the littlest thing can destroy a whole science project” was crucial. Thiswas an important place she had been trusted to enter. These experiences helped Kelly develop a sense ofauthenticity, she felt empowered to step into a leadership role when faced with obstacles to participation. Shedid so in the face of a challenge by other members of her group, pushing everyone to step up and get their workdone for the group’s final project.I remember I did take charge and say something about what we should do and why everybodywas actually there. Like the reason they were there wasn't just to be there for after school.Because if it was just after school, they could have joined another something else or were theythere for science and actually learning something (July, 2012).Kelly described herself as someone who was “there for the science.” She saw her work in COOL as meaningfulbecause her experiences had allowed her to create a storyline of someone who was “there for the science.” Hersense of the actions and discourse as connected to authentic science shaped her perception of what she waslearning. It shaped her desire to make sure that the final project was completed. This case study illuminates theways that a sense of authenticity developed during a young woman’s interactions with a set of designedsociomaterial arrangements (Bell et al., 2012). Kelly’s sense of authenticity within the COOL Program led todeepening participation in STEM practices. The challenge to educators, designers, and theorists is to figure outhow to create and sustain sense of authenticity within all learning environments.Relevance to the Conference ThemeThe processes of being and becoming in practice are directly related to the ways that youth experience theconnection between the things they are doing and the practices of disciplinary experts in the real world. Theways that youth perceive these connections are sometimes even more important than the observable links thatteachers or curriculum designers intend. Our data suggests the possibility that youth’s perceived connectionsICLS 2014 Proceedings1080© ISLSbetween their lived experiences and disciplinary practices impact their identification with the discipline, andwhether they choose to deepen participation in the discipline. The three prongs of authenticity intersect inimportant ways as students engage productively with the science domain, developing identities as scientists andcitizen scientists. In year one of The Knowledge In Action Project, the course was authentic to the sciencedomain and authentic to roles and problems existing in the real world, however it wasn’t until the addition ofauthenticity to students’ worlds that students began reporting identification with the domain and the transfer ofpractices out of school. Similarly, Project COOL was constructed to be authentic to the domain of science and tothe real world, but also to include authentic performances and roles. These three prongs of authenticity workedin concert to help the case study youth participate in the practices of contemporary science. Future researchcould explore ways the three prongs of authenticity intersect, authenticity as a changing practice, and ways tointegrate authenticity into learning environments, materials, and teacher pedagogical practice.ReferencesArcher, L., DeWitt, J., Osborne, J., Dillon, J., Willis, B., & Wong, B. (2010). “Doing” science versus “being” ascientist: Examining 10/11-year-old schoolchildren’s constructions of science through the lens ofidentity. Science Education, 94(4), 617–639.Barab, S. A., & Hay, K. E. (2001). Doing science at the elbows of experts: Issues related to the scienceapprenticeship camp. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(1), 70–102.Barron, B. (2004). Learning Ecologies for Technological Fluency: Gender and Experience Differences. Journalof Educational Computing Research, 31(1), 1–36.Bell, P., Tzou, C., Bricker, L., & Baines, A. M. D. (January 01, 2012). Learning in Diversities of Structures ofSocial Practice: Accounting for How, Why and Where People Learn Science. Human Development, 55,269-284.Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1992). The Jasper series as an example of anchoredinstruction: Theory, program description, and assessment data. Educational Psychologist, 27, 291–315.Heath, S. B. (2012). Words at work and play: Three decades in family and community life. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.Eisenhart, M. (1996). The production of biologists at school and work: Making scientists, conservationists, orflowery bone-heads? In B. Levinson, D. Foley, & D. Holland (Eds.), The cultural production of theeducated person (pp. 169–185). Albany: State University of New York Press.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20(4), 399-483.Feinstein, N. (2010). Salvaging science literacy. Science Education, 95(1), 168–185.Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible Selves. American Psychologist, 41(9), 954–969.Nasir, N.S. (2002). Identity, Goals, and Learning : Mathematics in Cultural Practice. Mathematical Thinkingand Learning, 4(2), 213– 247.Nasir, N. S. (2011). Racialized identities: Race and achievement among African American youth. Stanford,California: Stanford University Press.National Research Council. (2011). A Framework for K-12 Science Education  : Practices, CrosscuttingConcepts, and Core Ideas. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.Nolen, S. B., Tierney, G. Goodell, A., Eng, S., Whitfield, L., Nguyen, D., Cooper, S., Becherer, K., Pak, S.,Abbott, R. (2013). Teaching and Learning Practice-Linked Environmental Identities: A Design-BasedStudy. Paper presented at the biennial meeting of the European Association of Research on Learningand Instruction, Munich, September.Rivet, A. E., & Krajcik, J. S. (January 01, 2008). Contextualizing instruction: Leveraging students' priorknowledge and experiences to foster understanding of middle school science. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 45(1), 79-100.van Eijck, M., Hsu, P.L., & Roth, W.M. (2009). Translations of scientific practice to “students’ images ofscience.” Science Education, 93(4), 611–634.van Eijck, M., & Roth, W.M. (2009). Authentic science experiences as a vehicle to change students’ orientationstoward science and scientific career choices: Learning from the path followed by Brad. CulturalStudies of Science Education, 4(3), 611–638.AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by grants 1261892 and 1251595 (Susan Nolen, PI) from the National ScienceFoundation, and grants from the George Lucas Educational Foundation (John Bransford, PI). This work is alsosupported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF#9014483) and is partly supported by theLearning in Informal and Formal Environments (LIFE) Science of Learning Center (http://life-slc.org/) (NSF#0354453). All opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed here are those of the authors.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1081© ISLS