Intersections of Science Learning and Language Developmentwithin Scientific Argumentation: Implications for English LanguageLearnersMaría González-Howard, Katherine L. McNeill, Boston College, 140 Commonwealth AvenueChestnut Hill, MA 02467Email: gonzaldx@bc.edu, kmcneill@bc.eduAbstract: This piece contends that engaging in scientific argumentation simultaneouslypromotes second language acquisition through purposeful and authentic use of English,supports development of science content knowledge, and facilitates socialization into sciencepractices. We explore the learning opportunities embedded within argumentation using asheltered English immersion science classroom example. Through this examination, weprovide direction for designing learning environments for students that promote these types oflearning experiences.PurposeUnderstanding the dialogic aspects of classroom life is crucial to comprehending the opportunities for studentsto engage in science. Such engagement in science discourse is fundamental to accessing the science beingtaught, learned and practiced in the classroom (Kelly, 2007). Therefore exploring the tensions that arise inteaching and engaging in science discourse is important to ensuring equitable educational opportunities for allstudents, especially English language learners (ELLs). The sheltered English immersion (SEI) model is anapproach used to address the science education of ELLs, in which the teacher attends to both content andlanguage development objectives (Echevarria, Vogt & Short, 2008). The purpose of this piece is to highlight theways that an SEI classroom can enhance discourse opportunities by promoting the intersection of sciencelearning and second language (L2) development through argumentation. We discuss features of the SEIenvironment that promote these experiences and provide insight into ways to increase opportunities for ELLs toengage in science.Theoretical FrameworkA sociocultural perspective on science learning promotes enculturating students into the practices of scientificcommunities, which includes attention to the uses of language in science (Anderson, 2007). Anderson arguesthat “scientists are participants in communities of practice with shared linguistic and social norms, values, andpatterns of activity” (2007, p. 18). Consequently, an important task for science teachers is to explicitly teach andengage students within the social, linguistic, and cultural practices of science (Kelly, 2007). Similarly, thesociocultural view in second language acquisition (SLA) places emphasis on how learners become users of anL2 (Lantolf, 2000). Combining these views, this piece examines the ways ELLs use their evolving L2 toperform interactive and expressive tasks that are fundamental to science, specifically those associated withargumentation. Argumentation was chosen because it is heavily dialogic in nature (Jiménez-Aleixandre &Erduran, 2008), encouraging students to generate, critically evaluate, and use evidence to support claims(Osborne, 2010). Additionally, this practice lets ELLs use their developing L2 through multiple modalities inauthentic and meaningful tasks (e.g. reading and analyzing arguments). Little prior research on sciencediscourse and practice has focused on students who have been historically marginalized in science education,including ELLs (Kelly, 2007). As such, this conceptual piece explores the educational potential ofargumentation for ELLs.Exploration of an Argumentation Classroom ExampleWe suggest that argumentation is simultaneously a science learning opportunity, a language developmentexperience, and an authentic practice through which students can become enculturated into the scientificcommunity. Our perspective focuses on the ways that these learning experiences mutually support and informone another. Given space constraints, only one classroom example will be used to illustrate this concept,although the final poster will contain more examples across language modalities (e.g. writing and reading). Thefollowing interaction was captured in a middle school SEI science classroom, in which students were learningabout how relevant supporting evidence makes an argument more persuasive via a card sorting activity (seeTable 1).In this example, the students use their developing L2 to explain their reasoning as to whether a particular cardillustrates relevant evidence for a claim. When Sofia says she can’t accomplish this task well (end of turn 3) Evahelps her articulate her reasoning (first sentence in turn 4). Following this interaction, Sofia is able to explainher thought process for another card, having learned from her peer how to express her reasoning in English.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1499© ISLSDuring this interaction, the students also deepen their understanding of the science content. Their languageexperience was supporting and reinforcing their growing understanding of antibiotics and bacteria, while thetask provided an authentic purpose to use their L2. Additionally, these students became enculturated into afundamental practice of scientists. When Eva pushes Sofia to explain her reasoning by asking “Why?” (turn 1)she demonstrates a key component of argumentation: persuasion. This example illustrates how interlaced theselearning experiences are, as well as how these intersections further strengthen the other learning experiences’outcomes.Table 1: Transcript exemplifying learning opportunities within argumentationTurn1SpeakerSofia23EvaSofia4EvaTranscript[Student chimes in and finishes reading aloud the card with the other student] –“makepeople very sick.” I think this here [Student points to irrelevant pile] because doesn’tsupport the claim.Why?[Student rereads card] Because dice (it says) [student reads off card] “unfortunately not allbacteria are helful, helpful. Harmful bacteria can invade the human microbiome throughcuts, spoil food, microbiome through cut.” I think, yo no puedo hacer bien la cosa esta. (Ican’t do this thing well)Okay, I think here is [Student points to cards in irrelevant pile] here are information becausethey are like not connecting in the claim because they don’t have any antibiotics and killsand bacteria [student points to cards in irrelevant pile], like B right? And here [studentpoints to cards in the relevant evidence pile] they have, we have to see and read if they are[student points to claim card] antibiotics killing bacteria. And here this say [student pointsto card in relevant evidence pile] antibiotics kill bacteria, that’s why it’s here.However, we do not propose that the mere inclusion of argumentation resulted in the students having theselearning opportunities. In line with Berland’s (2011) work, we argue that multiple factors, such as the teacher’srole, were integral in enabling this triad of learning experiences. For instance, before beginning the card sort, theteacher instilled in her students the importance of articulating the “why” behind each card sort decision. Theeffect of this instructional strategy came across when Eva pushed Sofia to explain the reasoning behind herdecision. Another teacher action, which is evident in Eva’s response to help Sofia, was the simplification ofargumentation language. Before the card sort started the teacher made the language of the claim more accessibleto her students by asking them, “If you had to say this claim in three words, what three words would you use?”Eva reminds Sofia of these salient words when advising her to read for ”antibiotics”, “kills”, and “bacteria”(second sentence in turn 4).Implications for Education and ResearchWe argue that engagement in scientific argumentation presents numerous authentic opportunities for science andlanguage learning not only to occur simultaneously, but also to strengthen and support one another’sdevelopment. However, a crucial aspect of such experiences is understanding effective supports for ELLs inusing their developing language to access and engage in science learning through argumentation. Consequently,a task for future research will be to identify the key characteristics of the learning environment that promotethese interactions.ReferencesAnderson, C.W. (2007). Perspective on Science Learning. In S.K. Abell & N.G. Lederman (Eds.), Handbook ofresearch on science education (pp. 3-30). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Berland, L. (2011). Explaining variation in how classroom communities adapt the practice of scientificargumentation. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(4), 625-664.Echevarria, J., Vogt, M. E., & Short, D. J. (2008). Making content comprehensible for English learners: TheSIOP Model (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.Jiménez-Aleixandre, M. P. & Erduran, S. (2008). Argumentation in science education: An Overview. In S.Erduran & M. P. Jimenez-Aleixandre (Eds.). Argumentation in science education: Perspectives fromclassroom-based research. (pp. 3-28), Dordrecht: Springer.Kelly, G. J. (2007). Discourse in science classrooms. In S. K. Abell, & N. G. Lederman (Eds.) Handbook ofresearch on science education (pp. 443-469). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Lantolf, J.P. (Ed). (2000). Sociocultural theory and second language learning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Osborne, J. (2010). Arguing to learn in science: The role of collaborative, critical discourse. Science, 328, 463466.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1500© ISLS