Sequencing Sense-Making and Fluency-Building Support forConnection Making between Multiple Graphical RepresentationsMartina A. Rau, Department of Educational Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, marau@wisc.eduVincent Aleven, Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, aleven@cs.cmu.eduNikol Rummel, Institute of Educational Research, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, nikol.rummel@rub.deAbstract: Multiple graphical representations can significantly improve learning, provided thatstudents make connections between them. In doing so, they need to engage in sense-makingprocesses to build up conceptual understanding of the connections, and in fluency-buildingprocesses to fast and effortlessly use perceptual properties to make connections. Weinvestigate how these learning processes interact, and consequently, which learning processshould be supported first. We contrast two hypotheses: (1) conceptual understandingfacilitates fluency-building processes, and (2) fluency enhances sense-making processes. Weconducted an experiment to investigate whether students learn better if they receive sensemaking before fluency-building support, or fluency-building before sense-making support.We assessed students’ learning outcomes, problem-solving behaviors, conceptual reasoning,and visual attention. Our results show an advantage for supporting sense-making processesbefore fluency-building processes rather than vice versa. We conclude that instructionalmaterials with multiple representations should first support sense-making processes and thensupport fluency-building processes in connection making.IntroductionInstructional materials in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) domains often employmultiple graphical representations (e.g., circles and number lines of fractions, ball-and-stick figures and skeletondrawings of molecules), which use visual and perceptual elements rather than symbols to communicate information. A vast literature documents that multiple representations can enhance students’ learning, provided thatstudents make connections between them (Ainsworth, 2006; Bodemer & Faust, 2006). However, students tendnot to spontaneously make connections, but they need to be supported in doing so (Bodemer & Faust, 2006).In any domain, learning is likely to include sense-making processes and fluency-building processes.Sense-making processes are learning processes that lead to conceptual understanding by explicit and verbalreasoning. Fluency-building processes lead to more automatic knowledge that can be used fast and effortlessly.Accordingly, with respect to connection making between multiple graphical representations, we distinguishbetween sense-making processes that lead to conceptual understanding of the connections between graphicalrepresentations, and fluency-building processes that lead to the ability to fast and effortlessly make connectionsbetween them based on their perceptual characteristics.Most prior research exclusively focused on supporting sense-making processes involved in students’conceptual understanding of connections between multiple representations. This research shows that supportingstudents to make connections based on elements that – across representations – correspond to one another enhances their learning (e.g., Bodemer & Faust, 2006; Seufert & Brünken). Recent research on perceptual learninghas investigated the effects of support for fluency-building processes in connection making on students’ learning(Kellman, Massey, & Son, 2009). In these studies, students learned to find corresponding representations whilefocusing on perceptual characteristics of the representations, without conceptually reflecting on the connections.Students who received fluency training showed significantly higher learning gains compared to students whodid not receive such training (Kellman et al., 2009). However, Kellman and colleagues did not investigate interactions between conceptual understanding of connections and perceptual fluency.In a prior experiment, we found that both sense-making and fluency-building support is necessary forstudents’ learning from multiple graphical representations of fractions (Rau, Scheines, Aleven, & Rummel,2013): neither sense-making or fluency-building support alone were effective, but only the combination ofsense-making and fluency-building support significantly enhanced students’ learning of fractions (compared toa single-representation control group). To gain further insight into the mechanisms of the interaction betweensense-making and fluency-building support, we conducted a mediation analysis based on errors students madeduring the learning phase (Rau et al., 2013). Our findings indicate that conceptual understanding of connectionsenhanced students’ benefit from fluency-building support. We did not, however, find any evidence that fluencyin connection making enhanced students’ benefit from sense-making support. This prior research leads to thehypothesis that instruction is most effective if we provide students with sense-making before fluency-buildingsupport (understanding-first hypothesis). By contrast, if fluency enhances students’ benefit from sense-makingsupport, we should provide fluency-building before sense-making support (fluency-first hypothesis).ICLS 2014 Proceedings977© ISLSIn support of the fluency-first hypothesis, one might argue that fluency in connection making betweenrepresentations reduces cognitive load during learning activities with multiple representations (Koedinger et al.,2012). Indeed, Kellman and colleagues (2009) argue that fluency results from automating the perceptual task ofconnection making, thereby freeing cognitive resources for subsequent activities. Thus, supporting fluencybuilding processes first may free cognitive resources that students can then invest in making sense of connections between graphical representations. Thus, the fluency-first hypothesis predicts that instruction is most effective if it provides fluency-building support before sense-making support (fluency-sense condition).By contrast, the sense-first hypothesis proposes that conceptual understanding is necessary for studentsto attend to relevant features of the graphical representations while they work on fluency-building support. Nothaving conceptual understanding might lead students to employ inefficient learning strategies (e.g., trial anderror), which might impede their benefit from fluency-building support. Indeed, education practice guides seemto implicitly agree with this view. For example, according to the NCTM (2010), understanding of fractionsrepresentations is expected by grade 5, but the ability to efficiently work with fractions representations is expected later: by grade 8. In sum, the understanding-first hypothesis predicts that instruction is most effective if itprovides sense-making support before fluency-building support (sense-fluency condition).In our prior study (Rau et al., 2013), we consistently provided sense-making support before fluencybuilding support. Therefore, the understanding-first and fluency-first hypotheses remain untested. Yet, we expect that the temporal sequence of sense-making and fluency-building support should maximize students’ benefit from activities designed to support connection making. This question of optimal sequence is of broad relevance because connection making between multiple graphical representations is critical to students’ learning ofrobust domain knowledge in many STEM domains. Furthermore, in investigating this question, our researchhelps close the gap between studies that have exclusively focused on sense-making support (e.g., Bodemer &Faust, 2006) or exclusively on fluency-building support (e.g., Kellman et al., 2009). In this paper, we present alab experiment that contrasts the fluency-first hypothesis and the understanding-first hypothesis.Experimental StudyExperimental Design and ProcedureTo investigate these hypotheses, we conducted a lab experiment that contrasted different sequences of sensemaking and fluency-building support. We conducted the experiment within the context of the Fractions Tutor:an intelligent tutoring system for fractions (fractions.cs.cmu.edu). The Fractions Tutor supports learning throughproblem solving with a variety of interactive graphical representations (Figure 1).Figure 1. Interactive graphical representations used in the Fractions Tutor: circle, rectangle, and number lineSeventy-four students from grades 3-5 participated in the experiment. Table 1 details the sequence ofactivities for each condition. Students were randomly assigned to the sense-fluency and the fluency-sense conditions. Both conditions contained the same tutor problems, but they were provided in different orders. Students inthe sense-fluency condition received sense-making support before fluency-building support. This procedure wasimplemented for each topic (i.e., equivalence and comparison; see Table 1). By contrast, students in the fluencysense condition received fluency-building support before sense-making support, again for each topic.The experiment was conducted in two phases. Due to delayed arrival of eye-tracking equipment, 38students participated in phase 1 of the experiment, without eye tracking. The remaining 36 students worked withthe SMI RED 250 remote eye-tracking system. The procedure for phases 1 and 2 was identical except for thecollection of interview data (detailed below) and a calibration procedure (1-2 minutes prior to the pretest).Table 1: Sequence of activities by experimental conditionActivity Type1. Test2. Tutor:equivalence3. Quiz: equivalence4. Tutor:comparison5. Quiz: comparison6. Test7. InterviewICLS 2014 ProceedingsSense-fluency conditionPretest: near / far transferSense-making support: 4 tutor problemsFluency-building support: 4 tutor problemsReproduction-understanding, reproduction-fluencySense-making support: 4 tutor problemsFluency-building support: 4 tutor problemsReproduction-understanding, reproduction-fluencyPosttest: transfer of fractions knowledgeRetrospective interview on tutor problems978Fluency-sense conditionPretest: near / far transferFluency-building support: 4 tutor problemsSense-making support: 4 tutor problemsReproduction-understanding, reproduction-fluencyFluency-building support: 4 tutor problemsSense-making support: 4 tutor problemsReproduction-understanding, reproduction-fluencyPosttest: transfer of fractions knowledgeRetrospective interview on tutor problems© ISLSMaterialsStudents worked with the Fractions Tutor’s units on equivalent fractions and fraction comparison topics. Eachtutor activity was designed to support either sense-making or fluency-building processes. Sense-making supportfirst presented students with a worked example that used a familiar graphical representation (i.e., circle or rectangle) to illustrate how to solve a problem. Students completed the last step of the worked-example problemthemselves. Next, with the worked example still on the screen, students solved an analogous problem with a lessfamiliar representation (i.e., the number line). At the end of the problem, students were prompted to relate thetwo representations to each other. Fluency-building support was similar to Kellman and colleagues’ (2009)fluency training for perceptual expertise in connection making. Students were presented with a variety of graphical representations and, using drag-and-drop, had to sort them into sets of equivalent fractions, or order themfrom smallest to largest. Students were encouraged to solve the problems visually rather than computationally.AssessmentsWe assessed learning outcomes with respect to reproduction of conceptual understanding, reproduction of fluency, and transfer of fractions knowledge. Understanding-reproduction quiz items assessed students’ conceptual understanding of connections between graphical representations. Fluency-reproduction quiz items assessedstudents’ fluency in making connections. We assessed students’ transfer of fractions knowledge based usingpretests and posttests. The transfer test included test items without graphical representations.In addition, we assessed conceptual reasoning using retrospective interviews. For all students, we randomly selected one problem of each type for retrospective interviews. In phase 1, the interviewer asked thestudent immediately after completing the problem how he/she solved each problem step. In phase 2, we usedeye-gaze recordings as cues for the interviews. Protocols obtained from retrospective interviews were coded forconceptual and surface-level processing of connections between multiple graphical representations, and forconceptual reasoning about fractions (independent of graphical representations), based on a coding scheme usedin our prior research (Rau, Rummel, Aleven, Pacilio, & Tunc-Pekkan, 2012).Further, we assessed visual attention behaviors during the learning phase using eye tracking. To analyze the eye-tracking data, we created areas of interest (AOIs) for each representation presented in the FractionsTutor problems. We considered frequency of switching between different AOIs, which has been used to indicateperceptual integration (e.g., Johnson & Mayer, 2012). We computed the frequency of switching between graphical representations as the number of times a fixation on one AOI was followed by one on a different AOI. Second, we considered the duration of fixation after the first inspection of an AOI. The first inspection of an AOI isconsidered to indicate initial processing of material (e.g., Mason et al., 2013). The duration of fixations after thefirst inspection is considered to reflect intentional processing to integrate the information with other information(e.g., Mason et al., 2013). We computed the duration of second-inspection fixations on each AOI as the sum offixations that occurred after the first fixation on AOIs for area models and number lines.Finally, we collected errors rates while students worked with the tutor based on the tutor logs. Weconsidered a step to be correct if the student solved it without hints or errors. We computed error rates separately for equivalence-sense, equivalence-fluency, comparison-sense, and comparison-fluency problems.ResultsTable 2. Frequencies of utterances coded as representation connections and conceptual reasoning1.1. Representation-surface1.2. Representation-concept-incorrect1.3. Representation-concept-correct2. Representation-fluency3. Concept-correctSense-fluency condition1617108305Fluency-sense condition021494245Five students were excluded because they did not complete the Fractions Tutor or were statistical outliers at thepretest. Thus, we analyzed data from N = 69 students (n = 37 in sense-fluency, n = 32 in fluency-sense).First, we consider the effects on learning outcomes. The understanding-first hypothesis predicts thatthe sense-fluency condition will outperform the fluency-sense condition on measures of fluency in making connections. We conducted repeated measures ANCOVAs with transfer pretest score and time spent on the Fractions Tutor as covariates and performance on the reproduction-fluency quiz, averaged across equivalence andcomparison topics, as dependent measure. There was a significant advantage of the sense-fluency condition overthe fluency-sense condition, F(1,65) = 4.52, p < .05, η2 = .07. The fluency-first hypothesis predicts that the fluency-sense condition will outperform the sense-fluency condition on measures of conceptual understanding ofconnections. Using performance on the reproduction-understanding quiz averaged across equivalence and comparison topics as dependent measure, we found no significant effect of condition (F < 1). Both hypotheses predict that the optimal sequence of sense-making and fluency-building support will enhance students’ perfor-ICLS 2014 Proceedings979© ISLSmance on the transfer test. Using performance on the transfer test as dependent measure, we found a marginallysignificant interaction of test time with condition, F(1,66) = 3.76, p < .10, η2 = .05, but no significant main effects of condition or test (Fs < 1). A posthoc comparison showed a marginal advantage of the sense-fluencycondition at the posttest, F(1,65) = 3.05, p < .10, η2 = .05.Second, we consider the effects on conceptual reasoning, based on retrospective interviews. Table 2depicts the number of utterances of representation connections and conceptual reasoning. Interrater reliabilitybetween two independent coders on 33% of the transcripts was substantial (κ = .66). To investigate the effectson the interview measures, we computed chi-square tests. The understanding-first hypothesis predicts that thesense-fluency condition will make more connections while reflecting on fluency-building problems than thefluency-sense condition. Using frequency of representation-fluency utterances as the dependent measure, wefound no significant difference between conditions (χ² < 1). The fluency-first hypothesis predicts that the fluency-sense condition will make more connections while reflecting on sense-making problems than the sensefluency condition. Since there were almost no utterances coded as representation-concept-correct connections(see Table 2), a chi-square test on representation-sense utterances was not warranted. Both hypotheses predictthat the optimal sequence of sense-making and fluency-building support will result in more conceptual reasoning about fractions. Using concept-correct utterances as dependent measures, we found a significant differencebetween conditions, χ²(1, N = 550) = 6.55, p < .05, with the sense-fluency condition exhibiting more conceptualreasoning than the fluency-sense condition. Finally, fluency-building problems elicited significantly more connection-making utterances than the sense-making problems did, χ²(1, N = 241) = 110.25, p < .01.Third, we consider effects on visual attention behaviors. Four students were excluded due to a trackingratio below 70%. Thus, we analyzed data from N = 24 students from phase 2 (n = 12 in each condition). Weconducted repeated measures ANCOVAs with transfer pretest and time spent on the tutor as covariates andvisual attention measures on equivalence and comparison problems as dependent variables. The fluency-firsthypothesis predicts that the fluency-sense condition will exhibit more integrative eye-gaze behaviors whileworking on sense-making problems. Using frequency of switching as dependent measures, we found no maineffect of condition, F(1, 21) = 1.11, p > .10, but a significant main effect of topic, F(1, 21) = 11.19, p < .01, η² =.35, and a marginal interaction of topic with condition, F(1, 21) = 4.09, p < .10, η² = .16. Post-hoc comparisonsshowed that the fluency-sense condition switches marginally more frequently between representations on equivalence-sense problems, F(1, 21) = 3.53, p < .10, η² = .14, but not on comparison-sense problems (F < 1). Usingduration of second-inspection fixations as dependent measures, we found a significant main effect of condition,F(1, 21) = 4.43, p < .05, η² = .17, and a significant interaction of topic with condition, F(1, 21) = 7.09, p < .05,but no significant main effect of topic (F < 1). Post-hoc comparisons showed that the sense-fluency conditionexhibits significantly longer second-inspection fixations on area models on comparison-sense problems, F(1,21) = 5.95, p < .01, η² = .22, but not on equivalence-sense problems, F(1, 21) = 1.43, p > .10. There were nosignificant effects of condition on duration of second-inspection fixations on number lines (ps > .10). The understanding-first hypothesis predicts that the sense-fluency condition will exhibit more integrative eye-gazebehaviors while working on the fluency-building problems. Using eye-gaze measures collected while studentsworked on fluency-building problems, we found no significant differences between conditions (Fs < 1).Finally, to better understand the effects on visual attention behaviors, we computed correlations withthe error rates on equivalence-sense and comparison-sense problems. Frequency of switching on equivalencesense problems correlated positively with students’ error rates (r = .358, p < .10), indicating that a higher frequency of switching is associated with lower problem-solving performance. Duration of second-inspection fixations on area models on comparison-sense problems correlated negatively with students’ error rates (r = -.357, p< .10), indicating that shorter fixations are associated with higher problem-solving performance.Discussion and ConclusionWe conducted an experiment to contrast the understanding-first and the fluency-first hypotheses. Results fromthe learning outcomes provide some support for the understanding-first hypothesis. The sense-fluency conditionsignificantly outperformed the fluency-sense condition on the reproduction-fluency quiz and marginally on thetransfer posttest. By contrast, our results do not support the fluency-first hypothesis.The analysis of process-level measures provides insights into the mechanisms that may underlie theadvantage of the sense-fluency condition. First, the analysis of the retrospective interviews shows that the sensefluency condition engages in more conceptual reasoning than the fluency-sense condition. We also found thatfluency-building support elicits significantly more connection-making utterances than sense-making support.(These types of activities involve a large number of representations, and may simply afford greater opportunityfor connection making.) A reasonable interpretation of these findings may be that the combination of sensemaking and fluency-building support is effective because fluency-building support aids students in making alarge number of explicit connections between graphical representations. However, only when students receivesense-making support before fluency-building support might they be able to take advantage fluency-buildingsupport because they can integrate the perceptual knowledge with conceptual understanding.ICLS 2014 Proceedings980© ISLSThe analysis of the eye-tracking data provides somewhat less conclusive insights. We found differences only on sense-making problems, not on fluency-building problems. Seemingly consistent with the fluency-first hypothesis, students in the fluency-sense condition (compared to the sense-fluency condition) switchedmore frequently between representations on equivalence-sense problems. Although frequency of switching isoften considered to indicate integrative processing (e.g., Johnson & Mayer, 2012), we found that frequency ofswitching is (marginally) associated with lower performance on these problems. Rather than indicating integration across representations, frequency of switching may indicate confusion. Inconsistent with the fluency-firsthypothesis, the fluency-sense condition shows shorter second-inspection fixations on area models than studentsin the sense-fluency condition on comparison-sense problems. Shorter second-inspection fixations on area models were associated with lower performance on these problems. This finding might indicate that receiving fluency-building support before sense-making support inhibits students’ integration of new information with the areamodels. These interpretations of the eye-tracking data remain speculative, but they illustrate that we do not yetfully understand which measures of visual attention to consider, or whether they indicate productive or unproductive learning processes. It is crucial, therefore, that we explore the relationship between measures of visualattention and measures of other learning processes, such as the error rates we collected in our study.In summary, our findings provide some support for the understanding-first hypothesis. Although ourresults were not uniformly strong, a reasonable interpretation may be that understanding of connections betweenrepresentations is necessary for students’ benefit from fluency-building support because it enables students torelate connections between representations to conceptual knowledge about fractions. Thus, we cautiously recommend that instructional designers of multi-representational learning materials provide sense-making beforefluency-building support to enhance students’ acquisition of fluency in connection making and of robust domainknowledge that transfers to novel task types. Whether or not these conclusions hold for other domains thanfractions learning remains to be empirically tested. We consider our study to be a first step towards closing thegap between research that has exclusively focused on sense-making processes in connection making (e.g.,Bodemer & Faust, 2006) and studies that have mainly focused on perceptual fluency in connection making (e.g.,Kellman et al., 2009). Since many STEM domains employ multiple graphical representations and emphasize theimportance of both conceptual understanding of the connections between these representations as well as theability to fluently make connections between them, we anticipate that future research that investigates the interaction between sense-making and fluency-building processes will have broad impact to many domains.ReferencesAinsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for considering learning with multiple representations.Learning and Instruction, 16(3), 183-198.Bodemer, D., & Faust, U. (2006). External and mental referencing of multiple representations. Computers inHuman Behavior, 22(1), 27-42.Johnson, C. I., & Mayer, R. E. (2012). An eye movement analysis of the spatial contiguity effect in multimedialearning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 18(2), 178-191.Kellman, P. J., Massey, C. M., & Son, J. Y. (2009). Perceptual learning modules in mathematics: enhancingstudents’ pattern recognition, structure extraction, and fluency. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2, 285305.Koedinger, K. R., Corbett, A. T., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The knowledge-learning-instruction framework: bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36(5), 757–798.Mason, L., Pluchino, P., & Tornatora, M. C. (2013). Effects of picture labeling on science text processing andlearning: evidence from eye movements. Reading Research Quarterly, 48(2), 199-214.NCTM. (2006). Curriculum focal points for prekindergarten through grade 8 math: A quest for coherence.Reston, VA.Rau, M., Rummel, N., Aleven, V., Pacilio, L., & Tunc-Pekkan, Z. (2012). How to schedule multiple graphicalrepresentations? A classroom experiment with an intelligent tutoring system for fractions. In J. vanAalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th ICLS – Vol. 1 (pp.64-71). Sydney, Australia: ISLS.Rau, M. A., Scheines, R., Aleven, V., & Rummel, N. (2013). Does representational understanding enhancefluency or vice versa? Searching for mediation models. In S. K. D’Mello, R. A. Calvo & A. Olney(Eds.), Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on EDM (pp. 161-169).Seufert, T., & Brünken, R. (2006). Cognitive load and the format of instructional aids for coherence formation.Applied cognitive psychology, 20, 321-331.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by the National Science Foundation, REESE-21851-1-1121307 and by IES, NCERCASL Award No. R305A120734. We thank Ken Koedinger, Brian Junker, Jay Raspat, Michael Ringenberg,Angela McCarthy, Siyan Zhao, Lavender Yi, Jessica Han, Lisa Kwon, the Datashop and CTAT teams.ICLS 2014 Proceedings981© ISLS