Combining Generation and Expository Instruction to PrepareStudents to Transfer Big Ideas Across School TopicsInga Glogger (Organizer), University of Freiburg, Germany, glogger@psychologie.uni-freiburg.deLennart Schalk, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, lennart.schalk@ifv.gess.ethz.chClaudia Mazziotti, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany, claudia.mazziotti@rub.de,Nicole R. Hallinen, Stanford Graduate School of Education, hallinen@stanford.eduArmin Barth, Ralph Schumacher, ETH Zurich, Switzerland,Email: armin.barth@ifv.gess.ethz.ch, ralph.schumacher@ifv.gess.ethz.chKatharina Gaus, Alexander Renkl, University of Freiburg, Germany,Email: katharina.gaus@web.de, renkl@psychologie.uni-freiburg.deKatharina Loibl, Nikol Rummel, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany,Email: katharina.loibl@rub.de, nikol.rummel@rub.deDoris B. Chin, Kristen P. Blair, Daniel L. Schwartz, Stanford Graduate School of Education,Email: dbchin@stanford.edu, kpilner@stanford.edu, danls@stanford.eduKatherine McEldoon (Discussant), Learning Sciences Institute, Arizona State University, k.mceldoon@asu.eduAbstract: Approaches combining generation and expository instruction have been shown tobe beneficial for transfer. This symposium focuses on the approaches of inventing andproductive failure. Both approaches delay expository instruction. Students are asked to workon a generation activity with a problem or with contrasting cases. This activity is aimed tofoster transfer of the knowledge gained during subsequent expository instruction. The goal ofthe symposium is to contribute to a better understanding of how the generation activity is bestdesigned to foster transfer. The contributions of this symposium varied the amount and type ofgenerating by varying the materials (e.g., content of cases), the task (e.g., inventing vs. selfexplaining), or the setting (collaborative vs. individual) of the generation activity. Mediatingprocesses are also addressed. The symposium will clarify moderating conditions andmediating processes of how generation activities combined with expository instruction deploytheir full potential.Overall Focus and Major Issues of the SymposiumGenerative learning activities as well as expository instruction have their unique advantages for learning (Lee &Anderson 2013). Attempts to combine the two have been shown to be beneficial for transfer (Kapur, 2012;Schwartz & Martin, 2004). Transfer of big ideas across school topics is a much wanted outcome of instruction,but hard to achieve (Barnett & Ceci, 2002). The big ideas studied in the different contributions to thissymposium comprise linear functions (Schalk et al.), ratios in science and mathematics (Glogger et al., Hallinenet al.), and fraction expansion (Maziotti et al.) - all of which have great significance for various school subjects.In this symposium we focus on two forms of combining generation and expository instruction to foster transfer:First, inventing asks learners to generate a principle or method that allows evaluating several cases from thelearning domain. ‘Cases’ in the present studies refer to examples of a domain such as the diagram of a linearfunction with a positive gradient, or buses with densely packed passengers as cases of a type of density. Thecases usually vary critical features of the domain so that contrasting the cases helps to identify and understandthe critical features. The inventing with contrasting cases activity is used as preparation for future learning fromexpository instruction. Second, in the approach of productive failure, the generative phase includes a complexproblem. Learners usually fail to solve this problem in a canonical way. However, the combination withsubsequent expository instruction is theorized to make the failure productive (Kapur, 2012). The expositoryinstruction encompasses contrasting of suboptimal (students’) and canonical solution methods.The benefit in transfer of these activities could be based on the deep processing of good examples (orsolution methods) in an early stage of skill acquisition (Lee & Anderson, 2013). The deep processing couldresult in a richly elaborated mental representation of the examples. At the same time, the understanding of adeep structure, an abstract principle that "interconnects" the examples (and can be abstracted by contrasting andcomparing), can be the basis for transfer (Barnett & Ceci, 2002). Contrasting cases were shown to helprecognizing deep similarities between cases and abstracting generalizable principles (e.g., Alfieri, Nokes, &Schunn, 2013). The deep processing and abstracting of principles prepares to learn from the subsequentexpository instruction and to transfer “big ideas” across topics. The contributions to this symposium focus onways how to best foster deep processing and abstracting deep structures. They analyze primarily experimentalvariation of the generation phase.Major issues of this set of studies refer to the questions of what conditions moderate and whatprocesses mediate the effectiveness of different combinations of generation and expository instruction.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1179© ISLSModerating conditions can be the type and amount of generation. The type and amount of generation can varydepending on the task, the materials, and the setting. Regarding the task, the level of generation is highest in aninventing or productive failure task (all contributions encompass such a condition). For example, an index toevaluate the density in buses has to be invented. A somewhat lower amount of generation is required whenstudents self-explain already evaluated cases (Schalk et al.). They still have to think towards the abstractprinciple that forms the basis for the evaluation of the presented cases. The next lower level of generation is toself-explain a completely worked example of the inventing problem (index and resulting evaluation of cases areprovided, Glogger et al.). The type and amount of generation can also vary with the specifics of the material,here the characteristics of the cases. Characteristics of the cases that were varied in the studies of thissymposium include the concreteness of the cases (idealized, abstract vs. concrete cases in Schalk et al.) andcontents of the cases (isolate the main effects of key variables or include main effect and interaction of variablesin Hallinen et al.). Finally, the kind of generation can vary depending on the setting such as collaborative orindividual work, addressed in the study of Mazziotti et al.Mediating processes can explain how the generation phase affects processing of the subsequentexpository instruction and, in the end, how transfer is fostered. Processes discussed in this symposium aremotivational such as self-efficacy and cognitive such as cognitive load (Glogger et al.).The potential significance of each contribution is summarized in the following: Schalk, Barth, andSchumacher could show that the kind of material and the kind of task interact when students learn about linearfunctions: Specifically, their results suggest that self-explanation prompts should be combined with concretecases, while invention prompts should be combined with idealized cases. They did not find differences betweenthe generative preparatory conditions and a tell-and-practice condition.Glogger, Gaus, and Renkl found that a higher level of generation (inventing) led to deeper encoding ofthe deep structure of physics ratios such as density than a lower level of generation (worked examples). Deepencoding mediated transfer. A comparison with a previous study suggests that students react differently to thetask of inventing or explaining worked examples, respectively, depending on their experience with generativegroup activities.Mazziotti, Loibl, and Rummel could show that productive failure in mathematics (fraction expansion)is also beneficial for a new age group, namely, elementary school children. Additionally, they varied if studentsworked on the preparation problem in groups or individually. A simple comparison did not reveal differences inlearning outcomes depending on the social setting. However, further analyses of video data will provide moredifferentiated information about effective processes during collaborative generative activities.Hallinen, Chin, Blair, and Schwartz summarize several studies on the use of contrasting cases incombining generation and expository instruction, about task orientation, and about the content of materials.They could show that more complex material (including main effects and interaction of key variables instead ofjust the main effects of variables) enhances future problem solving. Consistent with the symposium as a whole,they conclude that the well-chosen combination of well-designed materials and an explicit focus on generation(such as an invention task) are two key aspects to transfer big ideas across school topics.The symposium will give the audience a chance to generate and invent hypotheses about key ideas inthe symposium by providing some materials from the studies. The interactivity of the symposium will further befacilitated by discussion questions posed by the presenters.Understanding the Gradient of Linear Functions: Comparing Students’Transfer Performance Resulting from Different Preparatory ConstructiveLearning Activities and Tell-and-Practice InstructionLennart Schalk, Armin Barth, Ralph SchumacherIntroductionA major challenge to science and math education is to enable students to use the knowledge learned in theclassroom flexibly. An important aim is therefore to foster the construction of knowledge structures whichenable transfer to new situations. In the present study, we compared different approaches of how to introduce anovel concept in math education which is of high importance for science in general, namely learning how todetermine gradients of linear functions. One way to introduce a new topic is to tell (i.e., directly instruct)learners about the concept and have them practice its application in several tasks; another way is to withhold theexpository instruction and start with a preparatory constructive learning activity. These activities have beenshown to better support transfer in comparison to the tell-and-practice approach (e.g., Schwartz, Chase,Oppezzo, & Chin, 2011).We implemented contrasting cases in learning materials to prepare an expository instruction on how todetermine the gradient of linear functions. Contrasting cases help to recognize deep similarities between casesICLS 2014 Proceedings1180© ISLSand to abstract generalizable schemata (e.g., Alfieri, Nokes, & Schunn, 2013) which in turn can enhance theeffectiveness of an expository instruction (e.g., Schwartz et al., 2011). However, contrasting cases could beimplemented in several different ways. First, cases can vary in concreteness. Cases could make a reference toconcrete, realistic situations (e.g., using realistic concepts to label the axes of coordinate systems in which linearfunctions are depicted) or they could represent a concept idealized without direct reference to the real world(e.g. removing labels of the axes). Concrete cases have the advantage of activating real-world knowledge whichmight help to solve the task, but this activation of prior knowledge could also distract learners from deriving theunderlying generic concept (e.g., Kaminski & Sloutsky, 2013). Therefore, the underlying concept might beeasier to abstract from idealized cases, which however do not have the potential of activating real-worldknowledge. Second, when several cases are presented simultaneously, participants should be prompted toactively compare the cases to increase transfer performance (e.g., Gick & Holyoak, 1983). Promisingapproaches are self-explanation prompts and prompts to invent a procedure or a formula to describe severaldifferent cases coherently. For the present research, we manipulated these two factors, concreteness of cases andkind of prompts, to construct four different preparatory learning materials and compared the transferperformance resulting from learning with these materials to a tell-and-practice condition.Materials, Procedure, and HypothesesAll learning materials consisted of printed booklets and were randomly distributed within standard math lessons.In the preparation conditions, students started with constructive learning activities before they receivedexpository instruction. We always presented eight cases of linear functions (i.e., 3 graphs with a positivegradient, 3 graphs with a negative gradient, and 2 graphs with a gradient of 0). Cases were either concrete oridealized and combined with either self-explanation (EXPLAIN_CONCRETE, EXPLAIN_IDEALIZED) orinvention prompts (INVENT_CONCRETE, INVENT_IDEALIZED). In the CONCRETE conditions, axes ofthe graphs were labeled with meaningful concepts; these labels were removed in the IDEALIZED conditions. Inthe EXPLAIN conditions, cases were presented with a gradient (i.e. a number) that indicated the steepness ofthe slopes. Participants were prompted to explain how these gradients had been derived. In the INVENTconditions, cases were presented without the gradient and participants were prompted to invent a coherentmethod to derive an index for the steepness of the slopes. After participants finished working on the preparatorymaterials (for max. 30 min), these materials were removed and participants read a short instructional text on theformal definition of gradients of linear function (max. 5 min). In the tell-and-practice condition (T&P),participants read the short instructional text first (max. 5 min). Afterwards, they practiced application of theconcept by computing the gradients of eight cases of linear graphs (max. 30 min).We assessed transfer performance immediately after learning and four weeks later. The test consistedof 20 questions embedded in contexts that differed strongly in superficial details from the learning materials(e.g., physics contexts, geometry problems). Participants had 45 minutes to answer the questions. We assumedthat writing self-explanations is more productively combined with concrete cases given as the context mightsupport writing explanations, while this reference might make it more difficult to invent a method because thelabeling might serve as unnecessary seductive details. Accordingly, we expected a qualitative interaction (stableover time) for the preparation conditions: INVENT_IDEALIZED > INVENT_CONCRETE, andEXPLAIN_IDEALIZED < EXPLAIN_CONCRETE. Furthermore, we expected that at least the two preparationconditions INVENT_IDEALIZED and EXPLAIN_CONCRETE outperform T&P.ParticipantsWe tested 148 nine-grade students (73 female; mean age 15;6) from a Swiss town in the first week after thesummer break. Linear functions are introduced in grade nine, thus, no participant had received any instructionon linear functions prior to the instructions delivered in the present study. Students were newly mixed in theninth grade. We expected differences in prior math knowledge between students coming from differentclassrooms and therefore, we used the final math grades of grade eight as a covariate in all analyses.ResultsTransfer questions were scored with 1 point if solved correctly, with 0.5 points if only parts of the solution werecorrect and with 0 points if the solution was incorrect or missing. The statistical analyses followed a two-stepprocess. First, we computed 2 (time of transfer test: immediate vs. delayed) x 2 (concreteness: concrete vs.idealized) x 2 (prompt: invent vs. self-explain) ANCOVA (covariate: math grade) for the preparation conditionsto test our hypothesis of a qualitative interaction. Second, we compared performance in the preparationconditions to T&P in a 2 (time) x 5 (condition) ANCOVA. We only report statistically significant effects withp< 0.05. The covariate strongly predicted transfer in both ANCOVAs, but did not interact with conditions.For the preparation conditions, the ANCOVA indicated a slight decrease in transfer performance overtime (F(1,115) = 4.2, ηpartial2 = .04). More importantly, a statistically significant concreteness x promptinteraction (F(1,115) = 4.0, ηpartial2 = .03) supported our hypothesis of a qualitative interaction:ICLS 2014 Proceedings1181© ISLSINVENT_IDEALIZED outperformed INVENT_CONCRETE (marginal estimates means: 12.67 vs. 11.40),while SELF_CONCRETE outperformed SELF_IDEALIZED (marginal estimates means: 12.35 vs. 11.05).Comparing transfer performance to T&P revealed no statistically significant differences between conditions.DiscussionThe present study in which participants learned to determine the gradient of a linear function shows that T&P isnot inferior to learning materials in which expository instruction is preceded by a preparatory constructivelearning activity. One explanation could be that the concept was quite easy, which might make a preparationunnecessary. For the preparation conditions, our results indicate that different kinds of prompts should becombined with different kinds of cases. Self-explanation prompts should be combined with concrete cases. Apossible explanation is that this activity requires participants to describe materials and concepts in their ownwords; this requires the use of prior knowledge which would not be as easily available when cases arerepresented idealized. In contrast, invention prompts should be combined with idealized cases. We assume thatthis advantage emerges as the prompt is highly demanding when several cases have to be considered andidealized cases make it easier to grasp the underlying concepts. However, these interpretations would benefitfrom fine grained analyses of the quality of self-explanations and invented solutions. These analyses areconducted at the moment and will be presented at the conference. At the moment, the results indicate thatdifferent approaches can lead to successful transfer performance and that the T&P approach, which is popularamong educators, need not to be considered a deficient instructional technique generally.Two Times Inventing Beats Worked Examples as Preparation for Learningfrom Expository InstructionInga Glogger, Katharina Gaus, Alexander RenklIntroduction and Theoretical BackgroundInventing includes a generation task based on contrasting cases. More specifically, a formula or commonprinciple is to be invented that allows for the evaluation of the cases (e.g., crowdedness of passengers in severalbuses). Such a generative inventing problem aims to prepare learners for subsequent expository instruction (e.g.,about density; Schwartz, Chase, Oppezzo & Chin, 2011). This preparation can consist of cognitive effects, suchas making aware of knowledge gaps, and motivational effects such as lifting curiosity and interest. Enhancedmotivation can foster transfer. The generative processes can deepen encoding of the cases. Encoding cases(examples) deeply in an early stage of skill acquisition can foster transfer as well. On the other side, inventingactivities may be problematic because learners are not directed towards the most important aspects and might(thus) not generate canonical solutions. Additionally, previous findings on inventing can often be explained bylonger time-on task or weak control groups (Sweller, Kirschner & Clark, 2007). Having learners study a workedversion of the inventing problem with contrasting cases (worked example) as control condition avoids theseproblems. In a recent study, we have actually found that enhanced self-efficacy (motivational), and lessextraneous load (cognitive) in the worked example group, as compared to a inventing groups, fostered deepstructure encoding and the transfer of big ideas (Glogger, Fleischer, Grüny, & Renkl, 2013). Students, however,might have had too little experience and practice with generative tasks such as inventing (Lee & Anderson2013). Thus, in the present experiment, we applied two inventing phases instead of one and asked if thepreviously found advantage of worked examples can be replicated. More specifically, we tested the followinghypotheses and asked the following research questions:1. Inventing leads to higher interest, curiosity, and perceived knowledge gaps than the worked solution.2. The worked solution induces less extraneous load and leads to higher self-efficacy than inventing. 3. Do thetwo groups differ in encoding of the deep structure of preparation problems? 3. Do the two groups differ inlearning outcomes (transfer)? 4. Are there process variables that mediate the effects on learning outcomes?MethodWe randomly assigned 108 eighth-grade students (sex: 89 female; Mage = 13.62, SD = 0.65) to two conditions:inventing (n = 52) and worked solution (n = 56). The experiment had two preparation phases, both preparing tolearn the concept of density, and moreover, of ratio indices as “big idea” in physics (the materials were adaptedfrom Schwartz et al., 2011). The phases varied in the level of generation (inventing the solution or workedsolution). In a first preparation phase, we gave three cases of different numbers of clowns that were squeezed indifferently sized buses along with the task to find an index (with certain properties) for the crowdedness of thebuses (the second preparation task was about gold quality). Students can discover the ratio structure of the indexby comparing cases. Both experimental groups worked in pairs for 20 minutes. The inventing group inventedthe index. The worked example group worked on the same problem, but it was worked out: a fictional studentalready solved the task. Some of her thoughts were written on the worksheet. Participants were asked to explainICLS 2014 Proceedings1182© ISLStheir solution to each other. This way, we kept communicating and debating explanations comparable; thegroups differed in whether the solution was generated or worked.We assessed extraneous load, self-efficacy, interest, epistemic curiosity, and perceived knowledge gapsby questionnaires immediately after the preparation task (see Glogger et al., 2013). Two days later, a recall testwas given to measure the encoding of the deep structure during the preparation phase 1. The subsequentpreparation phase 2 was about an index for gold quality, also preparing for understanding the concept of density.Students then listened to a lecture. Finally, we determined learning outcomes by calculation tasks and transfertasks (e.g., invent density index, new cover story, or invent spring constant index, i.e., another ratio index inphysics).FindingsGroups did not differ in interest, curiosity, self-efficacy, and knowledge gaps (all p > .23; see Table 1 for meansand standard deviations). Working on a worked-out version led to less extraneous load, F(1,97) = 3.47, p = .033(one-tailed). Further analyses showed that this effect is mainly due to students who perceive their performancein sciences as low (significant interaction b = -0.181, t(95) = -2.22, p = .029). Encoding of the deep structure ofthe preparation problem, measured by the recall test, was higher in the inventing group, F(1,97) = 6.22, p =.008, d = 0.54. The inventing group outperformed the worked solution group in transfer tasks, F(1,97) = 11.20,p = .001, d = 0.67. We tested mediation effects with a set of related multiple regression equations, following aproducts-of-coefﬁcients strategy (MacKinnon, 2008). Encoding of deep structure mediated part of the groupeffect on far transfer; path A: b = .50, SE = .186, β = .26, p = .008, R² = .28; path B: b = 1.14, SE = .427, β = .26,p = .009, R² = .40; Sobel-test: z = 2.30, p = .021, d = 0.14, small effect. Deeper exploratory analyses revealedthat more students found the canonical solution to the second inventing problem (56 %) than to the first (34 %),whereas self-explanations to the second worked example tended to get worse. We did not find any gendereffects.Table 1: Means (Standard Deviations) of process and outcome variables in both groups and ranges of variables.Inventing M (SD)(N = 49)Perceived Knowledge Gaps3.72 (1.08)Extraneous Load3.93 (0.88)Interest3.33 (0.94)Epistemic Curiosity2.91 (0.89)Self-efficacy3.60 (2.20)Recall of Deep Structure1.06 (1.07)Transfer8.10 (4.23)Note. Significantly different means are printed in bold.Worked-Example M (SD)(N = 50)3.91 (0.85)3.62 (0.76)3.41 (0.85)3.11 (0.73)3.87 (2.32)0.56 (0.76)5.40 (3.79)Range1-61-61-61-60-100-31-16DiscussionIn this study with two preparation phases, a higher level of generation (inventing) led to deeper encoding of thedeep structure of the preparation problems. Deep encoding partly mediated transfer performance. These findingsare in contrast to own previous studies (with one preparation phase), but in line with Schwartz’ studies (withseveral preparation phases). One explanation of the effects could thus be that several preparation phases arerequired for inventing to be successful in comparison with a worked example. Inventing solutions got actuallybetter in the second phase. Other studies have been shown that generation tasks need practice to be successful(Lee & Anderson, 2013).However, we have found differences in encoding the deep structure already after the first preparationphase. A reason could be that students’ practice with generative activities was already higher than in a previoussample (Glogger et al., 2013). If students need practice in generative tasks, students with higher levels ofexperience with generative activities, as compared to little experience, should react and benefit differently fromthem. We have informal hints that the present sample differed in this experience from the previous sample(teachers’ reports). We compared the patterns of results of the previous study with less experienced studentswith the present one with more experienced students. The process variables were measured by the same items inboth studies. This comparison suggests that the preparation activities elicited different processes across studies.The worked example led to significantly higher self-efficacy and less extraneous load in the previous study.Both latter variables were significant mediators of the group effect on transfer. Motivation was higher in thepresent sample. These different reactions towards the preparation activities could be an effect of different levelsof experience with generative group activities in the two samples. However, further research is needed tosystematically test this assumption.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1183© ISLSWorked examples were shown to be most effective with a fading procedure (Renkl, 2013). In thepresent study, the second fully worked-out example might have reduced interest, curiosity, and deeperprocessing because there was no fading. Subsequent studies could use a fading procedure and further look atbeneficial motivational and cognitive processes during a preparation activity. In sum, this experiment suggeststhat students’ transfer of big ideas in physics is best fostered by several phases of a generative task such asinventing instead of several worked examples.Does Collaboration Affect Learning in a Productive Failure Setting?Claudia Mazziotti, Katharina Loibl, Nikol RummelIntroduction and Theoretical BackgroundResearchers as well as practitioners struggle with the so called assistance dilemma, which targets the question ofthe timing and degree of assistance that students should receive when learning new concepts and procedures.Some researchers argue that a high degree of assistance in form of instruction should be provided at thebeginning of the learning process to avoid a high level of cognitive load (Kirschner, Sweller, & Clark, 2006).Others claim that at the beginning of the learning process students should be enabled to discover new conceptsand procedures on their own (i.e., low degree of assistance) to support the acquisition of conceptual knowledge(e.g., Schwartz & Martin, 2004; Kapur, 2012). One representative of this group is Manu Kapur with his twophase instructional design of Productive Failure (PF) (e.g., Kapur, 2012): In the first phase, small groups ofstudents try to solve a new problem on their own. During this problem-solving phase they usually generateincomplete or erroneous solution ideas. In the second phase, students receive instruction on the canonicalsolution in a class session (instruction phase). It has been discussed that PF designs trigger the followinglearning mechanisms (e.g., Kapur, 2012): First, students’ problem-solving attempts prompt the activation ofprior knowledge. Second, during instruction students focus their attention on the components of the targetconcepts that they did not yet discover during the problem-solving phase. Additionally, Loibl and Rummel(2013) argue that the form of instruction is crucial for learning: During the instruction phase, the teacher canbuild upon students’ generated solution ideas by comparing these ideas to each other and contrasting them withthe canonical solution. Loibl and Rummel (2013) showed that this form of instruction was more effective thaninstruction focusing on the canonical problem-solving procedure and the underlying concept.While the effects of the timing and the form of instructions on the acquisition of conceptual knowledgeare studied well, the role of collaboration during the first phase of PF remains unclear (Collins, 2012). Againstthe background of research on collaborative learning, we assume positive effects of trying to solve a problemcollaboratively, because in a collaborative learning setting students are encouraged to verbalize and explain theirproblem-solving ideas to each other (Slavin, 1996). In this way, elaborative processes and sense-makingactivities are initiated, which in turn support the acquisition of conceptual knowledge (Cohen, 1994). Indeed,Mullins, Rummel, and Spada (2011) showed that trying to solve a problem collaboratively is more efficient forthe acquisition of conceptual knowledge than individual problem solving. However, research on collaborativelearning has also emphasized that students need collaboration support (e.g., a role script, a group goal) to ensurefruitful interaction (Slavin, 1996; Cohen, 1994). Against this background, we hypothesize that learningcollaboratively during the first phase of PF facilitates the acquisition of conceptual knowledge in comparison toindividual learning (hypothesis 1). Given that several studies with secondary school students or universitystudents could show that PF designs foster conceptual knowledge and transfer in comparison to expositoryinstruction conditions (e.g., Schwartz & Martin, 2004; Kapur, 2012), we further investigated whether thebeneficial effect of PF on the acquisition of conceptual knowledge can be replicated with elementary schoolstudents (hypothesis 2).MethodIn order to test our hypotheses, we conducted a quasi-experimental study with 4th graders (N = 55; age 10) inGermany. Overall, we installed three conditions: We implemented two PF conditions as they were describedabove differing only in the social form during the problem-solving phase (i.e., PFCo = problem solving indyads; PFIn = individual problem solving). As a control condition, we set up a third condition (EICo), in whichstudents received instruction first. As in the PF conditions, the experimenter compared and contrasted typicalstudent solutions, which were collected prior to the experiment during pilot studies. Afterwards students solvedan isomorphic problem collaboratively. In both collaborative conditions (PFCo & EICo) we supported thecollaboration via a role script (“thinker” and “asker”) and a group goal (the pair who collaborated best won aprice). During the collaboration students were videotaped. The to-be-solved problem was a story problemrequiring expanding two fractions to compare them. Prior to the first learning phase, all students answered apretest measuring students’ mathematical prerequisites. After the second phase, students answered a posttestmeasuring conceptual knowledge of the target concept. The study took place on two days (45 minutes per day)ICLS 2014 Proceedings1184© ISLSand the three classes were assigned to the three conditions as a whole. In all classes, students have not learntfraction expansion and comparison prior to the study.ResultsOnly the 52 students who were present during both learning phases were included in the analyses. To assessdifferences between the experimental conditions, we calculated an ANCOVA with the factor condition and thecovariate pretest score (i.e., mathematical prerequisites). Mean scores and standard deviation of the threeconditions are displayed in Table 1.We did not find significant differences between the three conditions (F[3,48]= 2.3, p = .11). We further defined two a priori contrasts in line with our hypotheses. The first a priori contrastcompared PFCo and PFIn to test the effect of collaboration (hypothesis 1). For this contrast, we did not findsignificant differences between conditions (F[1,48] = 0.4, p = .84). The second a priori contrast compared bothPF conditions to EICo to test if the PF effect can be replicated for young children (hypothesis 2). Thiscomparison revealed a significant difference between EICo and the two PF conditions (F[1,48] = 4.6, p = .03),favoring the PF conditions.Table 1: Mean scores and standard deviations of the posttest.NMeanSDPFCo167.885.43PFIn177.713.29EICo195.263.91Discussion and OutlookIn summary, we investigated two hypotheses: Our main hypothesis, that collaborative problem solving withinthe first phase of PF is more beneficial for learning than individual problem solving, could not be confirmed byour findings. This result is surprising considering the above mentioned beneficial effects of collaborativelearning on the acquisition of conceptual knowledge. Although we implemented a group goal and a role script tosupport the collaboration, it seems that students did not take advantage of the collaborative setting. The analysisof the video data will provide insights on the quality of students’ collaboration. Given the high SD in the PFCocondition we assume that the quality of collaboration differed strongly across dyads and moderated the effect ofcollaboration on conceptual knowledge. Hence, for future work we aim to intensify our efforts to implement acollaborative support structure (e.g., by implementing a training for collaborative learning). Our additionalhypothesis, that also for young students PF is more beneficial for the acquisition of conceptual knowledge thanexpository instruction, could be confirmed. In other words, this finding replicated other PF studies (e.g., Kapur,2012; Loibl & Rummel, 2013) with a younger age group.Due to the small sample size we should treat our results as preliminary. We plan to conduct a follow-upstudy with a 2x2 design with the factors timing of instructions and social form. With this study we aim atdetermining whether the possible effect of collaborative learning interacts with the timing of instructions.Using Contrasting Cases for Generation and InstructionNicole R. Hallinen, Doris B. Chin, Kristen P. Blair, Daniel L. SchwartzContrasting CasesAn important part of science and math education is the learning of functional relations among variables. Theseideas map to Mathematical Practices in the Common Core State Standards (e.g. Reason abstractly andquantitatively; Look for and make use of structure), as well as the Ratio & Proportion Content area throughoutmiddle school grades (National Governors Association Center for Best Practices, 2010). In science assessments,it has been shown that 4th grade students who know about functional relations between plant growth and amountof light are better able to explain their answers, indicating that this knowledge affects a students’ ability toexpress his or her understanding (NCES, 2012).Contrasting cases are instructional tools that, in our instantiation, present a series of examples of aphenomenon; they are particularly well-suited to the task of highlighting variation to show functional relations.During these short, inductive activities, students learn to appreciate the range of variation in a problem spaceand also notice the invariant relationship that underlies each example. Contrasting cases have been developedfor a number of STEM topics, such as statistical variation (Schwartz & Martin, 2004), electromagnetic fields(Chase, Shemwell, & Schwartz, 2010), and density and other ratio-based topics (Schwartz, Chase, Oppezzo, &Chin, 2011), and for use with audiences ranging from 4th grade to graduate students.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1185© ISLSOur research focuses on two aspects of using contrasting cases in math and science instruction: taskorientation and design of materials. In both topics, we measure the effectiveness of using contrasting to learnabout scientific relationships and eventually transfer these ideas to new topics.Task OrientationTo use contrasting cases in instruction, educators must instill the proper task orientation in students. We findthat encouraging students to adopt an “inventing” task orientation is productive for discovering importantfeatures and patterns among the examples shown.In a study conducted in an 8th grade classroom, contrasting cases were used to teach students about theunderlying concept of ratio, an important idea that relates to many ideas in middle school science andmathematics topics, such as density, and speed. Some students were taught about ratios first and told to use thisknowledge to compute ratios about the contrasting cases. Another condition was asked to invent an index todescribe the cases. In the inventing condition, students invented the ratio structure of density and speed. Thestudents who invented the ratio idea transferred the concept to the spring constant, a new domain, on the posttest(Schwartz et al., 2011). The students who were explicitly taught about computing density and speed did not seethe underlying ratio structure across examples, which led to lower transfer. This finding is in line with otherresearch showing that students fail to notice commonalities across problems when instances are presentedsequentially (Star & Rittle-Johnson, 2009).A different study with 40 6th grade students used a set of contrasting cases to teach the relationshipsamong range, hang time, and speed in projectile motion. In this between-subjects study, one condition wasasked Compare and Contrast (CC) the cases. The other condition was instructed to use the same set of cases toInvent (INV) a method to predict the range of any shot. The CC students focused on isolating individualcomponents of projectile motion for comparison and were less likely to create an explanation that linked allthree factors (range, time, and speed) than the INV condition. As a result, INV students outperformed their CCpeers on a posttest about predicting the range of a projectile. Compare and Contrast instructions were simply notsufficient for learning structural relationships from contrasting cases; activities must ask students to generalize.(Chi et al., 2012)These examples highlight the benefit of encouraging students to search for a general solution. In eachstudy, the same contrasting cases materials were provided to each condition, indicating that task orientationprovides additional support for learning beyond the cases themselves.Designing Contrasting Cases MaterialsEven with the right task orientation, students need well-designed materials to support learning. The examplesincluded in sets of contrasting cases for multivariate topics must show varying levels of each factor as well asthe variety of possible combinations of variables that contribute to the solution. Fifty community collegestudents participated in a recent study to investigate the effects of using different materials to learn early physicsconcepts.For this study, we designed two sets of contrasting cases showing two-dimensional inelastic collisions.The result of each collision (move left, right, or stop) is determined by comparing the momentum (mass *speed) of the objects. We manipulated the examples as shown in Figure 1A. Individuals in the Main Effects(ME) condition received cases that isolate the main effects relationships between the two variables – caseswhere mass or speed is held constant across the two objects, or where mass and speed both indicate the sameresult. In the Main Effects + Interaction (ME+I) condition, some cases showing interaction relationshipsbetween the two key variables were included. In these cases, attending only to mass or only to speed would beinsufficient to determine the result.In a transfer task, participants in both conditions received contrasting cases for the balance scale, ananalogous science domain in which torque must be calculated by multiplying mass and distance from thefulcrum to determine whether the scale balances or tips. These cases included main effects and interaction cases,showing enough variation that simple qualitative rules about mass and distance would not be sufficient toexplain the results. These cases are shown in Figure 1B, with the interaction cases outlined for the reader. Theworksheet that students saw did not include this outlining.We found that using the ME collision materials led to a qualitative understanding of the relationshipbetween mass and speed. Participants who receive the ME+I materials were more likely to find themultiplicative relationship between the variables, and, in turn, performed better on a set of 18 predictionquestions (t(32) = -3.14, p < 0.01).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1186© ISLSFigure 1. Contrasting cases materials for A) momentum and B) torque. C) Transfer task results.As shown in Figure 1C, participants who used the momentum ME materials learned less from the transferbalance scale cases (0% found a multiplicative solution). They also performed worse on balance scale predictionquestions than their ME+I counterparts. In fact, they performed even lower than control students who did not dothe momentum activity at all. Using ME materials resulted in negative transfer to a new content area.This result demonstrates that the effects of using incomplete examples extend beyond one topic andcan impact learning on future problem solving tasks. Therefore, educators should carefully choose contrastingcases that systematically demonstrate the structural relationships between variables in these multivariateconceptual domains.ConclusionContrasting cases have the potential to facilitate a deep learning and eventual transfer of quantitative structures,such as ratio, that recur throughout science and math curricula various science and math topics. Asdemonstrated, instructional designers must thoughtfully select cases to show the range of possible variability.Additionally, the studies reviewed here emphasize the utility of adopting an “inventing” task orientation forlearning from contrasting cases. We suggest that the combination of well-chosen materials and an explicit focuson invention and generalization are two key aspects of using contrasting cases to promote learning across STEMdomains.DiscussantKatherine McEldoon, Learning Sciences Institute, Arizona State University(Chairperson: Inga Glogger, University of Freiburg)ICLS 2014 Proceedings1187© ISLSReferencesAlfieri, L., Nokes-Malach, T. J., & Schunn, C. D. (2013). Learning through case comparisons: A meta-analyticreview. Educational Psychologist, 48(2), 87-113.Chase, C. C., Shemwell, J. T., & Schwartz, D. L. (2010). Explaining across contrasting cases for deepunderstanding in science: An example using interactive simulations. Proceedings of the InternationalConference of the Learning Sciences.Chi, M., Chin, D., Hallinen, N., & Schwartz, D. L. (2012, August). A comparison of two instructional modelsusing contrasting cases. Physics Education Research Conference, Philadelphia, PA.Cohen, E. G. (1994). Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups. Review ofEducational Research, 64(1), 1-35.Collins, A. (2012). What is the most effective way to teach problem solving? A commentary on productivefailure as a method of teaching. Instructional Science, 40, 731-735.Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15,1-38.Glogger, I., Fleischer, C., Grüny, L., & Renkl, A. (2013, August). Inventing compared to worked-out problems:which processes foster transfer in physics? Paper presented at the 14th Biennial Conference of theEuropean Association for Learning and Instruction (EARLI), Munich, Germany.Kaminski, J. A., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2013). Extraneous perceptual information interferes with children’sacquisition of mathematical knowledge. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105(2), 351-363.Kapur, M. (2012). Productive failure in learning the concept of variance. Instructional Science, 40, 651–672.doi:10.1007/s11251-012-9209-6.Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work:An analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-basedteaching. Educational Psychologist, 41, 75-86.Lee, H. S., & Anderson, J. R. (2013). Student learning: What has instruction got to do with it? Annual Review ofPsychology, 64, 445–469. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-113011-143833Loibl, K., & Rummel, N. (2013, June). Delaying instruction alone doesn’t work: Comparing and contrastingstudent solutions is necessary for learning from problem-solving prior to instruction. Paper presentedat the 10th international conference on computer-supported collaborative learning.MacKinnon, D. P. (2008). Introduction into statistical mediation analysis. New York: Erlbaum.Mullins, D., Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2011). Are two heads always better than one? Differential effects ofcollaboration on students' computer-supported learning in mathematics. International Journal ofComputer Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(3), 421-443.National Center for Education Statistics (2012). The Nation’s Report Card: Science in Action: Hands-On andInteractive Computer Tasks From the 2009 Science Assessment (NCES 2012-468). Institute ofEducation Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, Washington, D.C.National Governors Association Center for Best Practices, Council of Chief State School Officers (2010).Common Core State Standards (Mathematics). Washington, DC: National Governors AssociationCenter for Best Practices, Council of Chief State School Officers.Renkl, A. (2013). Toward an instructionally oriented theory of example-based learning. Cognitive Science, 37,1–37. doi:10.1111/cogs.12086Schwartz, D. L., Chase, C. C., Oppezzo, M. A., & Chin, D. B. (2011). Practicing versus inventing withcontrasting cases: The effects of telling first on learning and transfer. Journal of EducationalPsychology, 103, 759–775. doi:10.1037/a0025140.Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for future learning: The hidden efficiency ofencouraging original student production in statistics instruction. Cognition and Instruction, 22(2), 129184.Slavin, R. E. (1996). Research on Cooperative Learning and Achievement: What we know, what we need toknow. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 21(1), 43-69.Star, J. R., & Rittle-Johnson, B. (2009). It pays to compare: An experimental study on computational estimation.Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 102(4), 408-426.Sweller, J., Kirschner, P., & Clark, R. (2007). Why minimally guided teaching techniques do not work: a replyto commentaries. Educational Psychologist, 42, 115-121. doi:10.1080/00461520701263426ICLS 2014 Proceedings1188© ISLS