The Role of Feedback in Interest Development in an Out-of-SchoolEngineering SettingJoseph E. Michaelis and Mitchell J. Nathan, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WIjemichaelis@wisc.edu, mnathan@wisc.eduAbstract The poster describes work-in-progress on interest development in an out-of-schoolrobotics competition. Hidi and Renninger’s (2006) Four-Phase Model of InterestDevelopment is used to develop an interest assessment, along with a field-based observationprotocol. High school students (N = 150) and their adult team leaders are drawn from 6robotics clubs: Rookie v. veteran clubs, crossed with high, low, and mixed SES populations.The need for increasing recruitment and retention of high quality entrants into the STEM workforce is welldocumented (National Academies Press, 2007). In order to meet this need, students must be encouraged andmotivated at a relatively young age to enter the “pathways” into these fields, which will require (among otherthings) developing and maintaining interest in STEM areas from elementary and middle school, through highschool and into post-secondary education (Katehi, Pearson & Federer, 2009). An increasingly sophisticatedview of interest development is emerging among scholars, just as hands-on, competition-based clubs andafterschool programs designed to foster interest in STEM education and career pathways is proliferating.This study focuses on students participating in the FIRST Robotics Competition (FRC), an out-ofschool robotics competition that now involves approximately 250,000 high school students in the US. Studiesof the impact of robotics clubs on interest and motivation have been mixed (NAE/NRC, 2014). However,Melchoir et al. (2005), in a study using interviews of alumni of the program, found FRC to have a high impacton choosing engineering as a college major. The Melchoir study recommends further investigation into theinitial interest of FRC participants. This study will develop an interest assessment and a field-based observationprotocol based on Hidi and Renninger’s (2006) Four-Phase Model of Interest Development (FPMID) as itsframework.Major Issues Addressed and Potential Significance of the WorkOur central research question is: Does receiving feedback appropriate to a student’s phase of interestdevelopment help sustain or increase the student’s interest over time? This investigation will document thenature of feedback club members receive over time. It will also provide a greater depth of understanding on howSTEM interest develops in situ, by providing examples leaders can utilize. If FPMID has predictive validity, andthe interest measurement tool reliably categorizes students in their current phase of interest, then a method offormative assessment for interest for team leaders would be proposed to best meet the developmental needs oftheir students. Thus, this inquiry addresses the need identified in the literature for understanding how interest ismaintained once it is triggered (Renninger & Hidi, 2011), as well as testing the validity of the FPMID.Theoretical FrameworkThe FPMID identifies four progressive phases of interest: Triggered Situational, Maintained Situational,Emerging Individual, and Well-Developed Individual. It provides descriptive characteristics of students in eachphase, as well as descriptions of the specific (ideal) feedback needs of learners in each of these phases. Previousresearch on effective student feedback sometimes uses a “one size fits all” approach by recommending feedbackthat will have positive results for all students. However, current research in interest development recognizesthat feedback that may have positive results for one student, may be inappropriate for students at a differentphase of interest, and can have a negative impact on later interest development (Renninger, 2010).The Model is used to develop two methodological tools. The first tool, the phase of engineering interestsurvey is being developed as an instrument to reliably categorize students into one of four interest phases.Currently there are no tools to reliably measure phase of interest development in this model (Renninger & Hidi2011), and there is a demonstrated need for this type of tool (Renninger & Hidi, 2011; NAE/NRC, 2014). Thesecond tool is an observation protocol developed for field use among FRC sites. This will be used to documentfeedback that participants receive from their team leaders and peers before, during and after an FRC competitionseason, as well as each team member’s participation. The observation protocol will independently assessstudents’ interest through their participation. Combining field observations with survey responses allows for alevel of validity assessment of the model.MethodBaseline interest will be assessed prior to the competition season using a 64-item Likert scale interest surveyadministered to 150 high school students from six Midwestern FRC teams representing high, low and mixedICLS 2014 Proceedings1525© ISLSsocio-economic status populations, crossed with rookie and veteran (more than three years of experience) teams.Survey results will be coded to derive a score for each participant, in six categories of interest phasecharacteristics: basic interest, positive feelings, content engagement, use of feedback, independent questioning,and perseverance. Initial survey responses will be used to match participants with their baseline phase of interestdevelopment. Observational data will be collected during the first week of the FRC competition season tovalidate the student participant’s phase of interest identified by the pre-competition survey.Observational data will be collected during the remainder of the FRC season the team’s regionalcompetition through observations and audio recordings of team meetings. This includes five weeks of a “buildseason” where students work to design, create, test and improve a unique robot built for a novel game unveiledat the start of the season (e.g., during the 2012 season, robots competed for the most basketball shots in twominutes, and then cooperatively balancing on a bridge with other team’s robots). Observations will be coded forinstances of types of feedback received by participants during the season. For example, the FPMID describesthose who have a “Level 3: Emerging Individual Interest” as needing feedback that “enables him/her to see howhis/her goals were met.” An observed instance of this type of feedback would be coded as “Level 3” feedback,and compared with the student’s developmental needs.Student participants will also be administered the interest measurement survey (post) after completionof the FRC season. Pre- and post-season survey scores will be compared to measure interest changes forindividual student participants. According to our research hypothesis, a greater proportion of students who havetheir feedback needs met will maintain their current interest phase or move to a higher interest phase than thosestudent participants who do not receive the appropriate feedback.Conclusions and ImplicationsAccording to FPMID, students in a particular phase of interest have specific feedback needs in order to maintainor increase their level of interest. The aim of this study is to explore the predictive validity of the model in anout-of-school STEM learning environment using survey responses and field-based observations across a set ofstudents in rookie and veteran clubs that attract high, low or mixed SES participants. This work can potentiallytest the predictive validity, while producing exemplars of matched and mismatched feedback as it occurs in situ.This work can lead to empirically based principles for maintaining and increasing interest in STEM. It maycontribute to the design of formative assessments of interest for STEM learning environments that may helppromote young people’s interest in STEM education and career pathways.Relevance to the Theme of the ConferenceThis study is relevant to the 2014 theme of the conference, “Learning and Becoming in Practice,” because of itsfocus on interest development in an out-of-school robotics competition. FRC promotes learning by engagingstudents in the practices of engineering. Students work side by side with teachers, and engineering professionalsand students, to develop a working robot to compete in a real contest. The impetus for studying interestdevelopment in this environment is to better understand how students choose to engage in STEM subjects andactivities, and ultimately how they take on the practices and habits of mind that allow them to become qualityprofessionals in a STEM field.ReferencesHidi, S. & Renninger, K. A. (2006). The four-phase model of interest development. Educational Psychologist,41, 111–127.Katehi, L., Pearson, G., Feder, M. A. (2009). Engineering in K-12 education: Understanding the status andimproving the prospects. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Melchior, A., Cohen, F., Cutter, T. & Leavitt, T. (2005). More than robots: An evaluation of the FIRST roboticscompetition participant and institutional impacts. Center for Youth and Communities Heller School forSocial Policy and Management: Brandeis University, Waltham, MA.National Academy of Engineering and National Research Council. (2014). STEM Integration in K-12Education: Status, Prospects, and an Agenda for Research. M. Honey, G. Pearson, & H.Schweingruber (Eds.), Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.National Academy of Sciences. (2007). Rising above the gathering storm: Energizing and employing Americafor a brighter future. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Renninger, K. A. (2010). Working with and cultivating interest, self-efficacy, and self-regulation. In D. Preiss& R. Sternberg (Eds.), Innovations in educational psychology: Perspectives on learning, teaching andhuman development (pp. 158-195). New York: Springer.Renninger, K. A. & Hidi, S. (2011). Revisiting the conceptualization, measurement, and generation of interest.Educational Psychologist, 46(3), 168-184.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1526© ISLS