Design Principles for Science Laboratory Instruction UsingAugmented Virtuality TechnologiesCrystal J. DeJaegher, Jennifer L. Chiu, and Jie Chao, University of Virginiacjy2em@virginia.edu, jlchiu@virginia.edu, jiechao@virginia.eduAbstract: This poster highlights design principles derived from piloting augmented virtualitylaboratory (AVL) activities in secondary science classrooms. Our AVL activities leverageaffordances of physical and virtual manipulatives through use of connected probeware anddynamic visualizations. To help students make connections among molecular and observablelevels, we developed curricular materials with a scaffolded knowledge-integration approach.Observations, students’ responses, and interview data were analyzed to extract designprinciples to inform future implementations of AVL and other mixed-reality approaches.IntroductionScience laboratory experiences allow students to interact directly or indirectly with the material world usingscientific tools, methods, models, and theories (National Research Council [NRC], 2006). Laboratories typicallyincorporate physical experiences, whereby students can directly interact with scientific phenomena (i.e. usingphysical manipulatives; Gire et al., 2010), or virtual experiences, where dynamic visualizations are employed sothat students can interact with scientific phenomena, especially phenomena that are not directly observable.Although physical laboratory experiences are widely used, physical labs do not always succeed in developingstudent understanding (Finklestein et al., 2005), as misunderstandings persist and are increasingly common withinvisible phenomena (e.g. Eylon & Silberstein, 1987). Virtual laboratory experiences using software andsimulations can benefit student learning (Honey & Hilton, 2011), yet even these types of experiences can leadstudents to emphasize superficial components of a phenomenon (Lowe, 2004) and fail to connect the virtualrepresentation to scientific phenomena observed in the real-world.Existing research indicates that sequential implementation of physical and virtual experiences ispromising in terms of student learning (Gire et al., 2010, Zacharia & Olympiou, 2011). Other researchdemonstrates that connecting physical and virtual experiences has potential for learning (e.g. Moher, 2006). Forexample, Blikstein and Wilensky (2007) use connected sensors to real-time computer displays in a bifocalmodeling approach to compare physical data to student-generated models side-by-side. Our work builds onthese efforts and simultaneously combines probeware with dynamic molecular visualizations. Specifically, thisposter presents findings from classroom tests of the Frame, an augmented virtual technology that uses physicalsensors to drive a molecular simulation (Figure 1; Xie, 2012). With the Frame, students control a visualizationof gas molecules in a chamber with physical manipulatives (scientific sensors). For example, students place jarsfilled with hot water near a temperature sensor to increase the temperature of the simulated gas. Additionally,they may physically push on the Frame that translates to the increased force on the virtual piston in thesimulation. The simulation component of the frame offers a dynamic visualization through which students canalso interact using a touch-screen interface. Simultaneous connection of physical and virtual manipulativesgives students the opportunity to link molecular and observable levels by manipulating physical objects andseeing resulting molecular behavior. This poster presents preliminary design principles for AVLs and aims toinform other mixed-reality approaches used in authentic classroom settings.Conceptual Framework and MethodsTo help students build upon their own prior knowledge and make connections between ideas, we combined theFrame labs with a knowledge integration (KI) approach (Linn & Eylon, 2011). Specifically, we draw fromscaffolded KI metaprinciples and KI patterns of eliciting, adding, developing criteria for and reflecting uponideas to maximize student learning with the Frame labs.To understand, utilize, and refine design principles concerning the implementation of AVL activities insecondary science settings, we use a design-based research approach (The Design Based Research Collective,2003). By conducting contextualized experiments in classrooms to test hypotheses regarding learningoutcomes, we aim for the systematic design of principles geared towards the development of effectiveclassroom interventions.We draw our design principles from four main cycles of implementations involving over 400 studentsin two different middle schools and three different high schools in the U.S. mid-Atlantic region. The first cycleconsisted of usability studies in a high school classroom and clinical setting. The second cycle implementedAVLs with 6 teachers and 13 classes using a pre/post design. The third cycle involved 5 teachers and 10 classescomparing AVLs to traditional labs. The fourth cycle involved 4 teachers and 13 classes comparing AVLs tovirtual labs. Data gathered included pre/post/delayed conceptual assessments, classroom observations andICLS 2014 Proceedings1523© ISLSvideos, and student and teacher interviews, In each implementation, students completed the AVL followingbrief introductions by their physical science or chemistry teacher. Groups of 2-3 students worked together tocomplete the unit. Evaluation of several curricular approaches coupled with analysis of students’ pre-/posttestdata, curriculum responses, and interviews lead to the development of design principles for AVL.Preliminary Findings, Conclusions, and ImplicationsDesign principles are still being refined from analysis of classroom runs. Preliminary design principles include:Help students distinguish ideas by problematizing content. Students made more progress in developingmolecular explanations of pressure when asked to distinguish their understanding of pressure through a moreadvanced topic of partial pressure as compared to directly developing an explanation of pressure. For example,when directly asked for a molecular explanation of pressure, many students’ explanations of pressure failed toinvolve collision frequency with container walls or any molecular-level description. However, in other trialswhere students had to distinguish their understanding of pressure by figuring out the contributions of differentkinds of gases, students provided more scientifically normative molecular explanations for the phenomenon.Explicit, intuitive correspondence between physical and virtual counterparts. Students often madeflawed connections or assumptions between the physical input and the visualization. For example, in theFrame, a real-life syringe controls the number of molecules in the simulation. Pushing in the syringe addsmolecules and pulling out the syringe removes molecules. However, some students assumed that the volume inthe physical syringe was directly connected to the volume of the virtual container. Similarly, some studentsbelieved that the visualization literally depicted the hot and cold jars that were used to control the temperature ofthe simulation. Designers of mixed-reality technologies need to pay special attention to the kinds of ideas thatstudents bring to both types of interactions.Encourage multiple simultaneous interactions, preferably “in competition”. During the first andsecond phases, students largely divided the work so that one person recorded observations and explanationswhile the other student interacted with the AVL. Little collaboration or group knowledge- building occurred.However, observations revealed that successful groups interacted with the AVL at the same time with“competing” inputs. For example, one student would control the force through the spring and another wouldcontrol the number of molecules with the syringe, spurring meaningful conversations about the connectionsamong these variables. In subsequent iterations, the curriculum was changed to encourage this kind of studentinteraction.Our findings highlight the importance of iterative refinement of both technologies and supporting curricula.AVL is an emerging technological application in science classrooms, thus this work has implications regardingimplementations of these types of mixed-reality experiences in authentic classroom settings.ReferencesBlikstein, P., & Wilensky, U. (2007). Bifocal modeling: a framework for combining computer modeling,robotics and real-world sensing. Annual meeting of the American Research Education Association.Chicago, IL.Finkelstein, N., Adams, W., Keller, C., Kohl, P., Perkins, K., Podolefsky, N., Reid, S., et al. (2005). Whenlearning about the real world is better done virtually: A study of substituting computer simulations forlaboratory equipment. Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research, 1(1), 1–8.Gire, E., Carmichael, A., Chini, J.J., Rouinfar, A., Rebello, S., Smith, G., et al. (2010). The effects of physicaland virtual manipulatives on students’ conceptual learning about pulleys. Proceedings of the 9thinternational conference of the learning sciences (ICLS 2010) (Vol. 1, pp. 937-944).Honey, M. A., & Hilton, M. L. (Eds.). (2011). Learning science through computer games and simulations.Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Lowe, R. (2004). Interrogation of a dynamic visualization during learning. Learning and instruction, 14(3), 257274.Linn, M. C. & Eylon, B.-S. (2011). Science Learning and Instruction: Taking Advantage of Technology toPromote Knowledge Integration. New York: Routledge.Moher, T. (2006). Embedded Phenomena: Supporting Science Learning with Classroom-sized DistributedSimulations. Proceedings ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2006)(April 2006, Montreal, Canada), 691-700.The Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm forEducational inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.Xie, C. (2012). Mixed-Reality Labs. Retrieved from http://concord.org/projects/mixed-reality-labs.Zacharia, Z. C., & Olympiou, G. (2011). Physical versus virtual manipulative experimentation in physicslearning. Learning and Instruction, 21(3), 317-331.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1524© ISLS