Collective Immersive Simulations: A New Approach to Learningand Instruction of Complex Biology TopicsMichelle Lui and James D. Slotta,University of Toronto, 252 Bloor Street West Toronto, Canada, ON,Email: michelle.lui@utoronto.ca, jslotta@oise.utoronto.caAbstract: This paper presents the design of an immersive simulation and collective inquiryactivity for exploring evolutionary concepts in a Grade 11 Biology course. Researchers and ahigh school science teacher co-designed a curriculum around a room-sized simulation of arainforest. Using several large displays stitched together on each wall of the room, we createdan immersive rainforest environment in which students worked collaboratively as “fieldresearchers” to observe changes in life forms over two hundred million years and gatheredevidence of evolution. The complex sequence of student interactions within the EvoRoomenvironment, as well as all materials, including large immersive displays, aggregatedvisualizations, and tablet applications were carefully designed as short inquiry activities thatcomplemented the broader curriculum. This paper presents our designs over two iterations interms of several key features that enhanced students’ collective immersive experience andlearning of evolutionary biology.IntroductionEducators and researchers have long struggled to help students achieve deep understanding of complex scienceconcepts, and to help students refine reasoning and communication skills, such as critical thinking andcollaboration (NSF Taskforce for Cyberlearning, 2008). In high school biology, concepts of evolution andbiodiversity are notoriously challenging, due in part to their complex systemic nature (Slotta & Chi, 2006), theirmultidisciplinary nature (e.g., genetics, biogeography, paleontology), as well as students’ incoming ideas, whichare often inconsistent with the scientific theory (Demastes, Good, & Peebles, 1995; Mayr, 2001).Inquiry-based learning has been advanced as an instructional approach where students are encouragedto develop deep understandings and scientific reasoning, by emphasizing the posing of questions, collection andanalysis of data, and construction of evidence-based arguments. Inquiry-based learning has shown promise forteaching evolution, as exemplified by projects like the Biology Guided Inquiry Learning Environment(BGuILE; Reiser et al., 2001) and GenScope™ (Horwitz et al., 1998).In recent years, researchers have begun to reconsider the role of the physical learning environment andto experiment with augmenting learning activities in digitally augmented physical spaces (i.e., mixed-realityenvironments). These spaces offer new ways of engaging groups of co-located students with abstract scienceconcepts that have traditionally been taught or addressed through more didactic forms of instruction (Price &Rogers, 2004). Moreover, such physical learning spaces, when used in combination with inquiry-based learningactivities, have shown positive outcomes in facilitating creativity and reflection (e.g., Facer et al., 2004; Rogers& Muller, 2006) – offering a more hands-on approach compared to traditional inquiry-based learning wherestudents typically work autonomously as individuals or pairs on single machines (Slotta & Linn, 2009).Collective Inquiry and Smart ClassroomsThe present study seeks to leverage technology-enhanced learning environments in support of more complexand participatory forms of scientific inquiry that engages co-located students in an investigation about evolution.Our goal is to create a comprehensive curriculum that embodies a pedagogical perspective known as KnowledgeCommunity and Inquiry (KCI), where students are supported to work as a collective scientific body, creating aknowledge base and using it as a resource for subsequent inquiry (Slotta & Najafi, 2012).Transforming classrooms into “knowledge communities” can engage students in more authenticscientific inquiry (Brown & Campione, 1990), for example with small groups of students working together likeresearch teams within a broader scholarly community to jointly negotiate issues of a shared problem. Bygenerating and building upon each other’s ideas, students take greater responsibility for ultimately fosteringtheir own understanding. In previous KCI studies, wikis were used to support knowledge communities, withfindings showing positive correlation between students’ contributions to collaborative inquiry and theirachievements in the curriculum (Peters & Slotta, 2010). However, much like traditional inquiry-based learning,communications tended to be asynchronous and distributed, with students mostly working on their personalcomputers. To this end, we seek to engage students in collective inquiry as a knowledge community aboutevolutionary biology within a “smart classroom” environment, where the physical environment is intertwinedwith a set of digital tools and materials to scaffold seamless and dynamic collaboration and real-time face-toface interactions while capturing the collective wisdom of the entire class (Slotta, 2010).ICLS 2014 Proceedings301© ISLSFigure 1. EvoRoom, an immersive simulation for teaching biodiversity and evolution, which consists sixprojected displays (three on each side) and two interactive whiteboards (middle).Immersive SimulationsInspired by the research tradition in immersive virtual worlds, such as River City (Dede, 2009) and Second Life,we are investigating a possible new educative role for immersive simulations, where the smart classroom isconverted into a rich simulation, and conceptual content is embedded in ubiquitous technology to support colocated students in learning as a community (Figure 1). The immersive, room-sized environment is responsive tostudent observations (recorded via tablet devices), with real-time emergent visualizations that serve to captureand aggregate student observations for purposes of knowledge building and discourse. Our research isconcerned with designing inquiry activities that complement and help to define such immersive environments,where students are engaged as a whole class, jointly negotiating problems and working towards a common goal.In this novel form of inquiry-based learning, called collective inquiry, students are encouraged to think deeplyabout materials and develop their own understandings, but with an emphasis on collective knowledge orprogress over individual understandings (Peters & Slotta, 2010; Slotta, 2010).Background & Related WorkParticipatory Learning and Physical Digital SpacesWilensky and Resnick (1999) pioneered the use of embedded, ubiquitous computational media to supportscience learning, including the use of role-playing activities and non-desktop technologies. This is illustrated bythe concept of participatory simulations, in which students themselves serve as the elements of a simulation(Colella, 2000). For example, Colella (2000) transformed students into potential virus carriers through wearablecomputers, with the mission of greeting as many peers as they could without becoming “sick”. Inspired byparticipatory simulations, another approach called Embedded Phenomena (EP; Moher, 2006) features apersistent scientific simulation that is “embedded” into the walls or floor. Students are tasked with discovering,monitoring and manipulating the state of the simulation and gathering evidence in the course of their inquiryabout the phenomenon. Other examples of digitally augmented physical learning spaces include SMALLab, aroom with digitally enhanced walls, floors and interactive technologies that supports new forms of studentinquiry. For example, high school students studied geologic evolution by collaboratively constructing andmonitoring the Earth’s crust, identifying uplift and erosion over time (Birchfield & Megowan-Romanowicz,2009). Using various input devices (e.g., glowballs, Wii remotes, wireless game pads) and a projected interfaceon the ground, groups of students were responsible for building, maintaining or evaluating a cycle of thegeologic clock. The intervention resulted in significant achievement gains, demonstrating the promise for furtherresearch regarding face-to-face interactions in a computationally augmented physical space, and distributedroles through a generative process that unfolds over time.Our research is motivated by these projects, extending the role of immersive participatory simulationsinto a more coherent pedagogical framework, where students are engaged in scientific inquiry as a knowledgecommunity (i.e., collective inquiry), and their experience within the simulation is carefully scripted within abroader curricular design. We designed an immersive simulation for teaching biodiversity and evolution topicsin high-school biology courses to understand the following research questions:RQ1: How can an immersive simulation be designed to support students in understanding evolutionarybiology?1a: How should an immersive simulation be designed within a broader set of curriculumactivities?1b: What forms of activities and materials support student engagement with immersive media anddrive reflection about evolutionary biology?RQ2: How can a collective experience within an immersive environment serve to advance a collectiveepistemology where students come to see their learning as a community effort?2a: How do we encourage students to respond meaningfully to ideas of their peers, in real-time?2b: How do we represent community progress and structure its advancement, such that studentsmust engage productively with the aggregated products of their peers’ inquiry?ICLS 2014 Proceedings302© ISLSMethodFollowing a design-based methodology (Brown, 1992; Design-Based Research Collective, 2003), the immersivesimulation was designed and evaluated over two iterations as part of a Grade 11 Biology course. Prior to thefirst classroom enactment, our team of researchers, technology developers, and a high school teacher metregularly for approximately one year to co-design the curriculum activities and the immersive simulation itself.A pilot study prior to the first enactment was conducted to evaluate the immersive environment, including theaccessibility of our materials and the relevance of activities to the topic of evolution (Lui & Slotta, 2013).Participants included students from class sections of Grade 11 Biology taught by our co-design teacher.The first iteration included two sections totaling 45 students aged 14-16. The second trial occurred in thefollowing academic year and included two sections totaling 54 students (aged 14-16). In both trials, a pre- andpost-test was administered, and all student observations and notes were collected for analysis. As well, videoand audio recordings served to capture patterns of interaction within the EvoRoom environment.EvoRoomEvoRoom is an immersive simulation of the rainforest ecosystem of Borneo and Sumatra. Implemented within a“smart classroom” research environment, the room is equipped with computers, servers, projection displays, andcustomized software to coordinate the flow of participants and content materials, as well as to collect dataduring the activity. During the collective inquiry activities, students take on the role of “field researchers,”working in various group configurations to complete tasks delivered to them on their personal tablet computers.The tablets help to place students in small groups, scaffold their activities, collect observations, and give realtime updates and resources. Student observations and reflections are aggregated and displayed on the interactivewhiteboards in real-time.The collective inquiry activities within the smart classroom were co-designed with the teacher to fitseamlessly within a broader high school biology curriculum, in topics of evolution and biodiversity. Running forapproximately 10 to 12-weeks, the integrated curriculum includes in-class activities, homework, a field trip tothe zoo, as well as two collective inquiry activities with immersive simulations. One of the collective inquiryactivities focuses on the topic of evolution. Students work individually, in small groups, and as a whole-class togather evidence of evolution by observing changes in life forms within the simulation as it is advanced (by theteacher) across two hundred million years. The second collective inquiry activity focuses on the topic ofbiodiversity. Prior to the activity, students are to make predictions about how certain environmental factors orchanges (e.g., tsunami, earthquake, low rainfall) that occurred within a single season could change thebiodiversity over a five-year time span. In the immersive environment, students are presented with four differentversions (“scenarios”) of the rainforest ecosystem, challenging them to explore the differences between thesefour rainforests and to locate the scenario that resulted from the variable or factor they explored in their earlierpredictions. The present paper focuses on the first EvoRoom activity, on topics of evolution, including therelevant in-class and homework assignments associated with the immersive experience.Iteration 1: Design and EnactmentAt the beginning of the unit, students were assigned to one of four specialist categories (plants & insects, birds,primates, and other mammals), which they held for the duration of the full curriculum. Students were providedwith a field guide of a set of species that would appear in the rainforest ecosystem of our immersive simulation.As their pre-activity homework, students wrote a blog post about how their species were related to one another.Students visited the EvoRoom in groups of between 10-12 students at a time. Within the EvoRoom,these students were split into four groups. Each student was provided a tablet computer for the duration of theactivity with a custom designed application that navigated the students through the activity as well as scaffoldedstudents to work together and in collecting data throughout the session. Students visited the smart classroomover two days (for approximately 45 minutes each time). For the first session, students examined the Borneorainforest as it may have appeared at nine different time periods (i.e., 200, 150, 100, 50, 25, 10, 5, 2 millionyears ago, and present day). Students were asked to go to each station (from 200 to 2 million years ago) andlook for their assigned specialty species as part of a larger team consisting of different specialists. If the specieswere not present, they were asked to identify their predecessors from a short list that popped up. Their answerswere recorded, resulting in the emergence of an aggregated, interactive cladogram (a diagram showingrelatedness among species) on the interactive white boards at the front of the room.In the second session, students entered the rainforest with its “state” set to two million years ago, whichapproximated Sundaland, a region in Southeast Asia predating Borneo and Sumatra. At this point the teacherused a teacher control tablet to “accelerate time” and showed the resulting geologic events in the Sundalandlandscape. Over the span of two million years, sea level changes broke Sundaland’s central landmass into apeninsula and several islands, which included Borneo and Sumatra. Setting the room’s timeline to present day,one side of the room now showed Borneo’s ecosystem, while the other side showed Sumatra’s flora and fauna.ICLS 2014 Proceedings303© ISLSStudents noted the presence of their assigned species in this new context and in the final step, the students cametogether in their teams to collectively document evidence of evolutionary differences they "observed" betweenBorneo and Sumatra (i.e., resulting from their separated state). Students were encouraged to discuss their ideaswith others and to post ideas about evolution processes that might have occurred. Their notes were aggregated tothe interactive whiteboard, which visibly represented the collective knowledge base of the students at the end ofthe activity. The teacher was able to use the content of this display, which allowed interactive filtering of thenotes by evolutionary concepts and species, to lead a synthesizing discussion.Iteration 1: OutcomesPre/Post-testThe Concept Inventory of Natural Selection (CINS; Anderson, Fisher, & Norman, 2002) was used as a source ofthe conceptual elements on the pre-/post-assessments. A paired-samples t-test was conducted on the pre- andpost-CINS questions to evaluate whether the curriculum supported students in understanding evolutionconcepts. 33 of 45 students completed both tests. The mean post-test score (M=78.94, SD=15.95) wassignificantly greater than the mean pre-test score, for CINS items (M=56.34, SD=17.16), t(32) = 7.14, p < 0.001.Because these items have been developed and validated by assessment researchers as a measure of theevolutionary processes concerned with natural selection, we are satisfied that this overall curriculum engagedstudents and helped them to learn within this notoriously challenging domain.Curriculum and Activity ArtifactsTo understand how students engaged with various components of EvoRoom we tracked their participation andcompletion throughout the curriculum. 60% of the students wrote a blog post about how their assigned specialistspecies were related to one another as their pre-activity homework, while 31% completed their post-activityhomework. As a benchmark comparison, 69% of students completed a similar assignment as part of theevolution unit (but not related to EvoRoom) that was graded by the teacher for completion. As part of ouranalysis of student performance during the collective inquiry activity, we examined how well students did whenasked: Which of the following is most likely [their assigned] organism's ancestor? Of 1112 answers collected bythe student tablets, 78% were correct, with an upward trend of accuracy compared to time period (Figure 2).Since the evolutionary lineages of most organisms present become less ambiguous as the time periods reachcloser to present-day, we feel that the students' observation accuracy indicates that students were indeed payingattention to the task at hand and engaging with the media appropriately.Figure 2. Observation accuracy by time period. Figure 3. Distribution of evolution explanations’ KI scores.observed by students.At the end of the activity, students were asked to contribute to the following question: Whatevolutionary forces do you think were at play (in this environment)? Students chose concepts from a predefinedlist and explained their answers with evidence of their thinking. 43 explanations were collected from the firststudy which were scored using a 0-5 Knowledge Integration (KI) scale that rewards valid scientific connectionsbetween concepts (Linn & Eylon, 2011). The average KI score was 2.7 (SD=1.05) with an average of 33.3words per explanation (SD=33.28). The distribution of the scores indicates that a large proportion of the noteswere scored as Irrelevant/Incorrect (Figure 3).Design IterationOutcomes from our first iteration of the EvoRoom design showed that students significantly improved theirunderstanding about evolution (based on their pre-/post-test results). While the effects cannot be attributed toour EvoRoom alone, these results demonstrated a positive conceptual change when students learned aboutevolution in a curriculum that included EvoRoom. To further understand how EvoRoom itself impactedICLS 2014 Proceedings304© ISLSstudents' ideas about evolution, we needed to revise the pre- and post-test assessment to include deeperconceptual questions targeted to the pedagogical goals of the activities.In terms of the curriculum activities that preceded students' experience in the immersive environment,we wanted to improve completion rates but did not want to include a competitive mentality such as that evokedby teacher-graded assessments. We sought to encourage a sense of student ownership in the project. Instead ofasking students to review a field guide, we asked students to collectively create the field guide they would beusing in subsequent activities. In addition, we wanted students to feel that they had actually had a hand in thedesign of the immersive environment. Therefore, we revised the curriculum activities that included studentsresearching the Borneo rainforest environment through two hundred million years.During their collective inquiry activities, students showed considerable focus in their interactions withthe materials, but we realized that students had spent more time as individuals in the immersive environment(working towards a collective goal) rather than engaging in the collaboration and deep reflective practices thatwe had envisioned for our co-located immersive inquiry environment. For example, in the portion of the activitythat asked students to locate their assigned organism's evolutionary predecessors, their efforts were displayed ina cladogram that all students in the room effectively created together, but the designed interactions tended to befocused on individual students observing the rainforest “walls” and reviewing materials on their tablet, and thenrecording their answers. For the second iteration, we sought to improve student-to-student interactions withinthe immersive environment and while encouraging them to collaborate on more reflective activities.Figure 4. Cladogram created from observations in iteration 2.Iteration 2: Design and EnactmentThe second iteration of the EvoRoom curriculum began with a short lecture delivered by the researchers aboutthe changing nature of science discussing the merits of large scale collaborations (using the Human GenomeProject as an example) and were introduced to ideas about themselves working in a knowledge community.Student were again assigned to one of four specialist categories (plants & insects, birds, primates, and othermammals), but was asked to work with other students (across two class sections of Grade 11 Biology) tocomplete a field guide on a wiki page on their class website. Each student was assigned specific species andcategories (e.g., habitat, life cycle, physiology) that they would research. Students were also told that they wouldcollectively create an immersive environment that they would experience together by researching their assignedspecies' role in the Borneo rainforest over two hundred million years. The premise of the collective inquiryactivity, and its organization were similar to that of the first iteration, with a few important changes:• Two 45-minute sessions were consolidated into one 75-minute session• When students were asked to identify their assigned species' evolutionary predecessor at stations thatdisplayed the rainforest at different time periods, a student guide (acting like a docent at a museum)was present to help with the task.• Teams of different species specialists actively compared adjacent time periods (e.g., 200 vs. 150million years ago) with reflective question prompts. Additional information about the time periodsaugmenting the rainforest "walls" were provided to students.• The final step where students discussed and posted ideas about evolutionary processes was furtherstructured to ask students to think about specific species as well as to include artifacts as their evidence.There was also explicit instruction to review the collective cladogram (Figure 4) as part of theirreflective process.During the second iteration, two of four sessions used paper handouts instead of tablet computers due totechnology issues, and one session was prevented from receiving the intervention at all.ICLS 2014 Proceedings305© ISLSIteration 2: OutcomesPre/Post-testFor iteration 2's assessment, we asked students the following questions:1. What is evolution? How do you think it works?2. How might evolution shape a species of red fox after 500 generations (approximately 1000 years)?Elaborate on the ideas from your previous answer. Feel free to speculate on the conditions surroundingtheir evolution.The items were scored using a KI scale, designed to reveal deep conceptual understanding of evolution,which found that the mean post-test score (M=3.40, SD=0.92) was significantly greater than the mean pre-testscore (M=2.58, SD=0.75), t(24) = 3.91, p < 0.002. An inter-rater reliability was performed on 17% of data,where 75% agreement (Kappa = 0.49, p < 0.005) was achieved at first pass. Once discrepancies were resolved100% agreement was reached and the rubric revised to account for the differences.Curriculum and Activity ArtifactsPrior to their participation in the collective inquiry activity, we found that of the 490 sections in the field guide,84% were complete, however the wiki page documenting the rainforest at various time periods was only slightlymore than half complete (58%). For the session that used tablet computers, we were able to examine how wellstudents performed with the help of a guide when asked: Which of the following is most likely your organism'sancestor? Of 335 answers collected by the tablets, 84% were accurate. Similar to our results in iteration 1, therewas an upward trend of accuracy compared to time period. However in iteration 2, over 90% accuracy wasreached by “100 million years ago” whereas in iteration 1, over 90% accuracy was only reached at two timeperiods (25 and 2 million years ago; Figure 2). We also examined how student groups made comparisonsbetween time periods, which included the following prompt: “As a team, you will compare the environmentbetween 200 & 150 million years ago.”1. Discuss the following with your group members and record your answers below.2. What are the major differences between the two time periods?3. What species appeared in this time period that wasn’t there before? Consider climate, habitat, animals,and plants.4. What evolutionary processes might have occurred during this time period? How were these processesrelated to the climate, habitats or other species at the time?In the sessions that were given paper handouts, only 67% of the comparisons were complete. While in thesessions utilizing tablets, all of the assigned comparisons were made. Student responses were scored using a KIscale, which found the mean KI score in the tablet sessions (M=3.33, SD=0.60) higher than that from the papersessions (M=1.9, SD=0.69).Due to time and technological constraints, students were unable to complete the final step discussingand posting ideas about evolutionary processes. This was remedied by asking students to answer an analogousquestion as a post-activity assignment: Choose an organism from the Borneo ecosystem and discuss theevolutionary forces you think are at play thorough 200 millions years? Responses were coded using the KIscale, which found that students who participated in the second iteration achieved a mean KI score of 3.7 (M=3.74, SD=1.14). Over 50% of the notes were coded either as Basic or Complex (Figure 3).DiscussionDisciplinary Content KnowledgePre/post assessments indicate that overall curriculum engaged students and helped them to learn within theevolutionary biology domain. Although the effects may be attributed to instruction of the entire unit, analysis ofin-activity artifacts, especially those asking students to think deeply about underlying mechanisms of evolutionand what constitutes as evidence for evolutionary processes, served as confirmation of our design's impact ondisciplinary content knowledge. It is interesting to note that knowledge integration scores for students'explanation of evolutionary processes in iteration 2 were significantly higher than those in iteration 1. This maybe due in part to the activity design or to their being completed after the activity, with more time for reflection.This could also be due to the phrasing of the question, which included more scaffolding in asking students toreview the cladogram and choose about a specific species to reflect upon.Engagement with Immersive MediaReviewing students' participation and how well they paid attention to the media, observation accuracy ratessuggest that students were paying attention to the content on the walls and those on the tablet. In the sessionutilizing paper handouts (in iteration 2), completion rate for making comparisons between time periods (e.g.,200 vs. 150 million years ago) were lower than the same question being answered on tablet devices, howeverICLS 2014 Proceedings306© ISLSstudents in both session types were observed to be engaged with the content of immersive walls. One reasonmight be that on tablet devices, students did not have an option of not answering the question before movingforward in the activity. Another reason might be that the students in the paper group were asked to makecomparisons between all time periods while the students in the tablet group were only asked to make twocomparisons. It is also interesting to note that answers tended to be more complete with significantly higher KIscores (M=3.33, SD=0.60) than those in the paper group (M=1.90, SD=0.69), p < 0.05. Video analysis currentlyunderway will serve to further elucidate how students engaged with the immersive media and how theyinfluence student interactions that lead to productive knowledge co-construction.Collaboration and Collective ProgressStructured Community Progress and DependenciesWe were able to structure community progress and student's dependency on their peers' work in two ways: 1)species specializations and teams with different specialists, and 2) giving students distinct roles duringcollaborative activities1) A key design feature of the collective inquiry activity is the use of specializations (e.g., birds,primates) kept by the students throughout the curriculum. It offered students the opportunity to have anauthoritative voice during collaborative discussions (since only they would have enlightened information abouttheir specialty species). This was carefully designed into collaborative steps of the activity. It also allowed manystudents to work towards a shared artifact for further exploration. Over 50 students collectively completed afield guide in iteration 2. Several sessions of ten to fourteen students worked together to create a map of theevolutionary lineages of the species in the simulated rainforest ecosystem, and in both cases individual studentshad their own piece of the larger puzzle that they were responsible for. However, in order for them to really feellike "experts" in their specialization, students needed to engage in pre-activity assignments. Engagement was notenforced nor was effort graded, which might have led to lack of external motivation to complete tasks.2) Another way we designed interdependency is to specify task-based roles within the activity (asopposed to content expertise). In iteration 2, when students collaborated to answer explanation questions, suchas comparing time periods, they were asked to designate a specific person to act as the scribe of the group (for aparticular question), as well time period specialists (i.e., responsible for looking up resources about therainforest at each specific time). Another example of roles being designated was the use of guides in iteration 2.Students Responding Meaningfully to Ideas of their Peers, in Real-TimeA more meaningful, but difficult, interdependency is to encourage students to respond meaningfully to ideas oftheir peers. This can be designed into the activity, to the extent that certain pieces of information may to bediscovered by different people participating such that only by collaborating will they see the big picture.Relevant pedagogical information can be carefully scripted to emerge at the right time. In EvoRoom, differentevolutionary mechanisms were designed for different species specialists to discover. For example, thosespecializing in plants and insects should become aware of the co-evolutionary relationship between floweringplants and pollen spreading insects, leading them to discover the symbiotic relationship between the fig tree andthe fig wasp. This type of dependency was most difficult to achieve, since the revelation of one insight couldrely on an emergent artifact that may or may not depict the correct information. The collective cladogram wasone such artifact. The cladogram in both iterations showed conflicting information particularly in the earliertime periods. The facilitating teacher had to think swiftly on her feet when reading and trying to launch relevantdiscussions from emergent artifacts at the same time. However, our teacher demonstrated in both iterations thatthese emergent, aggregative artifacts can be a powerful teaching tool. Discrepancies in an emergent artifact ledto interesting discussion. In one session, the mistakes in the earlier times of the cladogram prompted students tothink about what constitute as evidence for evolution (e.g., fossil records), and that which records are more orless likely to survive, and what led to our current understanding of evolution.ConclusionOverall, we found that EvoRoom enabled students to think deeply about evolutionary biology mechanisms.With respect to the broader curriculum, assigning expertise (e.g., species) was an important aspect of the designbut recognized that not everyone “bought-in” to their assigned roles, resulting in different levels of effort putinto their work within the broader curriculum. This led to a varied range of expertise during collective inquiryactivities (i.e., one “primate expert” having more insight than another), which would impact their group orsessions’ collective success. In both iterations, we found that students paid careful attention to the immersivemedia as well as other media components (tablet software, visualizations) in the immersive simulation. Much ofthe within-activity artifacts that demonstrated student reflection about evolutionary biology resulted frominteractions with immersive walls as well as with discussion with students’ group members. However, this wasas much a feature of our pedagogical design as the media’s influence. Further audio and video analysis is nowICLS 2014 Proceedings307© ISLSunderway to measure students’ thinking behind their written explanations. During the collective inquiry activity,visualizations that aggregated students’ collective observations served as an important tool as a shared artifact toencourage deeper discussions and drive further reflection. From the early results, successful design features ofour immersive simulation include: visualizing the rainforest, displaying the collective knowledge (i.e., in theform of a cladogram), and incorporating collaboration to the core of the activity.ReferencesAnderson, D., Fisher, K., & Norman, G. J. (2002). Development and evaluation of the conceptual inventory ofnatural selection. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(10), 952–978.Birchfield, D., & Megowan-Romanowicz, C. (2009). Earth science learning in SMALLab: A design experimentfor mixed reality. Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 403–421.Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141–178.Brown, A. L. & Campione, J. C. (1990). Communities of learning and thinking, or a context by any other name.Human Development, 21, 108-125.Colella, V. (2000). Participatory simulations: Building collaborative understanding through immersive dynamicmodeling. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471–500.Dede, C. (2009). Immersive interfaces for engagement and learning. Science, 323, 66–69.Demastes, S., Good, R., & Peebles, P. (1995). Students' conceptual ecologies and the process of conceptualchange in evolution. Science Education, 79(6), 637–666.Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educationalinquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5–8.Facer, K., Joiner, R., Stanton, D., Reid, J., Hull, R., & Kirk, D. (2004). Savannah: mobile gaming and learning?Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20, 399–409.Horwitz, P., Schwartz, J., Kindfield, A., Yessis, L. M., Hickey, D., Heidenberg, A., & Wolfe, E. W. (1998).Implementation and evaluation of the GenScope™ learning environment: Issues, solutions, and results.Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Charlottesville, VA.Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B.-S. (2011). Science Learning and Instruction. Routledge. New York.Lui, M., & Slotta, J. D. (2013). Immersive simulations for smart classrooms: exploring evolutionary concepts insecondary science. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 1–24. doi:10.1080/1475939X.2013.838452Mayr, E. (2001). What Evolution is. New York: BasicBooks.Moher, T. (2006). Embedded Phenomena: Supporting science learning with classroom-sized distributedsimulations (pp. 691–700). Presented at the CHI '06: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on HumanFactors in computing systems, New York: ACM Press.NSF Taskforce for Cyberlearning. (2008). Fostering Learning in the Networked World: The CyberlearningOpportunity and Challenge. Report of the NSF Task Force on Cyberlearning (pp. 1–64). Arlington, VA:National Science Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2008/nsf08204/nsf08204.pdfPeters, V. L., & Slotta, J. D. (2010). Scaffolding knowledge communities in the classroom: New opportunitiesin the Web 2.0 era. In M. J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.), Designs for Learning Environments of theFuture. Secaucus, NJ: Springer.Price, S., & Rogers, Y. (2004). Let's get physical: the learning benefits of interacting in digitally augmentedphysical spaces. Computers & Education, 43, 137–151.Reiser, B. J., Tabak, I., Sandoval, W. A., Smith, B. K., Steinmuller, F., & Leone, A. J. (2001). BGuILE:Strategic and conceptual scaffolds for scientific inquiry in biology classrooms. In S. M. Carver & D. Klahr(Eds.), Cognition and Instruction: Twenty-five years of progress (pp. 263–305). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Rogers, Y., & Muller, H. (2006). A framework for designing sensor-based interactions to promote explorationand reflection in play. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 64(1), 1–14.Slotta, J. D. (2010). Evolving the classrooms of the future: The interplay of pedagogy, technology andcommunity. In K. Makitalo-Siegl, F. Kaplan, J. Zottmann, & F. Fischer (Eds.), Classroom of the Future:Orchestrating collaborative spaces (pp. 215–242). Rotterdam: Sense.Slotta, J. D., & Chi, M. (2006). Helping students understand challenging topics in science through ontologytraining. Cognition and Instruction, 24(2), 261–289.Slotta, J. D., & Linn, M. C. (2009). WISE science: Web-based inquiry in the classroom. Teachers College Press.Slotta, J. D., & Najafi, H. (2012). Supporting collaborative knowledge construction with Web 2.0 technologies.In Emerging Technologies for the Classroom (pp. 93–112). New York, NY: Springer New York.Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems approach to making sense of theworld. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8(1), 3–19. doi:10.1023/A:1009421303064ICLS 2014 Proceedings308© ISLS