Adventure Learning @ the Learning SciencesBrant G. Miller, University of Idaho, bgmiller@uidaho.eduR. Justin Hougham, University of Wisconsin–Madison, rjustinhougham@gmail.comChristopher Cox, University of Colorado Boulder, Christopher.Cox-2@Colorado.EDUVon Walden, Washington State University, vonw@uidaho.eduKarla Bradley Eitel, University of Idaho, kbradley@uidaho.eduAbstract: Teaching the general public and K-12 communities about scientific research hastaken on greater importance as climate change increasingly impacts the world we live in. TheAdventure Learning approach to designing learning environments was used to engage highschool students in authentic climate science inquiries in Greenland. The learning sciencesrepresent an important next step in the evolution of Adventure Learning.Teaching the general public and K-12 communities about scientific research has taken on greater importance asclimate change increasingly impacts the world we live in. Science researchers and the educational communityhave a widening responsibility to produce and deliver curriculum and content that is timely, scientifically soundand engaging. To address this challenge, in the summer of 2012 the Adventure Learning @ Greenland(AL@GL) project, a United States’ National Science Foundation (NSF) funded initiative, used hands-on andweb-based climate science experiences for high school students to promote climate and science literacy. Thisposter reports on an innovative approach to education and outreach for environmental science research knownas Adventure Learning (AL) and seeks to engage the learning science community in a dialog around research onAdventure Learning.AL is a curricular approach that combines face-to-face and online learning experiences. The ALframework was originally tested through a series of circumpolar Arctic expeditions where a team of adventurerstraveled via dogsled between remote villages (see the GoNorth! project at http://www.polarhusky.com). The ALframework as enacted by the GoNorth! project proved to be extremely successful, effectively reaching millionsof students from around the world (The Learning Technologies Collaborative 2010).AL was originally defined by Doering (2006) as “a hybrid distance education approach that providesstudents with opportunities to explore real-world issues through authentic learning experiences withincollaborative learning environments” (p. 198). Building upon this definition, Veletsianos and Kleanthous (2009)define AL as “an approach for designing teaching and learning environments, whether those are online orhybrid, or used in face-to-face or distance education contexts” (p. 91). The framework associated with AL forthe purposes of design, development, and implementation has nine principles that operationalize the approach(The Learning Technologies Collaborative 2010).The purpose of AL@GL was to engage high school students in the US, and in Greenland, inatmospheric research that is being conducted in the Arctic to enhance climate and science literacy. Climate andscience literacy was explored via three fundamental concepts: radiation, the greenhouse effect, and climate vs.weather. Over the course of the project, students in each location engaged in activities and conductedexperiments through the use of scientific instrumentation. Students were taught science research principlesassociated with an atmospheric observatory at Summit Station, Greenland with the objective of connectingclimate science in the Arctic to student’s local environments.Summit Station is located on the Greenland Ice Sheet [72°N, 38°W, 3200 m] and was the primarylocation of interest. Approximately 35 students at multiple locations in Idaho, USA, and Greenland participatedin the hybrid learning environments as part of this project. The AL@GL project engaged students in an inquirybased curriculum with content that highlighted a cutting-edge geophysical research initiative at Summit: theIntegrated Characterization of Energy, Clouds, Atmospheric state, and Precipitation at Summit (ICECAPS)project (http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd/arctic/observatories/summit/). ICECAPS is an atmospheric observatoryfocused on obtaining high temporal resolution measurements of clouds from ground-based remote sensorsincluding radar, lidar, infrared spectra and others. ICECAPS also launches radiosondes twice daily. This largesuite of complementary observations are providing an important baseline understanding of cloud andatmospheric conditions over the central Greenland ice sheet and are supporting Arctic climate research on cloudprocesses and climate model validation. ICECAPS measures parameters that are associated with those identifiedin student misconceptions, for example, different types of atmospheric radiation, the effect of greenhouse gases,and climate versus weather (see also Haller et al., 2011). Thus, ICECAPS research and the AL@GL projectcombined to create a learning environment and educational activities that sought to increase climate literacy inhigh school students as well as communicate important atmospheric research to a broader audience.Students participating in AL@GL activities were given a pre/post survey that measured contentknowledge, understanding of science inquiry and the nature of science, and perceptions of human ecologicalimpact. The survey instrument was developed specifically for the AL@GL project and included questionsICLS 2014 Proceedings1509© ISLSmodified from the Student Understanding of Science and Scientific Inquiry (SUSSI) instrument (Liang et al.,2008), and the New Ecological Paradigm instrument (Dunlap et al., 2000), along with content specific questions(e.g. What is a cloud?). Pre surveys were administered to students in Greenland and the US prior to AL@GLactivities. Post surveys were administered immediately following AL@GL activities and prior to studentsdeparting for home.The pre/post assessment of student content knowledge produced mixed results. Total scores across themultiple-choice items relating to understanding of science inquiry, the nature of science, and perceptions ofhuman ecological impact remained essentially unchanged for students in Greenland and the US afterparticipating in the program. However, short-answer responses indicated that students’ understanding of keyclimate topics, including clouds, radiation, greenhouse effect, and weather and climate, all increased. Anincrease in understanding is evident for students in Greenland and the US across all four topics. Overall,percentages were higher for students in Greenland than for students in the US. These results represent a limitedview of student experience. Therefore, more focused research avenues need to be explored to understand theimpact of the AL approach on student learning.The learning sciences represent an important next step in the evolution of Adventure Learning. Theseminal work of Bransford, Brown, and Cocking (2000) shifted the focus from instructional design formemorization of information to learning for understanding and the application of knowledge. There is much wecan gain from the learning sciences as it relates to Adventure Learning that will greatly inform the next iteration.Three learning sciences paradigms will serve as the starting point for research on Adventure Learning. Theparadigms of constructionism (Kafai, 2006), case-based reasoning (Kolodner, 2006, Kolodner et al., 2003), andproject-based learning (Krajcik & Blumenfeld, 2006) each stand to inform rich avenues of inquiry for futureAdventure Learning projects. The Design Based Implementation Research (DBIR) (Penuel, Fishman, Cheng, &Sabelli, 2011) approach is the perfect methodology for exploring the iterative back and forth between researchand education. Thus, future Adventure Learning research, including the NSF EPSCoR Managing Idaho’sLandscapes for Ecosystem Services (MILES) project, will implement a DBIR methodology.ReferencesBransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.). (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience,and school. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Doering, A. (2006). Adventure learning: Transformative hybrid online education. Distance Education, 27(2),197-215.Dunlap, R. E., Van Liere, K.D., Mertig, A.G., & Jones, R.E. (2000). Measuring endorsement of the newecological paradigm: A revised NEP scale. J. Soc. Issues, 56, 425-442, doi: 10.1111/0022-4537.00176.Haller, A.G., McCubbin, I.B., & Wright, J.M. (2011). CHANGE: A place-based curriculum for understandingclimate change at Storm Peak Laboratory, Colorado. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 92, 909-918, doi:10.1175/2011BAMS3026.1.Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Constructionism. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences(pp. 1-16). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Kolodner, J. L. (2006). Case-based reasoning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learningsciences (pp. 1-16). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., Puntambekar, S., & Ryan, M.(2003). Problem-based learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom:Putting learning by design (tm) into practice. The journal of the learning sciences, 12(4), 495-547.Krajcik, J. S., & Blumenfeld, P. C. (2006). Project-based learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridgehandbook of the learning sciences (pp. 1-16). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Liang, L. L., Chen, S., Chen, X., Kaya, O.N., Adams, A.D., Macklin, M., & Ebenezer, J. (2008). Assessingpreservice elementary teachers’ views on the nature of scientific knowledge: A dual-responseinstrument. Asia-Pacific Forum Sci. Learn. Teach., 9, 1-20.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.The Learning Technologies Collaborative. (2010). “Emerging”: A re-conceptualization of contemporarytechnology design and integration. In Veletsianos, G. (Ed.), Emerging Technologies in DistanceEducation (pp. 91-107). Edmonton, AB: Athabasca University Press.Veletsianos, G., & Kleanthous, I. (2009). A review of adventure learning. Int. Rev. Res. Open Distance Learn.,10, 84-105.AcknowledgmentsThis work was made possible by NSF grant #1240700.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1510© ISLS