Current Research and Practice on Learning Communities:What We Know, What are the Issues,and Where are We Going?Katerine Bielaczyc, Clark University, kateb369@gmail.comDani Ben-Zvi, University of Haifa, dbenzvi@univ.haifa.ac.ilYotam Hod, University of Haifa, yotamhod24@gmail.comAbstract: We envision building an ongoing, international research collaboration on learningcommunities (IRCLC) composed of researchers who are interested in studying LCs. Giventhis goal, the purpose of this workshop is to bring together active researchers who study LCs,in all their forms, to better understand the past, present, and future of this central theme in thelearning sciences. The workshop will be structured following a LC model, so that norms oftrust, collaboration, and multiple zones of participation can be developed, while membersshare their expertise and contribute to a collective knowledge-building process on LCs.IntroductionIn recent decades, a socio-constructivist approach to learning has increasingly become relevant to education,reflected in the emergence of the learning sciences as a discipline (Bransford, Brown & Cocking, 2000). Thisshift in the recognition that learning does not take place only in one’s mind, but is distributed (Salomon, 1993),has been translated into educational models that are profoundly different than traditional ways that teaching andlearning have been practiced (Bielaczyc & Collins, 1999). Among these reconceptualized models, those thathave focused on the community have received a great deal of attention, particularly when they were first studiedin 1990’s (e.g., Brown & Campione, 1994; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994). We refer to these models as learningcommunities (LCs).The attention that LCs received from learning scientists, as well as their promulgation within variouseducational settings like schools (e.g., Herrenkohl & Mertl, 2010; Hogan & Corey, 2001; Lehrer, Schauble, &Lucas, 2008; Rogoff, Turkanis, & Bartlett, 2001), universities (Hod & Ben-Zvi, 2013), informal settings (e.g.,http://www.computerclubhouse.org) and more recently in online settings (e.g., Kafai & Fields, 2013; Resnick, etal., 2009), is reflected in academic journals and conferences. For example, a 2009 EARLI conference had thetheme of “Fostering a Community of Learners,” out of recognition that “learning is a social process ofknowledge construction by collaborating with peers and teachers in communities of learners” (Rijlaarsdam,2009, p. 5). Even this year’s ICLS theme, Learning and Becoming in Practice, is at the heart of the LC approachdue to its emphasis on enculturation (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989).While there are many reasons to view the progress that has been made in research and practice on LCspositively, there are still voices of concern. Firstly, to this day only a relatively small number of LCs have beenresearched and replicated in practical settings. While there may be multifarious aspects above and beyond thelearning sciences that inhibit this, one cannot rule out the lack of understanding or under-theorization as apotential factor. Second, although there has been a steady roll-out of articles and research published on LCs,they have hardly been the central theme of articles and conferences. A close look at the same EARLI conferenceshows there were no efforts to define, revisit or review what is known about LCs. Moreover, for example, in thepast two learning sciences international conferences (CSCL 2013, ICLS 2012), the term LC, or one of itsrelevant equivalents, was a central theme or even loosely addressed in only a relatively small number of papers.Workshop GoalsBased on the enduring interest of the learning sciences community to explore the LC approach, we make a callwith this proposal as a step towards re-invigorating LCs as a central theme of research. Moreover, we areinterested in contemporary ways that LCs have been extended. We believe there is great work being done, andthe goal of this workshop is to communicate these ideas around the organizing concept of LC theory andpractice. As such, our pre-conference workshop will focus on the following questions:•••••What is the current status of LC theory and practice?What exemplary learning community models exist today that still have yet to be shared but can make acontribution?What are current research agendas working on this and what are the key results?What interdisciplinary perspectives can contribute to what is known about LCs? How we create a newLC language based on the existing disciplinary languages?How is technology used to foster n LC? What are future technological directions?ICLS 2014 Proceedings1677© ISLSExpected Outcomes and ContributionsThe workshop is organized around these four guiding questions that the participants will actively negotiateduring the day’s activities:••••Who are we? The purpose of this question is to build the social infrastructure of our internationalresearch collaboration on learning communities (IRCLC).What are we interested in? The purpose of this question is to encourage people to share ideas and elicitthe major themes.What are the emergent issues in researching LCs? The purpose of this question is for the community toidentify the issues that need to be developed and studied further.Where do we want to go from here? The purpose of this question is to reflect upon the day and makecommitments (or explore possibilities) for future collaborationsWe envision this workshop as the start of an ongoing, International Research Collaboration onLearning Communities (IRCLC) composed of researchers and visionaries who are interested in studying LCs.As an outcome of this research, we suggest publication of a book or special issue in a refereed journal thatreports and synthesizes our emergent findings. We will use a collaborative internet platform to pool resourcesfrom different disciplines, connect research and practice in various domains, examine current and futurechallenges, and contribute to a solid research foundation that can significantly advance the field.Participation ModesParticipants include practitioners and researchers in all domains who are actively researching, are interested inresearching, or want to learn more about the theory and design of LCs. This includes various settings (face-toface, online, blended, classroom, school, professional, etc.), technologies that support LCs, as well as learningand teaching processes within LCs. The workshop includes two modes of participation: key contributors andparticipants.Key contributors are those who actively research LCs in various forms. They will, in addition to beinga full participant in the day’s activities, lead an approximately 45 minute round-table about the research anddesign of their LC. Key contributors will also be asked to submit an abstract of their LC (or LC related idea) toenable participants to choose which round-table they will attend.Participants will be selected based on their interest in participating in the workshop and experiencewith LCs. Participants will be expected to actively engage in the day’s activities, contributing to the collectiveknowledge of the group. Participants with limited or no LC experience, who would like to come to learn, areencouraged to apply.OrganizersDr. Katerine Bielaczyc is an Associate Professor and Director of the Jacob Hiatt Center for Urban Education atClark University. Dr. Bielaczyc's research involves collaborating with students, teachers, and schoolcommunities to investigate new approaches to teaching and learning. Her work focuses on developing bothtechnological and social infrastructures to support participants in working together as a knowledge buildingcommunity to create knowledge regarding personal, pedagogical, and systemic transformation.Dr. Dani Ben-Zvi has a lifetime of experience working with learning communities. He designs and studiestechnology-enhanced learning communities as means to make complex domains such as statistics and learningsciences more accessible to learners. For the past eight years, he has been the leader of the EducationalTechnologies Graduate Program in the University of Haifa. Currently, he leads a Research Excellence Center inIsrael that examines learning in a networked society in interdisciplinary ways.Yotam Hod, a doctoral student, has over 10 years experience working in and researching LCs. He has spent fiveyears at a celebrated NYC public high school as an assistant principal, leading a community of learners. Yotamhas researched a unique LC at the University of Haifa over the past five years, focusing on what social andclinical psychological theories of groups can explain about LCs.ReferencesBen-Zvi, D. (2007, October). Using wiki to promote collaborative learning in statistics education. TechnologyInnovations in Statistics Education Journal, 1(1).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1678© ISLSBielaczyc, K., & Collins, A. (1999). Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of educationalpractice. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional design theories and models: A new paradigm ofinstructional theory (pp. 269-292). Mahwah NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Bielaczyc, K., Kapur, M. & Collins, A. (2013). Cultivating a community of learners in K-12 classrooms. In C.E. Hmelo-Silver, A. M. O’Donnell, C. Chan, & C. A. Chinn (Eds.), International Handbook ofCollaborative Learning (pp. 233 – 249). Taylor & Francis, Inc.Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (2000). How people learn: brain, mind, experience, and school(Expanded ed.). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Brown, A. L. & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided Discovery in a Community of Learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.)Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice. (pp. 229-272). Cambridge,UK: The MIT Press.Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32-42.Herrenkohl, L. R., & Mertl, V. (2010). How students come to be, know, and do. Cambridge University Press.Hod, Y., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2013). An adapted group psychotherapy framework for teachingand learning aboutCSCL. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan and S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Proceedings of the TenthComputer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference (CSCL10), Volume I (pp. 240–247).Madison, WI, USA: University of Wisconsin.Hod, Y., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2013). An adapted group psychotherapy framework for teachingand learning aboutCSCL. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan and S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Proceedings of the TenthComputer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference (CSCL10), Volume I (pp. 240–247).Madison, WI, USA: University of Wisconsin.Hod, Y., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2014). Productive failure in an emerging learning community: A group developmentalperspective. Proceedings of the Chais conference on instructional technologies research 2014: Learningin the technological era. Y. Eshet-Alkalai, A. Caspi, S. Eden, N. Geri, Y. Yair, Y. Kalman (Eds.),Raanana: The Open University of Israel.Hogan, K., & Corey, C. (2001). Viewing classrooms as cultural contexts for fostering scientificliteracy. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 32(2), 214-243.Kafai, Y. B., & Fields, D. A. (2013). Connected play: Tweens in a virtual world. MIT Press.Lehrer, R., Schauble, L., & Lucas, D. (2008). Supporting development of the epistemology of inquiry. CognitiveDevelopment, 23(4), 512-529.Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernandez, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., Millner, A.,Rosenbaum, E., Silver, J., Silverman, B., and Kafai, Y. (2009). Scratch: Programming for all. ACM,52(11), 60–67.Rijlaarsdam, G. (2009). Proceedings of the Biennial Conference for the Research on Learning and Instruction:Fostering communities of learners: the impact on teaching practice. 13th European Conference forResearch on Learning and Instruction (EARLI).Rogoff, B., Turkanis, C. G., & Bartlett, L. (2001). Learning together children and adults in a school community.London, UK: Oxford University Press.Salomon, G. (1993). Distributed cognitions: psychological and educational considerations. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1679© ISLS