Sources of Affect around Interdisciplinary Sense MakingBenjamin D. Geller,* Julia S. Gouvea,* Vashti Sawtelle, and Chandra TurpenDepartment of Physics, Univesity of Maryland, College Park, College Park, MD 20742Email: geller@umd.edu, juliasvoboda@gmail.com, davisvas@gmail.com, chandra.turpen@gmail.com* Authors contributed equally to this paperAbstract: We unpack an episode in which a case study student in an Introductory Physics forLife Scientists (IPLS) course experiences positive and negative affect coupled to sources offrustration and satisfying resolution. We argue that the positive affect that the studentexperiences stems from an alignment between his identification as a sense-maker and hisepistemological view of this physics course as one that that values sense-making. Conversely,we attribute his frustration to a tension between his identity and his epistemological view ofhis biology courses as descriptive and fact-driven. We discuss some implications of this modelfor students engaged in interdisciplinary sense-making more generally. In particular, wesuggest that Gavin’s frustration with the lack of attention to mechanism in his biology coursesmight ultimately serve to strengthen his sense of interdisciplinary connectedness andsatisfaction.Introduction: Different Reasons for Appreciating PhysicsIn recent years, efforts have been made to design introductory physics courses that are specifically tailored tolife science students (e.g. Meredith & Redish, 2013). A number of objectives are routinely cited for doing so,including the increased importance of physical modeling and quantitative approaches in upper-division biologycoursework, the need to train future physicians in methods and technologies developed in the physical sciences,and a general recognition that science disciplines are increasingly integrated and dependent on each other forinspiration and innovation. These objectives often align with national calls for substantial reform of theundergraduate curricula for life science and pre-health profession students (National Research Council, 2003).In practice, instructors recognize the importance of affect as both a mediator of participation in and anoutcome of Introductory Physics for Life Scientists (IPLS) courses. Meeting the interdisciplinary objectivesstated above seems to require that students be open to participating in physics. Because life science studentsoften have negative orientations towards physics, helping life science students come to “appreciate” or “like”physics is seen as an important component of interdisciplinary learning. This goal is sometimes made explicit,but more often is conveyed implicitly through efforts to include content that biologists would find “exciting” orof particular “interest.” However, the sources and consequences of affective responses have not been wellresearched.There are many reasons why life science students might profess to like or appreciate physics. Perhaps,for example, students see utilitarian value in their physics class in preparing them for the MCAT exam or inlater coursework. Perhaps students like physics because they find it easy and it makes them feel competent orconfident as a learner. Perhaps students like physics because they find it intrinsically satisfying to make sense ofwhy objects behave as they do. These different sources of positive affect can have consequences for how and ifstudents participate in physics and potentially for their participation in other science disciplines. A betterunderstanding of the pathways that lead to affective responses can help instructors be more intentional about thekinds of emotions they are trying to foster in their students.The focus in this paper is on affective responses that are triggered by moments in which physics ishelping a student make sense of phenomena previously encountered in his biology courses by seeking coherentmechanistic accounts of these phenomena (Hammer et al., 2005). By focusing on how and why these momentsof explanatory coherence generate positive affective response, we hope to suggest ways of inviting students toparticipate in physics as well as foster an appreciation for thinking and learning across disciplinary boundaries.	  In order to better understand both the sources and consequences of affective responses for participationand learning in science, we attend to interactions among affective displays and the ways in which studentsidentify with and understand the epistemologies of the disciplines. We present an episode from an interviewconducted with “Gavin,” a case-study student in an IPLS course. We examine how aspects of Gavin’s identityinteract with his epistemological orientation toward physics and biology to generate both positive and negativeemotion and unpack the source of his affect in these moments. In turn, we consider how this affective responseinfluences and is shaped by epistemological views of coherence in the natural world.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1142© ISLSTheoretical and Methodological ApproachIn our analysis we attend to an instance in which positive and negative affect are coupled to sources offrustration and resolution. The unit of our analysis is not the individual but rather a series of moments in thecontext of this interview. We do not claim, for example, that Gavin always exhibits these particular emotions forthe reasons illustrated by the episode we have chosen. Rather, the episode serves to highlight how Gavin’sepistemic resources and ways of positioning his identity were coordinated in these moments. For reasons wedescribe below, these ways of coordinating epistemology and identity may influence Gavin in the future.This framework views neither identity, nor epistemology, nor affect as stable entities that an individualcarries with him from moment to moment. Instead, each of these dimensions is influenced by the differentcontexts in which an individual participates (Gupta et al., 2010; Hammer & Elby, 2002; Nasir & Saxe, 2003).This framework does not preclude the possibility that some of these constructs may be more or less consistentlyactivated across a variety of contexts. It simply starts from the assumption that these constructs are sensitive tocontext and leaves the determination of whether they are more or less stable across context to empiricalinvestigation.Our focus is on the ways in which an interaction between identity and disciplinary epistemology isresponsible for Gavin’s disciplinary affect in an interview about his experiences in this IPLS course.Disciplinary epistemology here refers to ways of knowing and learning associated with a particular discipline(Hammer & Elby, 2003). For students, disciplinary epistemologies are likely to be closely tied to their courseexperiences (Watkins & Elby, 2013). For example, a student might develop an understanding of biology as“complex and difficult to model in a simple way,” or of physics as “abstract and idealized” from his biology andphysics coursework respectively. Different course experiences could contribute to the development of differentsets of epistemological resources. That same student might develop an understanding of biology as elegant andmathematical or physics as uncertain and messy from another set of course experiences.Identity, like epistemology, is dynamic and context dependent. As Esmonde (2009) writes, “identitiesmay shift in meaning or salience as one moves from one context to the next.” The way a student positionsherself relative to a discipline can also vary from moment to moment in more or less consistent ways. A studentmay over time begin to define herself as “a biology person,” but may in other moments feel alienated from orexcluded from that discipline (Nasir & Saxe, 2003), particularly in comparison to experts. Another student mayidentify as “someone for whom physics is really difficult,” but may, at times, position herself as more alignedwith the discipline. There may be ways of identifying that are broader than any particular discipline, but thatinteract with the individual disciplines in influential ways, such as one’s view of himself as “a hands-on kind ofperson” or “a person who is good with symbols.”Epistemology, identity, and affect are related in various and nuanced ways. Danielak et al. (2013)describe how identity and personal epistemology are coupled for a student who identifies as a certain kind ofknower. Disciplinary identity and disciplinary epistemology sometimes evolve together, as when researcherscome to position themselves as aligned with or distant from particular disciplinary practices (Osbeck &Nersessian, 2010). Affect, in turn, can stabilize or destabilize epistemic orientations and aspects of identity ormay result from a match or mismatch between them. Someone might feel anxious in a context in which hisenacted identity is not valued, or proud in a context where it is. At times these constructs of identity,epistemology, and affect reinforce each other, and at times they are in tension. This is particularly true in aninterdisciplinary setting in which more than one set of disciplinary identities, epistemologies, and affectiveresponses may be at work.Gavin’s Story: Satisfaction from a Mechanistic Explanation of DiffusionOne goal of our IPLS course is to unpack the physical mechanisms underlying biological phenomena that areonly described phenomenologically in typical introductory biology and chemistry courses. An example of this isthe diffusion of particles or gases along a concentration gradient, a phenomenon with which life science studentsbecome familiar but for which they are often not provided a mechanistic explanation in their introductorycourses (Redish & Cooke, 2013).Gavin finds the unpacking of diffusion in mechanistic terms to be highly satisfying and references theexample in describing the role this interdisciplinary course plays in his education more generally:	  [1]Gavin: This [IPLS] class was very good about telling us about thermodynamics andentropy's role in the universe… And I think diffusion was when everything started toclick; when we talked about how molecules go from higher concentration to lowerconcentration because they're bumping into each other so much, and so these Newtonianinteractions were able to move particles away from one another… there was lesscollisions and stuff like that… And so I felt like that's when things started to click [snapsICLS 2014 Proceedings1143© ISLSfingers]... I was like that's why molecules go from higher concentration to lowerconcentration...[2] Interviewer: So you already knew that it happened?[3] Gavin: I knew that it happened but then I was like how the hell do they know where thelower concentration is?! And in biology we never explain that [brushes arm across hischest]. And I think that biology has done obviously very brilliant things and I lovebiology, but as far as the professors, they're very knowledgeable but they have to go overso much stuff that they don't really take time to explain why things happen. And I'm avery "why" kind of person; I want to understand why does this happen. And that's why Istruggle with [organic chemistry] so much, because it's like ‘memorize the mechanismsand take the test’ [throws up his hands]… well how the hell do I know why themechanism is happening in the first place?![4] Interviewer: How do the molecules know what to do...[5] Gavin: Exactly. And why do they do this bouncing thing [moves hands back and forth]and it was never explained to me very well, and then when I take this [IPLS] class andunderstand, oh, this is why molecules interact the way they do, this is why you are goingto have this expansion of particles over space.[6] Interviewer: Yeah[7] Gavin: It's because they collide less often when they're further apart than when they'retogether. And they are going to want the least colliding orientation which is going havethe most microstates which is therefore going to have the greatest entropy.[8] Interviewer: So it connected... you knew that it wanted the greatest entropy, and itconnected sort of underneath it what was causing?[9] Gavin: Right it gave me a foundation...[10] Interviewer: And that was satisfying to you?[11] Gavin: That was very satisfying… understanding the why really gave me the confidencein order to go into tests and be able to rationalize why things work the way they do andwhat to look for.In turn [3] of this exchange, Gavin reflects on his experience in prior biology (and organic chemistry) courses.He diagnoses biology as descriptive and fact-driven (“they have to go over so much stuff’), as placing too greatof an emphasis on memorization of factual information and too little of an emphasis on the explication of “whythings happen.” Gavin’s epistemological orientation toward biology in this moment is one in which he sees thediscipline as failing to take up mechanistic explanations of the sort that his IPLS course provides for diffusion(or perhaps even failing to ask questions for which a mechanistic answer is appropriate). Gavin’s reflection onhis experiences in biology is accompanied by markers of frustration. He is exasperated that his biologyinstructors “don’t really take time to explain why things happen” and that he is asked to “memorize themechanism and take the test.” In this moment both his words and hand gestures convey frustration. We describeGavin’s frustration as stemming from a disconnect between his identity as a sense-maker – “I am a why kind ofperson” – and what he finds to be an unsatisfying preoccupation with knowing (as opposed to explaining) inbiology (left side of Figure 1).Whereas Gavin’s epistemological orientation toward biology is in tension with his identification as a“why kind of person,” the epistemological view of physics that he articulates in this moment aligns with thatidentification. Gavin describes physics as a discipline where mechanistic sense-making is commonplace. In turn[1] he credits physics as a place where he came to understand “why reactions proceed the way they do,” and inturn [5] as the place where he finally came to understand “why molecules interact the way they do… why youare going to have the expansion of particles over space.” In turn [9] he labels the explanatory base he feels heacquired in physics as a “foundation.” These descriptions of his epistemological orientation toward physics areaccompanied by markers of positive emotion and excitement. He describes his IPLS course in turn [1] as theplace where “everything started to click,” and in turn [11] agrees with the interviewer that the conceptualfoundation that he feels he established is “very satisfying.” Where Gavin’s epistemological orientation towardbiology is in tension with his identification as a “why kind of person,” his epistemological view of physics as aplace where sense-making happens aligns with this identity in such a way that his affective response to physicsis notably more positive (right side of Figure 1). Gavin also attributes his greater comfort on tests to improvedfacility with mechanistic explanation of the sort emphasized in his IPLS course, saying that such anunderstanding provides “the confidence in order to go into tests and be able to rationalize why things work theway they do.”ICLS 2014 Proceedings1144© ISLSFigure 1. Modeling the sources of Gavin’s affect during an interview in IPLS.Implications for InterdisciplinarityThe frustration stemming from tension between Gavin’s self-identification as a “why kind of person” and hisepistemological view of biology is coupled to the satisfaction that Gavin achieves in his IPLS course. While wedo not know if Gavin would or would not have appreciated physics in its own right had he not first encounteredphenomena in biology for which he desired further explanation, his sense of resolution in IPLS can be attributedin part to his dissatisfaction with explanations in biology. Gavin positions his satisfaction with the role thatphysics is playing in his understanding of natural phenomena in direct comparison with and in direct contrast tohis dissatisfaction with the incompleteness of explanations in biology.Similarly, Gavin’s frustration with the lack of attention to mechanistic explanation in his biologycourses might actually serve to strengthen his ultimate sense of interdisciplinary connectedness and satisfaction.Because he sees physics class as a place where he was encouraged to develop explanations, Gavin may actuallybe more likely in the future to view physics as relevant and important for understanding the living world. Thefrustration that Gavin feels in association with biology may not only be productive in the sense that it enableshim to more fully appreciate and experience the power of mechanistic explanation when he does eventuallyencounter it, but also in the sense that it allows him to appreciate a role that physics can play in the life sciences.A student who is never troubled by a lack of mechanistic reasoning in biology (or a student who sees biology asdescriptive but actually likes that aspect of the discipline) might see superficial connections between biology andphysics in an IPLS setting, but that student is less likely to see physical models as essential for answering someinteresting questions in biology.Figure 1 represents disciplinary affect as an outcome of the interaction (either tension or alignment)between identity and disciplinary epistemology. It is also plausible, however, that the alignment betweenGavin’s identification as a why kind of person and his disciplinary epistemology is stabilized by the positiveemotions resulting from that alignment. The feelings may reinforce Gavin’s belief that he is a sense-maker whovalues mechanistic explanation, and it is not unreasonable to predict that he may seek out opportunities in hisfuture courses to do more of that sense making. We would hope, for example, that Gavin might begin to look foropportunities to make sense of biological phenomena in mechanistic ways that are authentic to the discipline ofbiology. Alternatively, if Gavin does not have this kind of opportunity in his subsequent life science courses, hemight consider leaving biology for a field that he views as more conducive to mechanistic sense making(Danielak et al., 2013). By way of comparison, an IPLS student who experiences neither Gavin’s frustrationwith biology nor his satisfaction in having explained something important in his physics course may be lesslikely to seek out connections between physics and biology beyond the confines of the IPLS environment.In a course that has as one of its goals the dismantling of disciplinary silos, positive affect associatedwith the role that physics can play in unpacking biological phenomena is of particular importance. Future workis required to establish whether such affect indeed does stabilize a student’s orientation toward interdisciplinarysense making, and to determine if such affect makes it more likely that that student will cross disciplinaryboundaries in the future. But the positive affect is also an end in and of itself. Many prominent scientists haveattributed their motivation to participate in science to those rare but powerful feelings of satisfaction, pleasure,and beauty that accompany the successful reconciliation of various pieces of conceptual understanding. It ispossible for our students to experience similar satisfaction. When defining what it is that we hope our studentswill learn in interdisciplinary courses, we would be well served to consider also what we hope they might feel.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1145© ISLSReferencesDanielak, B. A., Gupta, A., & Elby, A. (2013). The marginalized identities of sense-makers: reframingengineering student retention, 1–76. Submitted for publication.Esmonde, I. (2009). Ideas and entities: Supporting equity in cooperative mathematics learning. Review ofEducational Research, 79, 1008-1043.Gupta, A., Danielak, B. A., & Elby, A. (2010). Understanding students' difficulties in terms of coupledepistemological and affective dynamics. Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE Frontiers in EducationConference, Red Hook, NY: Curran Assoc. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1003.4238Hammer, D., & Elby, A. (2002). On the form of a personal epistemology. In B. Hofer & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.),The Psychology of Beliefs and Knowledge about Knowing. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Hammer, D., & Elby, A. (2003). Tapping epistemological resources for learning physics. The Journal of theLearning Sciences, 12(1), 53–90.Hammer, D., Russ, R., Mikeska, J., & Scherr, R. (2005). Identifying inquiry and conceptualizing students’abilities. In Duschl, R. & Grandy, R. (Eds.), Teaching scientific inquiry. Rotterdam, Netherlands: SensePublishers.Meredith, D. C., & Redish, E. F. (2013) Reinventing physics for life science majors. Physics Today, 66:7, 38-43.Nasir, N. S., & Saxe, G. B. (2003). Ethnic and academic identities: A cultural practice perspective on emergingtensions and their management in the lives of minority students. Educational Researcher, 32(5), 14–18.National Research Council (US). (2003). Bio 2010: Transforming Undergraduate Education for Future ResearchBiologists. National Academy Press.Osbeck, L. M., & Nersessian, N. J. (2010). Forms of Positioning in Interdisciplinary Science Practice and TheirEpistemic Effects. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 40(2), 136–161.Redish, E. F. & Cooke, T. J. (2013). Learning each other’s ropes: Negotiating interdisciplinary authenticity. CellBiology Education – Life Science Education, 12, 175-186. doi:10.1187/cbe.12-09-0147.Watkins, J., & Elby, A. (2013). Context Dependence of Students' Views about the Role of Equations inUnderstanding Biology. CBE-Life Sciences Education, 12(2), 274–286.AcknowledgmentsWe appreciate the feedback from the UMD Physics and Biology Education Research Groups and are gratefulfor the support of Joe Redish, and for substantive discussions with Ben Dreyfus. This work was supported byNSF-TUES DUE 11-22818 and the HHMI NEXUS grant.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1146© ISLS