“Deep Hanging”: Mentors Learning and Teaching in PracticeDéana Scipio, University of Washington, Box 354941, WA 98195-3600, descipio@uw.eduAbstract: This paper is a comparative case study focused on the experiences of mentors in achemical oceanography afterschool program. The study explores “deep hanging”—the termmentors used to describe their experiences learning about the culture of science, scientificresearch processes, as well as learning they could be- and become- scientists. “Deep hanging”entails authentic tasks in rich contexts, providing access, capitalizing on opportunity, andbuilding interpersonal relationships. Data include reconstructive history interviews withmentors and video of their interactions with youth in the afterschool program. The conceptualframework for this paper explores the ways that constellations of situated events lead tochanges in sociomaterial practices overtime. Findings suggest that surfacing and exploringmentors’ self-position with respect to STEM is crucial to understanding how they will positionyouth. These findings have implications for the design of learning environments that seek tobroaden participation for non-dominant groups in the sciences.Major Issues AddressedBringing educators and experts together to create rich disciplinary focused learning environments for youth hasthe potential to broaden youths’ pictures of the types of people who can do science (Barab & Hay, 2001; Hsu etal., 2009; Polman & Miller, 2010). These programs operationalize learning in practice by making ways ofknowing and doing in the sciences visible to youth and engaging them in contemporary scientific practices.Youth from non-dominant communities face barriers to Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics(STEM) learning based upon the ways that they are typically positioned with respect to the domain of science.Postionality with respect to science domains and practices interacts with race, Socio-Economic Status (SES),gender, English language learning, epistemological commitments, family expectations, and cultural repertoiresof practice (Bell et al., 2009; Calabrese Barton, Tan, & Rivet, 2008; Czujko, Ivie & Stith, 2008; Hanson, 2007;Lee, C., 2007; 2008; Lee, O. & Buxton, 2008; Nasir et al., 2006).This paper is a comparative case study focused on the experiences of mentors in a chemicaloceanography afterschool program. This study explores “deep hanging”—the term mentors used to describetheir experiences learning about the culture of science, scientific research processes, as well as learning theycould be-and become- scientists.Potential Significance of the WorkOne approach to building broadening participation programming for youth from non-dominant groups entailsbringing scientists and youth together. Broadening STEM participation is more than teaching youth aboutSTEM practices, it also entails making the mores, expectations, values, and ways of being (Herrenkohl & Mertl,2011) visible to youth. Delpit (1995) would refer to these hidden ways of being as codes of power. One way thatdesigners of learning environments seek to make these codes of power visible is by leveraging experts in STEMfields to serve as mentors for youth. Mentors serve as models to make the practices of sciences visible andaccessible to youth from groups traditionally underrepresented in the sciences. Scientists from non-dominantcommunities who have successfully navigated the societal and disciplinary barriers to participation are in aunique position to help youth understand what else it takes to be and become a scientist. The experiences ofmentors from non-dominant groups have the potential to serve as resources for youth from similar backgroundsentering into the sciences. The rationale is that scientists who have personal experiences with complex scientificpractices are well positioned to make ways of knowing and doing STEM visible to youth.Unfortunately, there is a metaphorical black box around the social and cultural contexts that influencethe developmental trajectories of scientists from non-dominant groups. From the point of view of novices toSTEM fields, this black box obscures disciplinary practices and cultural expectations about STEM domains. Foryouth from non-dominant groups it can make pursing a career in science seem impossible. From the point ofview of scientists from non-dominant groups it can obscure their connections to community. Our lack ofknowledge about the processes that helped mentors come to participate in STEM means that designers oflearning environments are ill equipped to design learning environments that leverage all aspects of mentors’expertise to broaden participation for youth. Understanding what is happening for mentors in spaces whereyouth have access to identity building experiences has implications for the design of informal learningenvironments. As the learning sciences field strives to design “spaces” for youth to gain expertise in thesciences, a focus on knowing & doing is essential but fails to capture all aspects of learning. Studying the waysthat learning environments foster the development of the kinds of people who can do science is integral tounderstanding the ways that they can help youth become the kinds of people who can be scientists.ICLS 2014 Proceedings871© ISLSThis paper seeks to add to the growing literature on learning as identity development and deepeningparticipation (Azevedo, 2013; Baron, 2006; Bricker & Bell, 2014; Herrenkohl & Mertl, 2011; Lee, 2007; Nasir,2002; Nasir & Hand, 2006) to explore natural scientist mentors’ experiences learning they could be and becomescientists. Further, this paper seeks to establish a link between mentor’s personal experiences and the ways theythen want to introduce youth to the complex practices of STEM by focusing on identity development for youthin informal settings. Finally, there are implications for the ways designers, educators and researchers preparementors to work in informal environments designed to broaden STEM participation for youth.Design PrinciplesThe Chemical Oceanography Outside the Lab (COOL) Program is an ongoing collaboration between a Parksand Recreation afterschool space, an oceanography lab, and a Learning Sciences program. COOL is a designbased research initiative to introduce young women of color to practices of the geosciences through engagementwith a six month long chemical oceanography afterschool program. The COOL program echoes designprinciples advanced by The Institute for Science and Math Education (http://sciencemathpartnerships.org/).Designers positioned youth as developing experts and sought to build bridges from youth’s everydayknowledge of science and technology to discipline specific modes of inquiry and participation. Designedlearning spaces brought youth and experts into collaboration to accomplish projects that had personal,community and disciplinary relevance. We believed a learning ecology built around these commitments wouldplace youth and adults into a robust and productive learning environment likely to enable shifts in youthidentification with the domains of science. The theoretical framework used in this paper explores the types ofplaces, actions, and positions that lead to long-term changes in youths’ sociomaterial practices.Sociomaterial practices are social arrangements and material resources that together support particularlines of practice. In the COOL program, we created constellations of social arrangements that included people,materials, and activities to make complex science content. We took a peer reviewed paper about fishfeminization in the Pacific Northwest (Johnson et al., 2008) and created a mapping activity that would allowyouth to collaboratively create a representation of the locations and numbers of feminized dish. Then weoverlaid maps that showed population density and wastewater treatment overflows. Once students participatedin building this representation they came to the same conclusions that the scientists did in the discussion sectionof their paper. This sociomaterial arrangement of materials, people and activities allowed youth to participate indata analysis and think in ways that scientists did about their data.Theoretical and Methodological FrameworkTheoretical FrameworkFigure 1. Cultural Learning Pathways Framework (Bell, Tzou, Bricker, & Baines, 2012).Youth centered learning environments that leverage experts as mentors can offer youth opportunities to thinklike scientists, engage in authentic practices, negotiate identities, answer personally relevant questions, and learnabout disciplinary specific cultural tools (Calabrese Barton, Tan, & Rivet, 2008; Cornelius & Herrenkohl, 2004;Tabak & Baumgartner, 2010; Cornelius & Herrenkohl, 2004; Polman & Miller, 2010). Harré et al. (2009)ICLS 2014 Proceedings872© ISLSdefined positioning as a triangle of speech acts, storylines, and stances taken together these constructs shape theways individuals develop within structures of social practice (Dreier, 2009). Positioning theory frames the waysthat constellations of interpersonal interactions and social learning facilitate shifts in sociomaterial practicesover time (Bell, et al.,2012). The conceptual framework for this paper focuses on the constellations of situatedevents on the right hand side of figure 1 below (Bell et al., 2012). As youth and mentors interact in a learningenvironment designed to allow for co-constructed moments of coordinated participation in chemicaloceanography practices, we can observe the ways that mentors and youth access to places, positions, anddiscourse shape their scopes of possibility. Specifically we can observe ways that mentors’ moves grant youthaccess or constrain opportunities for youth to participate in chemical oceanography practices.ParticipantsThree professional scientists participated in the program as mentors to youth. These mentors were all womenfrom groups traditionally underrepresented in the sciences (one German Latina, one Bolivian American, and oneDiné). They were in the process of or had already attained graduate degrees in the sciences. There were fourteenfemale participants from sixth and eighth grades in the afterschool program (eight African-American, twoWhite, one Filipina, one Asian-American, two Latina).Table 1: Mentor ParticipantsMentorEthnicAffiliationsEducationalBackgroundCurrent PositionEvaGerman &LatinaMS in Aquatic andFisheries SciencesStudent and enrollment services director at localuniversity, Director of a STEM enrichment programJesseeDiné, Hopi &UteMS in Molecular &Upward bound student services educator for localCellular Biologycommunity collegeDevelopmentalBiology; MITSecondary EducationAngelicaBolivianAmericanMS in Botany; MAMuseologyResearch Analyst at Museum Consulting firmThe description of participants would not be complete without a description of my own positionalitywith respect to this project. As an Afro-Caribbean woman, I had many things in common with the largelyAfrican-American eighth grade COOL participants, as we were all members of the African Diaspora. Yet, as anAfro-Caribbean woman and an adult I was not a full community member able to leverage in-group language,references, or certain shared repertoires of practice with the youth participants. Within the COOL program, Iwas a full participant observer. I co-taught and co-designed the curriculum. During COOL sessions, I often tookon the role of lead instructor. With the mentors in the program my role was that of pedagogical mentor andguide into the world of science education. Eva, Jessee, Angelica and I spent many hours debriefing the programsessions. We would talk about individual youth’s developmental learning trajectories, flow of lessons, youthdevelopment, and pedagogical moves. Eva and Jessee have both gone onto teaching roles in the localcommunity and I have continued my role as pedagogical mentor. This largely entails fielding questions aboutproblems of teaching practice, approaches to teaching STEM content, and youth development work.Outside of COOL sessions, I coordinated the program, liaised with mentors, school administrators,teachers, parents, and family members. I organized field trips, managed supplies, made calls to collaborators,and facilitated the successful completion of the COOL program from end to end. These positions gave me aunique perspective on the program activities and an intimate relationship with youth and mentors that had apositive impact on the interviews, my perspective on COOL sessions, and my analysis of program data.MethodsThe data used in this analysis were collected during the second year of the COOL program. Data sources for theanalysis in this paper included field notes of mentor and student interactions, and 1.5 hours of interviews withyouth and adult mentors. The entire data corpus includes over 33 hours of video, field notes for each programsession, mentor and youth written reflections, and 6 hours of interviews. The interviews chosen for this analysiswere the reconstructive history interviews with mentors conducted at the beginning of the COOL program in fall2010. All interviews were transcribed and analyzed using a hybrid of emergent coding and codes built using thecultural learning pathway framework (Bell et al., 2012). This analysis surfaced a mentor generated analyticalconstruct that will be explained in greater detail in the next section.ICLS 2014 Proceedings873© ISLS“Deep Hanging” became an analytical construct for understanding the ways that professional scientistmentors positioned both themselves and the COOL program participants with respect to science: as an enterpriseand as a set of practices. Once a Deep Hanging profile had been built for each mentor, I returned to the video ofmentor and youth interactions from the afterschool program sites and coded for ways that mentors positionedyouth through stances, sociomaterial arrangements, actions. I also leveraged possible future selves (Markus &Nurius,1986) as a way of linking mentors’ past experiences with ways that they envisioned themselves workingwith youth and the ways they were able to see themselves as people who could be and become scientists throughtheir Deep Hanging experiences. We surfaced places, actions, youth, and mentor positions related to STEMpractices.Major Findings, Conclusions and ImplicationsDeep Hanging“Deep Hanging” (DH) was Eva’s term. She used it to describe her learning experiences and the ways that shewas brought into science and recognizing that she could be- and -become a scientist. She referred to the researchcycle—i.e. the things that scientists do to complete a research project—in her description of her learningprocess. Eva maintained that while your advisor should facilitate this process it is actually through theinteraction with peers and “just being part of it” that people learn complex scientific practices. Eva described aprocess of learning in practice. The question of where you can learn to fit into the culture of science was arecurring theme in interviews with other mentors and related directly to the ways they positioned themselveswith respect to science. The following quote is Eva’s response to a question about how people learn complexscience practices.I think part of it is the “deep hanging” that you do. Ideally, it should be through thementorship of your advisor…Your peers are going through the process, you’re discussingthings…So being able to understand where you fit within that cycle, I think comes from justbeing part of it. I think a lot of it is the socialization that happens (Eva, 2011).Eva described a socialization process that does not happen through direct instruction from a more competentother- from your advisor but it actually comes from “just being a part of it.” Learning to be and become ascientist happens in practice. As a research scientist, Eva participated in the culture of science within her lab andused science to make sense of the world.She acknowledged that the professional definition of science that was not made accessible to everyone.“When we say science it has the Western academy picture behind it but that is not the only way of knowing ordoing that helps us make sense of the world” (Eva, 2011). Eva believed that being able to see yourself as thetype of person who can do science was key to the actual practice of doing science, and she is not alone;Herrenkohl & Mertl (2011) also described learning as a process that entailed knowing, doing, and being. Eva’swords challenge us to recognize that knowing and doing are not the only important aspects of becoming ascientist. DH recombines all three components- knowing through doing facilitated by being in relationship withothers.Deep Hanging as Eva described it was a process that helped change her sense of who she could be andbecome. This construct has four interconnected characteristics as Eva described them: Deep Hanging entails 1)authentic tasks in rich contexts, 2) direct access and engagement with novel practices, 3) leveraginginterpersonal relationships to facilitate participation, and 4) interpersonal relationships that encourage shifts inidentity and deepening identification with the discipline. I will use DH going forward to explore the STEMinduction experiences of mentors in the 2011 COOL cohort.Lave & Wenger’s (1991) Legitimate peripheral participation (LPP) might seem like an explanatoryframework that could encompass Deep Hanging. Similar to LPP, DH entails having a purposeful activity withinan ongoing complex practice. Eva was a technician in a local research laboratory and this role meant that shewas engaged in purposeful activity during her interactions in the lab. However, there are a few key differencesbetween LPP and DH. LPP has a definite telos- novices join the community of practice with the intention ofbecoming central participants i.e. moving ever closer to the center of practice. The LPP model when applied tomentoring in STEM presupposes that the goal of STEM education is to produce new STEM practitionersspecifically bench scientists. The “Pipeline” metaphor is an often used to describe the desired outcomes forbroadening participation programs. Blickenstaff’s 2005 literature review describes the reasons that the pipelineintended to carry people from an interest in STEM through high school, college, and into a STEM careerdisproportionately leaks women at multiple points. Given this framing, interventions would aim to plug the“Pipeline” in such as way as to allow women to stay in the pipeline all the way into careers in STEMdisciplines. This framing suggests that people who leave bench science to pursue other STEM related careerpaths (education, communication, or policy) have fallen out of the “leaky” pipeline. By this metric, none of theICLS 2014 Proceedings874© ISLSmentors who participated in the 2011 COOL Cohort would have been qualified to mentor youth because theydid not reach the center of STEM practice. I reject this framing of the COOL mentors because they were eachnegotiating new spaces for continued and broadened participation in STEM fields.The mentors in the COOL program were not passive drips falling out of the STEM pipeline. They wereagentive decision makers who chose to step away from the bench to bring youth into the practices of STEM bysharing their professional and disciplinary expertise. Their goals were to make visible and accessible to youthfrom groups traditionally underrepresented in the sciences the complex practices of science. By sharing theirown journeys into science careers along with lessons learned along the way the COOL mentors shared morethan the master novice relationship with youth in the program. The COOL mentors were pushing for the youthto have had enough experience with STEM practices and identities to make an informed decision about whatthey wanted out of their own interactions with STEM. Their stance echoes a more expansive version of STEMliteracy advanced by Noah Feinstein (2009, 2010) and Joseph Polman et al., (2012) who suggest that STEMliteracy needs to be functional in the lives of students as community members and individuals making decisionsthat have impacts on their health, communities, and career trajectories.Both Angelica and Eva had mentors who provided direct access to novel practices. They both choose toengage in those practices with their mentors. Angelica spent time reading articles with her mentor in a contextwhere she felt comfortable and encouraged to ask questions and develop new skills. Eva was invited toparticipate in lab meetings and join the full practice that was taking place in her research lab above and beyondher role as a scientist. Deep hanging also hinges upon interpersonal relationships in a nuanced way.Relationships with experts who serve as mentors helped Eva, Angelica, and Jessee deepen their participation inSTEM pursuits. Jessee found her mentor in middle school. Her mentor spoke with Jessee’s parents about lettingher join a summer science program for girls. While their mentors provided access, it was up to Jessee, Eva, andAngelica to decide take up these practices. The other aspect of relationships translates directly into the COOLspace. For Eva, Jessee and Angelica, relationships with scientists helped to shape their ideas of who they couldbe- and become. Eva got to know the scientist in her lab while they were working together on purposefulproject; “there was that interpersonal space being brought into your professional setting. I really got to knowthem and to understand why they were in graduate school” (Eva, 2011).Within Project COOL, findings from analyses of the impact of mentor Deep Hanging with youth showyouths’ broadening understanding of what it meant to participate in STEM, growing sense of identity asparticipants in the work of the chemical oceanography laboratory, and more generally an identification with thediscipline. Findings on mentor learning indicate that mentors made shifts in their pedagogical and sociomaterialpractices throughout the course of their involvement. In alignment with the cultural learning pathwaysframework (Bell et al., 2012) we saw changes in the interests and concerns of mentors, as well as the ways inwhich they coordinated participation in activities and deepened social relationships. This in turn allowed formentors to reflect on how their identities as scientists, mentors, and educators changed through theirparticipation in the hybrid learning environment.What Deep Hanging Means for Mentors Positioning ThemselvesThe mentors in our program had their own complicated relationships with science. Mentors described the effectsof the black box on their self-positioning with respect to science and the sense of responsibility they felt to theircommunities. Eva described science as a selfish proposition and one that caused culture clash “often inacademic science, it’s a very selfish endeavor that really goes against the grain…that’s not the values we wereraised with so you know there’s lots of culture clash when you to get to academia” (Eva, 2010). Here Eva wasdiscussing the ways that she found it difficult to reconcile her identities as an agent of change for her communityand as a bench scientist.COOL connected with Jessee, Eva, and Angelica, as they were each choosing to veer off of thetraditional STEM career pipeline. Jessee came to our program after deciding to change her career path from aPhD in bench science to leaving with a Masters in science to join the Masters in Teaching (MIT) program at thesame university. She used her hours in COOL to count towards the mandatory student contact hours necessaryto enter the MIT program. Eva has just finished a Masters degree in fisheries science and was transitioning intoa position in a laboratory as outreach and education manager. Angelica was finishing a Masters degree inbiology and transitioning into a Masters in museology. These transitions away from exclusively pursuing benchscience were connected to changing positioning for all three women (see Table 1 above).Eva was the most directly aware of the impact of privileging the Western definition of science whenworking with youth from communities traditionally underrepresented in STEM.There are people within the western academy who want to hold on to the profession, to thedefinition of science. I’ve seen that play out in a couple of different ways. What I think is soimportant for the girls’ identity building is to see that they can do science, that there is anoption, and that the practices they engage in are like science- in this way. When we sayICLS 2014 Proceedings875© ISLSscience it has the western academy picture behind it but that is not the only way of knowing ordoing that helps us make sense of the world (Eva, 2011).In the above quote Eva positioned herself as someone who pays attention to privileged ways of knowing withinthe Western academy’s definition of science but goes beyond to incorporate other ways of STEM sense making.This was a storyline for Eva, where she saw herself as a type of person who challenged what it meant to engagein science and inherently as the kind of person who facilitates a broader sense of learning for the youth sheworks with. Part of this came from Eva’s position as a woman of color whose role as community builder was acentral part of her identity, part of this stance came from her journey of learning a disciplinary specific set ofscientific practices, and all of these things came into play as she took up her role in the COOL program.Deep Hanging played a role in the lives of other mentors as well. Angelica came to the COOL programseeking to learn more about teaching science. She was finishing up her work in a biology lab with a Mastersdegree although she also came into the program seeking a PhD. Angelica was applying to a museology programat the same university. Angelica described a similar process of finding a mentor who helped her see herself asthe kind of person who could be and become a scientist. However Angelica’s learning in practice did not happenat the lab bench. Angelica foregrounded the sense of encouragement and comfort level she felt havingconversations with her ecology professor about scientific papers. When she met with her mentor they wouldread and discuss articles together. Angelica described this time as pivotal to her development as a scientistbecause this helped her to feel confident as a consumer of scientific research. This comfort led her to envision arole for herself in creating scientific research.These Deep Hanging experiences played out in the ways that mentors worked with youth in COOL.For Eva this meant that she valued the downtime, always came early to spend time with youth before theprogram started, and excelled at pulling in these of things into the COOL activities. Once the young womenwere talking about curling their hair and later in the day Eva used curlers as an analogy to describe the internalmake-up of the Gas Chromatography machine. Angelica’s DH experience meant that she was attuned to seekingand creating a sense of comfort paid most attention to the quietest participants and made sure that all studentsfelt comfortable participating in games and scientific discussions. Angelica leveraged her language expertiseand spoke Spanish with youth to make it more comfortable for them to participate in activities and encouragedthem to share their ideas with the group.What Deep Hanging Means for the Ways that Mentors Position YouthThe mentors all came to the COOL program at a time when they were questioning their own position withrespect to STEM careers. Angelica and Jessee were particularly disillusioned as a result of negative interactionswith their academic advisors- who were also running the labs they were participating in. They were in essenceflirting with stepping outside of the black box. This tension made these mentors particularly aware of the waysthat COOL as a broadening participation effort positioned youth. Broadening participation efforts can be builtupon assimilationist metaphors, and focus on making sure that youth from non-dominant groups gain access todominant ways of learning in practice. The COOL mentors viewed broadening participation in more expansiveways. Their vision included broadening the concept of what it meant to participate in STEM, suggesting that theways that mentors position themselves with respect to science is crucial to understanding how they will go on toposition youth.All of the mentors in the program talked about the ways that they wanted the youth to see themselvesas capable of becoming scientists. Youth from non-dominant groups may look at the black box of STEM fromafar and make a decision without any knowledge of what kinds of possibilities it might hold. In essence mentorswanted to make sure that youth could make choices about participating in STEM careers with knowledge ofwhat was inside the black box. In response to a question about the role she wanted to play Angelica said shewanted to:Just to be the kind of person that would excite students about a subject and then make themfeel that you know they could do it to and feel that they could really go on and be successfulor even just think that they could be a masters student or a doctoral student. Kind of like aguide, that’s how I saw myself (Angelica, 2010).Another mentor, Jessee put it this way:“Or even for them to realize, hey I don’t really like science, I can do science. But it’s notsomething I want to …to be able to actually comprehend the long term interest in sciencewould be amazing, for me to see that, and to actually see that that’s actually possible” (Jessee,2010).Neither mentor discussed the pipeline as a goal nor STEM careers as the endpoint for youth STEMICLS 2014 Proceedings876© ISLSparticipation. They wanted youth to leave the program with a new storyline about themselves as scienceparticipants who could go on to learn and do more science. Mentors’ picture of broadening STEM participationfor the youth in our program connected more deeply to the concept of “possible future selves” (Markus &Nurius, 1986).Positioning youth as people capable of doing science and becoming scientists as opposed to futurescientists within existing STEM paradigms balances the need to honor student agency while creating authenticaccess points to discipline-linked STEM participation. The mentors in our program were uniquely positioned tomanage this tension. Here mentors’ own experiences with learning scientific practices and managing tensionsbetween assimilationist models and making their own meaning comes out. Jessee’s comments highlight thistension, “ hey, I don’t really like science, I can do science” demonstrates this nuanced picture of what she wantsfor the students she mentors. Mentors in COOL pushed youth to find science personally relevant without lettinggo of the scientific rigor and this led to youth participants making comments like “scientists do what we did,”when we asked them to describe a scientist in follow up interviews.ImplicationsThe above findings- specifically the role of Deep Hanging in shaping mentors’ motivations can help us betterunderstand what mentors are trying to do when they work with youth. By engaging mentors in reconstructivehistory interviews about their STEM induction experiences we can gain insight into the ways that they will workwith young people. As a design strategy we have turned mentors into reflective practitioners with the ability tothink about their own experiences of learning in practice. With programs like COOL, our design goal is to getyouth into the black box, or at a vantage point to the black box for long enough to make informed decisionsabout their continued STEM participation. To achieve these ends, we want scientists with expansive attitudes tobroadening participation and what it means to participate in STEM. Within the world of teacher education theapprenticeship of observation (Grossman, 1991) is the term used to describe the link between an individual’shistories of learning which in turn prepare them to work with learners in particular ways. This study intimatesthat this holds true for disciplinary mentors. They learned they could be and become scientists through DeepHanging and used this construct to position and work with youth in the afterschool program.Warren, Ogonowski, and Pothier (2003) explained that researchers and teachers in their work withyoung people from non-dominant communities in the sciences, "had to work at learning to see and hear theintellectual substance” (p. 143) in their students’ contributions. This reframing from "student as deficit" toplacing the onus on teachers and researchers to remediate their visions of science learning and participation is avaluable change. It requires adults working with youth to make changes rather than expecting youth to do thisalone. Thus creating another hybrid space where youth and disciplinary expert perceptions and participation arehonored. The findings of this study go a step further to encourage the design of environments where mentors canposition themselves as bridge builders not gatekeepers. Broadening participation in COOL means more than justteaching youth to do the things mentors or scientists do. It also means broadening the picture of what it means toparticipate in STEM.Asking questions about disciplinary expert meaning making in programs intended to broadenparticipation is one way to begin this work. Future work could chart the ways that disciplinary experts areprepared to leverage youths’ cultural and out of school identities into STEM learning contexts by exploring theirpast STEM learning experiences. Additionally, we can work to understand how experts and youth position oneanother with respect to STEM disciplines. Finally, we can look into the ways experts view the STEM practicesof youth in relation to their own disciplinary practices.ReferencesAzevedo, F. S. (2011). Lines of Practice: A Practice-Centered Theory of Interest Relationships. Cognition andInstruction, 29(2), 147–184.Barab, S. A. & Hay, K. E. (2001). Doing science at the elbows of experts: Issues related to the scienceapprenticeship camp. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(1), 70–102.Barron, B. (2006). Interest and Self-Sustained Learning as Catalysts of Development: A Learning EcologyPerspective. Human Development, 49(4), 193–224.Bell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A., & Feder, M. (eds.) (2009). Diversity and Equity. In Learning Science inInformal Environments: People, Places and Pursuits (pp. 209-247). Washington, DC: NationalAcademy Press.Bell, P., Tzou, C., Bricker, L., & Baines, A. M. D. (2012). Learning in Diversities of Structures of SocialPractice: Accounting for How, Why and Where People Learn Science. Human Development, 55, 269284.Blickenstaff, J. C. (2005). Women and science careers: leaky pipeline or gender filter? Gender and Education,17(4), 369–386.Bricker, L. A., & Bell, P. (2014). “What comes to mind when you think of science? The perfumery!”:ICLS 2014 Proceedings877© ISLSDocumenting science-related cultural learning pathways across contexts and timescales. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 51, 3, 260-285.Calabrese Barton, A., Tan, E., & Rivet, A. (2008). Creating Hybrid Spaces for Engaging School Science AmongUrban Middle School Girls. American Educational Research Journal, 45(1), 68–103.Cornelius, L. L., & Herrenkohl, L. R. (2004). Power in the Classroom : How the Classroom EnvironmentShapes Students’ Relationships With Each Other and With Concepts. Cognition and Instruction, 22(4),467–498.Czujko, R., Ivie, R., & Stith, J. H. (2008). Untapped Talent: The African American Presence in Physics and theGeosciences (p. 1–22). College Park, MD.Delpit, L. D. (1995). Other people's children: Cultural conflict in the classroom. New York: New Press.Dreier, O. (2009). Persons in Structures of Social Practice. Theory & Psychology, 19(2), 193–212.Feinstein, N. (2009). Prepared for What? Why Teaching “Everyday Science” Makes Sense. Phi Delta Kappan,762– 766.Feinstein, N. (2010). Salvaging science literacy. Science Education, 95(1), 168–185.Grossman,P. L. (1991). Overcoming the Apprenticeship of Observation in Teacher EducationCoursework. Teaching and Teacher Education, 7, 4, 345-57.Harré, R., Moghaddam, F. M., Cairnie, T. P., Rothbart, D., & Sabat, S. R. (2009). Recent Advances inPositioning Theory. Theory & Psychology, 19(1), 5–31.Hanson, S. L. (2007). Success in Science Among Young African American Women: The Role of MinorityFamilies. Journal of Family Issues, 28(3), 3–33.Herrenkohl, L. R., & Mertl, V. (2010). How students come to be, know, and do  : A case for a broad view oflearning. New York: Cambridge University Press.Hsu, P., Roth, W., & Mazumder, A. (2009). Natural Pedagogical Conversations in High School Students ’Internship. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(5), 481–505.Johnson, L. L., Lomax, D. P., Myers, M. S., Olson, O. P., Sol, S. Y., O’Neill, S. M., … Collier, T. K. (2008).Xenoestrogen exposure and effects in English sole (Parophrys vetulus) from Puget Sound, WA.Aquatic Toxicology (Amsterdam, Netherlands), 88(1), 29–38.Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1979). Laboratory life: The social construction of scientific facts. Beverly Hills:Sage Publications.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning : legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge [England];New York: Cambridge University Press.Lee, C. D. (2007). Culture, literacy & learning: Taking bloom in the midst of the whirlwind. New York, NY:Teachers College Press.Lee, O., & Buxton, C. (2008). Science Curriculum and Student Diversity : A Framework for EquitableLearning Opportunities. The Elementary School Journal, 109(2), 123–137.Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible Selves. American Psychologist, 41(9), 954–969.Nasir, N.S. (2002). Identity , Goals , and Learning : Mathematics in Cultural Practice. Mathematical Thinkingand Learning, 4(2), 213– 247.Nasir, N. S., & Hand, V. M. (2006). Exploring Sociocultural Perspectives on Race , Culture , and Learning.Review of Educational Research, 76(4), 449–475. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/412441Nasir, N.S., Rosebery, A. S., Warren, B., & Lee, C. D. (2006). Learning as a Cultural Process: Achieving Equitythrough Diversity. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (1ST ed.,pp. 489–504). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge University Press.Polman, J., & Miller, D. (2010). Changing Stories: Trajectories of Identification Among African AmericanYouth in a Science Outreach Apprenticeship. American Educational Research Journal, 47, 4, 879-918.Polman, J., Newman, A., Farrar, C., & Saul, E. W. (2012). Science Journalism. Science Teacher, 79, 1, 44-47.Tabak, I., & Baumgartner, E. (2010). The Teacher as Partner : Exploring Participant Structures , Symmetry ,and Identity Work in Scaffolding. Cognition and Instruction, 22(4), 393–429.Warren, B., Ogonowski, M., & Pothier, S. (2003). “Everyday” and “Scientific”: Rethinking Dichotomies inmodes of thinking in science learning. In A. Nemirovsky, A. S. Rosebery, J. Solomon, & B. Warren(Eds.), Everyday matters in mathematics and science education (pp. 119–152). Mahwah, N.J.:Erlbaum.AcknowledgmentsThis work is supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF#9014483) and is partly supportedby the Learning in Informal and Formal Environments (LIFE) Science of Learning Center (http://life-slc.org/)(NSF# 0354453). All opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed here are those of the author. I would alsolike to thank my advisor Dr. Philip Bell, my research team- ESTG, and Shelley Stromholt my researchcollaborator.ICLS 2014 Proceedings878© ISLS