Two Systems, Two Stances:A Novel Theoretical Framework for Game-Based LearningMario M. Martinez-Garza and Douglas B. ClarkPeabody College of Education and Human Development at Vanderbilt UniversityPeabody #230, 230 Appleton Pl. Nashville, TN 37203-5721, USAmario.m.martinez@vanderbilt.edu, doug.clark@vanderbilt.eduAbstract: Recent reviews of the research on game-based learning agree that digital games aspedagogical tools add limited value. A more sophisticated theory of learning is clearlyrequired to advance game-based learning research. This poster presents our efforts toconceptualize game-based learning within a more general framework for human cognition, the“two-system” model. Our extension of this model mechanistically explains some of thecomplexities of game-based educational research and provides several potentially interestingresearch vectors.Introduction and GoalsReform perspectives on science education highlight the role of models in promoting student learning(Committee on Science Learning, 2007). Computer simulations are useful for modeling complex processes andrelationships which are difficult to observe directly (Windschitl & Andre, 1998). Clark, Nelson, Sengupta &D’Angelo (2010) argue that digital games can be accurately described as simulations encased within game-likestructures to increase student engagement, provide effective feedback, and promote self-efficacy. However,recent reviews have suggested that digital games provide only limited educational benefits (Young et al., 2012).The increasing sophistication of educational games promises to improve their outcomes, however, a unifyingcausal model that explains how people learn from games has remained elusive.The goal of our proposed framework is to support a more sophisticated understanding of how and whatpeople learn from digital games. We are motivated by the strong contrast between recent scholarship that findslittle evidence that people learn much from digital games (Young et al., 2012). Opposite to that finding is theobservation that players inhabit rich ecologies of knowledge about the games they play (Gee, 2007). Thedisconnect between the relatively low efficacy of games for learning and the often-impressive feats of cognitionand inquiry observed by gamers “in the wild” motivates us to develop a more robust theoretical framework.Software Models and Mental ModelsAside from principles related to multimedia learning, mental models are frequently featured as the causalmechanism behind learning outcomes from digital games. The proposed mechanism for game-based learning isthat students purposefully investigate the digital environment, “try hard to make sense” of it, and the product oftheir effort is a “coherent mental model” (Moreno, Mayer, Spires, & Lester, 2001, p. 185). This model enablesstudents to solve problems both within the game and at a later time and in different context.Our premise is that players do not necessarily form accurate mental analogues of the software modelsthat drive the phenomena they experience in-game (i.e. the encased “simulation”); rather, they create a secondorder model (i.e. a “simulacrum”) that is oriented towards explaining the functioning of the simulation,predicting future states, and allowing the user to feel she understands the simulation and is in control of it.“Learner” Stance and “Player” StanceA person might have two distinct goals when engaging with their simulacrum. The first is to understand thesimulation, its objects and relationships. The second is to use the simulacrum as a laboratory where actions canbe planned and evaluated in terms of their effectiveness at creating a desired state. A student playing a digitalgame is constantly shifting in stance between (a) a problem-solver seeking a specific desired outcome, i.e.winning, and (b) an explorer purposefully and systematically investigating the operating principles of the virtualenvironment. These two sets of goals imply different forms of thinking. A user in the inquiry (or “learner”)stance might probe the simulation for information that confirms their understanding. A user in the mastery (or“player”) stance might engage in exploratory actions and observing if these actions lead to positive results.The 2SM in ActionThe interaction between the simulation and the simulacrum can be conceptualized using a two-system model ofcognition (see Evans, 2008). Two-system models of cognition distinguish between effortless thought, or“intuition”, and deliberate purposeful “reasoning”. These modes of cognition are neutrally labeled as System 1and System 2, respectively. The former is described as fast, automatic, associative, emotional, and opaque; theICLS 2014 Proceedings1657© ISLSlatter as slower, controlled, serial and self-aware. In our framework, we associate System 1 with the “player”stance and System 2 with the “learner” stance.Starting from the two-system model of cognition, we propose this mechanistic explanation for howpeople play and learn from digital games. A person begins play, and a goal will be suggested to the player’sthinking, immediately triggering a self-query, “how do I achieve this goal?” The self-query shifts the persontowards the learning stance, and in response to the query a simulacrum is constructed. This simulacrum’sfunctional requirement is that it suggests actions that will bring the simulation closer to the goal state. Theseactions are rendered as execution steps (”Do that”) and enacted in the simulation through the game’s interface.Actions that prove effective are reinforced and actions that have a negative effect are rephrased as avoidancesteps (”Don’t do that”). With repeated reinforcement, effective rules are matched to the context cues from theenvironment, and stored as conditionals, i.e. “If this, do that.” These conditionals are easy to remember, quick toaccess, and require nearly no cognitive effort to execute: they fit the functional definition of heuristics.Whenever the player finds themselves in a situation that is covered by one of her stored rules, she willin most cases default to doing what that rule stipulates. In other cases, the person must shift to a learning stance,reinstate the simulacrum and use it to find new possible actions. The simulacrum that is rebuilt is based on theone last used, since reinforcement of effective actions also reinforces the simulacrum that suggested that action.If the player is never without a rule to apply, the simulacrum is deactivated as the person defaults to System 1style processing, i.e. fast, effortless, intuitive heuristics. Through play, a person gathers three forms ofknowledge about the game: (a) the conditions that the game presents, (b) a set of heuristics, i.e. rules of actionwhose activation criteria match these conditions, and (c) a simulacrum, or second-order mental model, of howthe game produces the conditions.Implications and Possible Lines of ResearchThe baseline assumption of mental-model accounts of game-based learning is that once learners form theirmental models, these models remain available in other contexts. Our framework problematizes that assumptionsince simulacra, like all System 2 processes, are pre-empted by System 1 processes such as rules and heuristicswhenever these are available (Schwartz & Black, 1996). Given that System 1 is the preferred mode for everydaythought, it is unlikely that students retain a mental model that is useful in new contexts. How then can designersdisrupt the learners’ natural tendency to discard simulacra and reason from heuristics?One possible approach is to design an educational game that is constantly offering new goals as well asrules and constraints. Since the player cannot cope with them using existing heuristics, she must shift back intothe learner stance, reinstating the simulacrum. If this happens frequently enough, the student may eventuallybecome habituated to reasoning from a context-unbound mental model, rather than context-bound heuristics.This may result in greater availability of the mental model for problem-solving in other contexts. This designapproach suggests a radically different form of educational game, featuring a constantly increasing novelty,escalating complexity, and tighter coupling between the player’s goals and the software model. Our firstchallenge is to build a game upon these two principles, and assess its effectiveness vis-à-vis alternative designs.ReferencesClark, D. B., Nelson, B., Sengupta, P., & D’Angelo, C. (2009). Rethinking science learning through digitalgames and simulations: Genres, examples, and evidence. In Learning science: Computer games,simulations, and education workshop sponsored by the National Academy of Sciences, Washington.Committee on Science Learning, Kindergarten through Eighth Grade (2007). Taking Science to School:Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8. (R. A. Duschl, H. A. Schweingruber, & A. W. Shouse,Eds.). Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Evans, J. S. B. T. (2008) Dual-processing accounts of reasoning, judgment, and social cognition. Annual Reviewof Psychology, 59, 255-278.Gee, J.P. (2007) Good video games and good learning: Collected essays on video games, learning, and literacy.New York: Peter Lang Publishing.Moreno, R., Mayer, R. E., Spires, H. A., Lester, J. C. (2001). The case for social agency in computer-basedteaching: Do students learn more deeply when they interact with animated pedagogical agents?Cognition and Instruction, 19(2), 177-213.Schwartz, D. L., & Black, J. B. (1996). Shuttling between depictive models and abstract rules: Induction andfallback. Cognitive Science, 20(4), 457–497.Windschitl, M., & Andre, T. (1998). Using computer simulations to enhance conceptual change: The roles ofconstructivist instruction and student epistemological beliefs. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,35(2), 145–160.Young, M. F., Slota, S., Cutter, A. B., Jalette, G., Mullin, G., Lai, B., Simeoni, Z., Tran, M., & Yukhymenko,M. (2012). Our Princess Is in Another Castle: A review of trends in serious gaming for education.Review of Educational Research, 82(1), 61–89. doi:10.3102/0034654312436980ICLS 2014 Proceedings1658© ISLS