Learner Alignment with Expansive Framing as a Driver of TransferDiane P. Lam, Adam Mendelson, Xenia S. Meyer, Lloyd Goldwasser,University of California, Berkeley, 4646 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CAdianelam@berekley.edu, amendelson@berekley.edu, xenia.meyer@berkeley.edu, goldwasser@berkeley.eduAbstract: Recent theoretical perspectives on transfer highlight the active role of learners intransferring knowledge. In this study, we focus on the learner by exploring the possibility thatwhen learners align their actions and beliefs with expansive framing, they are more likely totransfer knowledge from one context to another. We define expansive framing as theperspective that learning is connected to other times, places, participants, and topics, and thatthe role of students is to generate and share knowledge. We examine the degree to which highschool biology students aligned themselves with this perspective. Using correlational anddiscourse analyses of students’ performance on transfer assessments in relation to theirperceptions of the expansive relevance of their class, we present evidence of a relationshipbetween alignment with expansive framing and transfer. Students who perceived greatertemporal relevance across past experiences, current learning, and future opportunitiesdisplayed the highest levels of transfer.IntroductionResearch on transfer of learning has a century-long history, dominated primarily by laboratory experiments anda cognitive perspective that views transfer as dependent on the characteristics of learners’ mental representations(e.g., Gentner, 1983; Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Reeves & Weisberg, 1994; Ross, 1984). In recent years, a new setof perspectives has emerged including actor-oriented transfer (Lobato, 2012), preparation for future learning(Bransford & Schwartz, 1999), consequential transitions (Beach, 1999), dispositional and motivational views(e.g., Belenky & Nokes-Malach, 2012; Perkins & Salomon, 2012), and expansive framing (Engle, 2006; Engle,Lam, Meyer, & Nix, 2012; Engle, Ngyuen, & Mendelson, 2011). A key feature of these perspectives is a greaterfocus on the role of the learner in transfer, and the importance of more than purely cognitive factors.This paper focuses on one of these contemporary approaches: expansive framing, as an explanation fortransfer. The underlying premise of this approach is that transfer is facilitated when learners perceive instructionas part of larger intellectual conversations that extend across contexts, and perceive themselves as capable ofand accountable for contributing to those conversations (Engle, 2006; Engle at al., 2011). It is hypothesized thatinstruction that is expansively framed promotes these learners’ perceptions and beliefs of intercontextualitybetween learning and potential transfer opportunities, which then triggers social and cognitive mechanisms thatlead to transfer (Engle et al., 2012). Our prior research has focused primarily on expansive framing from theinstructor’s perspective and how he or she can frame a learning environment to promote transfer (Engle, 2006;Engle et al., 2011). In this paper, we turn our attention away from the discursive moves through whichinstructors can expansively frame instruction, and focus directly on the perceptions and beliefs of learners in anexpansively framed biology classroom. This shift in focus is motivated by the observation that a teacher'spedagogical moves matter only to the extent that these moves are perceived and taken up by students andincorporated into their practices.We investigated the degree to which students in this classroom aligned their own actions and beliefswith expansive framing, and compared their level of alignment with their performance on transfer measures. Wefound converging evidence of relationships between student alignment with expansive framing and transfer,supporting the premise that learners’ perceptions and beliefs of the extended relevance of learning arefundamental for transfer. In our discussion we consider how the instructional approach used by the teacher mayhave influenced those crucial perceptions and beliefs.Background and Theoretical FrameworkAn Emerging Focus on the Learner in Contemporary Transfer ResearchThe role of learners’ perceptions and beliefs in transfer has been gaining increasing attention from transferresearchers in recent years. Perhaps the most fully developed learner-focused perspective on transfer is JoanneLobato’s (2012) actor-oriented transfer (AOT). Dissatisfied with the limits of traditional transfer measures,Lobato aims to “understand the interpretative nature of the connections that people construct between learningand transfer situations” independently of whether or not those connections are expected or deemed appropriateby researchers (p. 239). From this perspective, analyses of transfer provide insight about other ways in whichstudents draw on prior learning.ICLS 2014 Proceedings689© ISLSJames’ (2008) study on transfer between writing tasks designed to be similar or dissimilar illustratesthe benefits of taking an AOT approach. Student interviews showed that students considered many dimensionsof the tasks that the researcher had not considered, and that different students identified different similarities anddifferences between tasks. Independently of which of two tasks each individual student completed, there weregreater levels of transfer by students who perceived their assigned task to be similar to instruction than bystudents who perceived their task as different. This finding suggests that transfer depends on subjectiveperceptions of similarity more so than researcher-assumed objective similarities (Day & Goldstone, 2012; Pea,1987).Perkins and Salomon (2012) call for a focus on the learner by considering learner motivations anddispositions in relation to transfer. They claim that the bulk of transfer research focuses on “learners’ ability tomake the [researcher’s] desired connection” while ignoring the learners’ “motivation or disposition to do so” (p.253). Belenky and Nokes-Malach (2012) illustrate the importance of these factors in their investigation ofachievement goals in relation to transfer. Subjects’ achievement goals were measured before and while engagingin different activities about statistical concepts. The researchers found that students who displayed higher levelsof motivation to develop long-term competence and understanding of statistics, and higher senses of personalrelevance and contribution while engaging in activities displayed higher levels of transfer. Together this body ofwork suggests that transfer is highly dependent on the individual learner, and his or her orientation towards whatis being learned and transferred.The Learner in Expansive FramingWe use the term framing to refer to the discursive moves through which interlocutors propose and alignthemselves with expectations regarding the nature of the interaction in which they are engaged (Bateson, 1972;Goffman, 1974; Tannen, 1993). Framing consists of primarily linguistic cues that index schema of types ofinteractions (Gumperz, 1982; Ochs, 1996; Tannen, 1993) and activate cognitive resources associated with thoseschema (Hammer, Elby, Scherr, & Redish, 2005). We refer to framing as expansive when it proposesintercontextuality (e.g., Floriani, 1994; Gee & Green, 1998), or connections between the current interaction andothers (Engle, 2006; Engle et al., 2012; Engle et al., 2011). For example, a classroom teacher can expansivelyframe a lesson by presenting it as an opportunity for students to take on knowledgeable roles withincommunities in which they may participate throughout their lives. Doing so expands the scope of the lesson byproposing its relevance across time, space, and social configurations. It is thought that transfer is facilitatedwhen learners perceive and believe in this expanded relevance (Brown, 1989; Greeno, Smith, & Moore, 1993;Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, 1983; Pea, 1987). When learners hold these perceptions andbeliefs, we say that they are aligned with expansive framing, and we present data in this paper that indicate thatthis alignment is indeed related to transfer.Table 1. Intercontextualities created by expansive framing and mechanisms for how each may lead to transfer.Contextual aspectProposed intercontextualityTransfer mechanismTime: When is thelesson happening?The lesson is part of an ongoing activitythat started in the past and will continueinto the future.Students draw on prior knowledge during thelesson. They learn content expecting to be ableto use it in the future.Place: Where is ithappening?The lesson is relevant outside theclassroom (e.g. to rest of school, homes,local community, places around theworld, other institutions, etc.).Students draw on experiences from otherplaces during the lesson. They learn currentcontent expecting it to be applicable in otherplaces.Participants:Whoparticipating?isThe lesson is relevant to a broadcommunity that extends throughout andbeyond the classroom.Students consider the relevance of interactionswith others during the lesson. They learncurrent content expecting it to be of interest toothers.Topics: What isthe topical scopeof the lesson?The lesson is part of larger andinterrelated units, topics, and subjectareas.Students see connections between the lessonand other topics they have studied and willstudy.Roles: How arelearnerspositionedintellectually?Learners are authors who areresponsible for developing, sharing, anddefending their own ideas.Students feel accountable for using and sharingthe ideas they author. They may also adopt thepractice of generating and adapting ideas toattempt to solve novel problems.Empirical work on expansive framing has identified five different aspects of learning contexts thatinstructors can frame expansively: time, place, participants, topics, and roles (Engle, 2006; Engle et al., 2011).ICLS 2014 Proceedings690© ISLSMore recently, Engle and her colleagues (2012) proposed several explanations for how expansive framing canpromote transfer. Drawing on this body of research, the following table presents the intercontextual links thatare proposed when each of the five aspects is expansively framed, as well as explanations of how learners’alignment with these proposals is believed to promote transfer (Table 1).MethodsIn this paper, we investigate the idea that what ultimately matters for transfer is the degree to which learnersalign themselves with expansive framing. We focus on relationships between learners’ alignment withexpansive framing, captured through surveys and interviews, and their performance on learning and transferassessments. We use correlational analyses of surveys and transfer assessments to investigate the relationshipbetween learner alignment with expansive framing and transfer. Through qualitative analysis of interviews, weexplore patterns in the expressions of alignment of students who demonstrated different levels of transfer.Research Context: An Expansively Framed Biology ClassThe data presented in this paper come from a larger, mixed-methods study on framing and transfer in theclassroom of an experienced and award winning high school biology teacher who we refer to as Mr. Kent. Wefirst began observing Mr. Kent’s classroom in 2008, at which time we recognized many key aspects ofexpansive framing in his instruction (Engle, Meyer, Clark, White, & Mendelson, 2010). Through our prolongedcollaboration with Mr. Kent, we believe that the degree to which his instruction embodies our framework hasincreased over time (Engle et al., 2012). This paper focuses specifically on Mr. Kent’s second period biologyclass consisting of 32 freshmen and sophomores (22 girls, 10 boys) at a San Francisco Bay Area high schoolduring the 2010-2011 school year.Data Collection and AnalysisWe draw from three data sources in this paper: (1) a series of written assessments, to measure student learningand transfer of knowledge related to osmosis and diffusion; (2) student surveys, to measure student alignmentwith expansive framing as well as their recognition of Mr. Kent’s use of expansive framing in his instruction;and (3) student interviews, to capture more detailed student expressions of alignment with expansive framing.Assessments of Learning and TransferOur analysis of transfer for this paper is based on four written assessments about osmosis and diffusion, aconcept that is fairly difficult for students to master (Christianson & Fisher, 1999) and therefore to transfer(Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000). The pre- and post-assessments were administered before and after theinstructional unit on osmosis and diffusion and were identical for the purpose of recording changes in studentknowledge of the focal content. The initial transfer assessment was administered several months after the posttest, and the follow-up assessment (which measured both transfer and retention) was administered nearly twoyears later, in 2013 (see Figure 1). Seventeen of the original 32 students from the focal class completed thefollow-up assessment.Figure 1. Timeline of written assessments in relation to the instructional unit on osmosis and diffusion.Questions on the initial and follow-up transfer assessments presented students with a variety ofscenarios about concentration gradients that were designed to be more or less analogous to what students hadalready learned in class (Gick & Holyoak, 1983). Some questions had a similar structure and referred to contentthat was discussed during the instructional unit. Other questions included content areas not yet addressed inclass, and required students to recognize the role of concentration gradients in the problem before being able tosolve it. Still others posed a different kind of task, such as drawing a diagram rather than selecting frommultiple-choice answers.Our analysis of transfer was based on knowledge elements related to osmosis and diffusion that werereflected in students’ responses to assessment questions. We use the term “knowledge element” (KE) to refer toan individual fact or proposition that forms part of the normative understanding of a larger conceptual principle(Engle et al., 2011; Renkema 2004; van Dijk & Kintsch 1983). In our coding scheme, we identified seven ofICLS 2014 Proceedings691© ISLSKEs that together represented the targeted level of understanding of osmosis and diffusion. Students’ relativemastery and application of KEs was assessed through their identification of the outcome of a problem scenarioby selecting a multiple-choice answer, and their explanation of that outcome in a written response. Two of theauthors coded the responses independently, and compared codings to measure interrater reliability. Alldifferences were resolved by mutual agreement. Interrater reliability was 0.937, giving a Cohen's Kappa of0.861.As a baseline measure of each student's knowledge about osmosis and diffusion that was available fortransfer, we adopted the total set of all KEs that were coded for each student on any of the questions of the postassessment. That is, if a student’s response was coded for a particular KE on any item on the post-test, thatstudent was identified as having that KE available to transfer. We were then able to compare this baseline withstudents’ answers to each of the questions on the initial and follow-up transfer assessments. We calculated eachindividual student’s transfer by question as the number of KEs received for the particular transfer questiondivided by the number of total post-assessment KEs. The student's initial transfer score was then computed asthe average of the nine ratios. The formula used to calculate transfer for each individual wasTransfer score =Transfer (average of Knowledge Elements across questions)Post-test (all Knowledge Elements achieved)Because the denominator was the same throughout, this overall transfer score also equaled the average numberof KEs achieved throughout the transfer assessment divided by the number of post-assessment KEs. In this way,the computed transfer scores are the average number of KEs students applied to new scenarios in relation towhat they displayed on the post-test.Student SurveysEarly in the spring semester (February), Mr. Kent’s students completed an online survey in class, designed tocapture student recognition of their teacher’s discursive moves related to expansive framing as well as students’own alignment with expansive framing across each of the five contextual aspects described earlier. In this paper,we focus primarily on responses to survey questions related to alignment because our framework suggests thatalignment is the mechanism for transfer. The survey was comprised of 36 Likert-style questions and showedhigh internal consistency both within and across all five contextual aspects (α ≥ 0.795 in all cases). For eachstudent, we created scores for each of the five aspects by averaging the responses to questions that addressedeach aspect. These per-aspect framing scores were then compared with individual students’ transfer scoresthrough correlation analyses.Student InterviewsTowards the end of the school year, we conducted individual interviews with 18 students to ask them toelaborate on their survey responses. These students were selected to constitute a representative sample of theclass, based on their range of performance on our written assessments, survey responses, and demographics.Interviews were audio recorded and transcribed. We used discourse analysis to code interview transcripts forexpressions of alignment with expansive framing and self-reports of transfer.FindingsIn this section we provide evidence of student transfer, and then explore possible relationships between transferand student alignment with expansive framing as captured through surveys and interviews.Evidence of Transfer in Mr. Kent’s ClassUsing the approach described above, we first compared student performance on the initial transfer assessmentwith their performance on the post-test. The average initial transfer score for the class was 0.43 (SD=0.25;N=28), indicating that on average students transferred 43% of the KEs that they had displayed on the post-test.This score demonstrates that transfer did, in fact, occur across the post-assessment and initial transfer test. Wethen used the same approach to compare results of the follow-up transfer question with the post-test. Theaverage follow-up transfer score was 0.45 (SD=.43; N=16), or 45% of KEs displayed on the post-test. On theretention question students averaged 54% (SD=.43, N=16) of the knowledge elements they had displayed on thepost-test.Relationships between Transfer and Alignment with Expansive FramingStudent SurveysTable 2 presents class-wide means and standard deviations for student alignment with expansive framing ofeach of the five contextual aspects in our framework. These data indicate that students perceived the expandedrelevance of their learning across time, place, and topics to a degree between “sometimes” and “often.” TheyICLS 2014 Proceedings692© ISLSperceived expanded relevance across participants, and themselves as authors of biology knowledge to a degreeslightly less frequent than “sometimes.”Table 2: Results from student survey measuring student alignment with expansive framingAlignmentTime3.72 (0.72)Place3.51 (0.73)Participants2.87 (0.70)Role2.92 (0.75)Topics3.45 (0.99)Average3.29 (0.55)After calculating framing scores for each student for each of the five contextual aspects, we rancorrelations between these scores and student scores on our initial transfer assessment and our follow-upassessment. Correlation analyses revealed alignment with expansive framing of time, per our survey, as havingthe strongest relationship with the results of our transfer assessments. We found strong and statisticallysignificant correlations between student alignment with the expansive framing of time and initial transfer scores(r[26]=0.376, p<0.05), follow-up transfer score (r[14]=0.589, p<0.01), and retention scores (r[14]=0.444,p<0.05). In other words, those students who indicated on our survey that they perceived higher degrees oftemporal relevance of their biology class, both in terms of biology being related to what they already knew andin terms of the future applicability of biology content, were the same students who had higher scores on ourassessments of transfer.We found one additional statistically significant correlation in these data, between alignment withexpansive framing of role (i.e., perceiving oneself as an author of biology knowledge) and the retention questionon the follow-up assessment (r[14]= 0.440; p<0.05). That is, those students who indicated on our survey thatthey most perceived themselves as playing an active and accountable role in authoring biology knowledge werethe same students who displayed the highest level of retaining what they had learned about osmosis anddiffusion after nearly two years.Student InterviewsIn this section we present patterns from our interview data related to time, authorship, and transfer because ofthe importance and interrelatedness of these factors as suggested by our correlation analysis. Our goals in thissection are to complement our survey data with concrete examples of students’ expressions of alignment withexpansive framing; and to complement our statistical analysis with descriptions of the patterns in our interviewdata. Here, we present our findings by three themes: 1) alignment with the expansive framing of time, 2)alignment with the expansive framing of role, and 3) self-reports of transfer.With regard to perceiving the long-term temporal relevance of biology content, most studentsexpressed some alignment with expansive framing, but there were some salient differences by level ofperformance on the transfer assessment. One difference was that students who displayed higher levels oftransfer on the assessment spoke about the future relevance of biology in much more concrete terms thanstudents who had lower transfer scores. For example, high transfer students were quite definitive about theiranticipated future use of biology content in college, making comments such as, “for college, yeah, I’m gonnause this stuff” (Lindy). In contrast, while students with average to low transfer scores also spoke about theapplicability of biology content to college, they tended to give hedged or conditional responses, such as:“Biology will probably be involved” (Deena); “I might use that later on in the future, maybe” (Bianca); and “If Igo to college…it’ll help me” (Pedro).In addition to the specificity with which they anticipated the future relevance of biology, some hightransfer students also expressed the perception of continuity of course content throughout the school year. Thissentiment was best illustrated by Elaine: “The only time it’s really brand new is in the beginning of the year.Like, we’ll um, we always refer back to certain stuff. (…) We always just kinda add something new, but itbuilds on what we already know.” Dorthee echoed this sentiment by referring to learning about cells as “just thebeginning” of biology-related knowledge. We did not find similar comments in the interviews of students withlower transfer scores.What we did find from some of the lowest transfer students, however, were examples of questioningand even rejecting the future relevance of biology. For example, Carolina expressed that she was unlikely topursue a future for which biology would be relevant: “Like, be a scientist? Mmm, no I don’t think so…I don’tthink it’s for me.” She later added “I think there are some thing [from class] we don’t need to know later on inlife. Like I don’t think it’ll be useful for some of us students that aren’t gonna be needing that stuff later on.”In terms of perceiving themselves as taking on roles as authors of biology knowledge, most of thestudents we interviewed expressed a belief in the value of sharing ideas with their classmates, a practice that wasvery much emphasized by Mr. Kent. However, their explanations of the value of this practice varied. Mid to lowtransfer students saw sharing their ideas primarily as a way to “learn from mistakes” (e.g., Luis, Deena,Carolina), an idea also emphasized by Mr. Kent. In contrast, high transfer students depicted interacting withtheir classmates as an active process of collaborative knowledge construction. According to Dorthee, sharingideas with her classmates meant “if they have a different view they tell me why and (…) You can combine yourICLS 2014 Proceedings693© ISLSideas to make a better answer.” Baara added, “We actually have to discuss [questions] amongst the whole classand we have to come up with an outcome on our own. (…) It’s not like we’re really dependent on our teacher allthe time. We become more able to think for ourselves.” It is worth noting the way in which these high transferstudents’ commonly used first person pronouns and possessives to position themselves as owning and takingresponsibility for their ideas. Elaine used similar language when referring to “my understanding” of a biologyrelated phenomenon, as did Lindy in anticipating that she would “refer back to my notes” when taking futurescience classes.The high transfer students also positioned themselves as capable of productively disseminating thoseideas to others, both inside and out of class. Lindy anticipated “help[ing] my sister with biology,” and Baarabelieved that by sharing what she knew in the classroom she could “help out the class.” With the exception ofDeena, who also claimed, “I could teach other people,” the mid and low transfer students did not make similarcomments about knowledge dissemination. One low transfer student, Carolina, actually rejected some aspectsof authorship, stating, “I don’t think that if you don’t talk about ideas -- like if you don’t say ideas you don’t goanywhere. I’m pretty sure you’ll go somewhere in life.”Self-reports of transfer were relatively scarce in the student interviews, but even so some differenceswere observed between higher and lower performing students on the transfer assessment. First, such reportswere slightly more common from high transfer students than from others. Second, and perhaps moreimportantly, was a qualitative difference: high transfer students reported actually applying biology knowledge tonovel situations, while mid and low transfer students reported retelling facts learned in class. Of the hightransfer students, Lindy had by far the highest number of self-reports of transfer. As a softball player, shereported, "[Mr. Kent] says ‘oh you need a lot of carbohydrates and nutrients and stuff, for, if you’re athletic’ and(…) I look online and try to find out what’s the daily stuff if you do sports and stuff. And I just look on that andsee how many servings I need and everything.” Here we see Lindy’s practical application of what she haslearned about nutrition in her biology class to her needs as an athlete outside of class. This particular report alsoexemplifies transfer in the form of preparation for future learning (Bransford & Schwartz, 1999) as Lindy usedwhat she had learned about nutrition to search online for specific answers to her needs.The only low transfer student we interviewed who made self-reports of transfer was Pedro, who, likeLindy, reported some transfer to his experiences as an athlete. However, in contrast to Lindy’s practicalapplication, Pedro’s reports were limited to retelling facts and terms. For example, with teammates who alsostudied biology, he reported answering their definitional questions such as “What are carbohydrates?” saying,“I’ll just try to sound smart and like, tell them all of these terms I learned.” Pedro’s transfer is therefore limitedto repeating facts that has learned, but does not necessarily display any sort of application of biology knowledgeto solving novel problems.In summary, our interview analysis revealed several characteristics that seem to generalize fairly wellacross those interviewees who displayed high levels of transfer on the assessment. These students not onlyperceived biology as generally relevant to the future, but actually imagined themselves in concrete futuresituations in which they anticipated using that content. They also perceived biology instruction as continuousacross the school year, as earlier lessons connected to later ones. These students perceived themselves as activeparticipants in the construction of biology-related knowledge. They took ownership of their ideas andproductively shared them for the benefit of others. Finally, when they reported transferring biology knowledgeto other aspects of their lives, they did so in ways that implied practical application to meet actual needs.In contrast, lower transfer students either expressed the future relevance of biology content in muchmore conditional terms, or, in some cases, actually rejected that future relevance. They shared ideas withclassmates in order to learn from mistakes, but did not position themselves as actively constructing anddisseminating knowledge. Very few of them reported transferring their knowledge of biology, and those reportswere limited to retelling facts more so than solving novel problems.Discussion and ConclusionOur analyses of students’ surveys and interviews in relation to their performance on our measures of transferprovide converging evidence of a relationship between alignment with expansive framing and transfer. Ourstrongest finding is that those students who reported perceiving more temporal relevance between pastexperiences, current learning, and future opportunities for application were the same students who displayed thehighest levels of transfer. This finding is consistent with prior empirical and theoretical work that positsperceived relationships being central to transfer (e.g., Day & Goldstone, 2012; James, 2008; Lobato, 2012; Pea,1987). Additionally we found higher levels of transfer, although perhaps only in the form of retention, fromstudents who indicated that they perceived themselves as taking on actives role in constructing anddisseminating biology-related knowledge. This finding resonates with work that links transfer to students’perceptions of autonomy and authority with regard to learning and knowledge (e.g., Belenky & Nokes-Malach,2012; Perkins & Salomon, 2012).ICLS 2014 Proceedings694© ISLSOur findings also indicate that Mr. Kent’s attempts to expansively frame his instruction contributed tohis students’ beliefs and perceptions of expansive relevance. While we found no statistically significantcorrelations between students’ recognition of Mr. Kent’s expansive framing and their performance on ourtransfer assessment, we did find a strong correlation between their recognition and their alignment withexpansive framing (r[28]=0.558, p<0.01). The relationship between their recognition and their reportedperceptions of temporal relevance was even stronger (r[29]=0.632, p<0.001). In other words, those students whoshowed the highest degree of alignment with the expansive framing of time – a factor that we’ve shown to berelated to transfer – were the same students who were most aware of Mr. Kent’s discursive positioning of theexpansive relevance of learning in his classroom. This finding is consistent with suggestions that while learnerperceptions may be at the heart of transfer, instruction can play a role in shaping those perceptions (e.g.,Belenky & Nokes-Malach, 2012; Lobato, Rhodehamel, & Hohensee, 2012). Future research could betterinvestigate the relationship between instruction and learner alignment with expansive framing by including preand post-measures of alignment, and by comparing alignment of students in classrooms that are more and lessexpansively framed by their instructors. Additionally, video analysis of classroom behaviors could provide amore intimate understanding of the degrees to which students discursively took up Mr. Kent’s proposed framing(Clark, 1996). If students were to discursively reciprocate their instructor’s expansive proposals, it isconceivable that higher levels of perceived relevance might spread throughout the class, thus establishing aclassroom culture of transfer (Pea, 1987). We plan to explore this premise through future analyses of our currentdata and in future studies.Given that our framework includes five contextual aspects that can be expansively framed (time, place,participants, topics, roles), we must also consider possible explanations for the fact that in our data we onlyfound relationships between transfer and alignment with two of these factors (time and role). Is an alignmentwith the expansive framing of time and role more important for transfer than an alignment the other aspects ofcontextual framing? What relationships exist among the different contextual aspects? In a concurrent researchproject, we aim to disentangle the effects of an expansive framing of role or settings (time, places, andparticipants), separately and in conjunction with one another, on transfer. The study involves one-on-onetutoring with students, where the tutor frames the role or settings in either an expansive or bounded manner.Knowledge assessments are used to measure learning and transfer, and online surveys record student recognitionand alignment with expansive framing. The strong correlation between recognition of and alignment withexpansive framing that we presented in this paper suggests that we may see changes in student alignment withexpansive framing in each of these experimental conditions, and we plan to investigate the relationship betweenthese levels of alignment and levels of transfer.Finally, we must acknowledge that our measures of transfer for this study are limited in onlyconsidering performance on researcher-designed assessments as opposed to also considering additional forms oftransfer that students may have been capable of (Lobato, 2012). We did draw on Lobato’s notion of ActorOriented Transfer in analyzing interviews, but because those interviews were structured around our surveys,they did not provide students with many opportunities for self-reported transfer. Similarly, we have not yetconducted sufficient video analysis of student behaviors in class to systematically identify other possiblemanifestations of transfer. It is possible that including a greater variety of measures of transfer may illuminateadditional relationships between transfer and alignment with expansive framing.ReferencesBeach, K. (1999). Consequential transitions: A sociocultural expedition beyond transfer in education. Review ofResearch in Education, 24, 61–100.Belenky, D. M., & Nokes-Malach, T. J. (2012). Motivation and transfer: The role of mastery-approach goals inpreparation for future learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(3), 399-432.Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, andschool. Washington DC: National Academy Press.Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking Transfer: A Simple Proposal with Multiple Implications.Review of Research in Education, 24, 61-100.Brown, A. L. (1989). Analogical learning and transfer: What develops? In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),Similarity and analogical reasoning (pp. 369–412 ). Cambridge, United Kingdom: CambridgeUniversity Press.Christianson, R. G., & Fisher, K. M. (1999). Comparison of student learning about diffusion and osmosis inconstructivist and traditional classrooms. International Journal of Science Education, 21, 687-698.Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Day, S. B., & Goldstone, R. L. (2012). The import of knowledge export: Connecting findings and theories oftransfer of learning. Educational Psychologist., 47(3), 153-176.Engle, R. A. (2006). Framing interactions to foster generative learning: A situative explanation of transfer in acommunity of learners classroom. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 451-498.ICLS 2014 Proceedings695© ISLSEngle, R. A., Lam, D. P., Meyer, X. S., & Nix, S. E. (2012). How does expansive framing promote transfer?Several proposed explanations and a research agenda for investigating them. . EducationalPsychologist., 47, 215-231.Engle, R. A., Meyer, X. S., Clark, J., White, J., & Mendelson, A. (2010). Expansive Framing and Transfer inHigh School Biology Class: Hybridizing Settings and Promoting Connections within a LargerLearning Community. Paper presented at the National Association for Research in Science TeachingAnnual International Conference.Engle, R. A., Nguyen, P. D., & Mendelson, A. (2011). The influence of framing on transfer: Initial evidencefrom a tutoring experiment. Instructional Science, 39(5), 603-628.Floriani, A. (1994). Negotiating what counts: Roles and relationships, texts and contexts, content and meaning.Linguistics & Education, 5, 241-274.Gee, J. P., & Green, J. L. (1998). Discourse analysis, learning, and social practice: A methodological study.Review of Research in Education, 23, 119–165.Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. . Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema Induction and Analogical Transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15(1),1-38.Greeno, J. G., Smith, D. R., & Moore, J. L. (1993). Transfer of situated learning. In D. K. Detterman & R. J.Sternberg (Eds.), Transfer on trial: Intelligence, cognition, and instruction (pp. 99–127). Norwood, NJ:Ablex.Gumperz, J. (1982). Discourse strategies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005). Resources, framing, and transfer. In J. Mestre(Ed.), Transfer of learning: Research and perspectives (pp. 89-119). Greenwich, CT: Information AgePublishing.James, M. A. (2008). The influence of perceptions of task similarity/difference on learning transfer in secondlanguage writing. Written Communication, 25(1), 76-103.Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition. (1983). Culture and cognitive development. In P. H.Mussen(Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. History, theory and methods (pp. 295–356). New York:Wiley.Lobato, J. (2012). The actor-oriented transfer perspective and its contributions to educational research andpractice. Educational Psychologist., 47(3), 232-247.Lobato, J., Rhodehamel, B., & Hohensee, C. (2012). “Noticing” as an alternative transfer of learning process.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(3), 433-482.Ochs, E. (1996). Linguistic resources for socializing humanity. In J. Gumperz & S. Levinson (Eds.), Rethinkinglinguistic relativity (pp. 407-438). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Pea, R. D. (1987). Socializing the knowledge transfer problem. International Journal of Educational Research,11, 639–663.Perkins, D. N., & Salomon, G. (2012). Knowledge to go: A motivational and dispositional view of transfer.Educational Psychologist., 47(3), 248-258.Reeves, L. M., & Weisberg, R. W. (1994). The role of content and abstract information in analogical transfer.Psychological Bulletin, 115(3), 381-400.Renkema, J. (2004). Structured content. In Introduction to discourse studies (pp. 87-102). Amsterdam: JohnBenjamins.Ross, B. H. (1984). Remindings and Their Effects in Learning a Cognitive Skill. Cognitive Psychology, 16(371416).Tannen, D. (1993). Framing in Discourse. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.van Dijk, T. A., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of discourse comprehension. NewYork: Academic Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings696© ISLS