Framing Sociocultural Interactionsto Design Equitable Learning EnvironmentsBryant Jensen, Ph.D., Brigham Young University206-T MCKB Provo, UT 84602, bryant_jensen@byu.eduAbstract: Many racial and ethnic minority (REM) students (i.e., African Americans,Hispanics, Native Americans, Pacific Islanders, and some Asian Americans) in the U.S.continue to underperform on academic tasks. Partially but not entirely explained bysocioeconomic factors, REM underperformance is associated with different and inequitablesociocultural demands between informal and formal settings where REM children learn anddevelop. “Culturally responsive” classroom teaching is posited to help remedy this situation,but conceptual clarity and empirical support are limited. To address these limitations Irecommend the learning sciences closely study cultural dimensions of social interactionsacross diverse classroom settings. Derived from a synthesis of research and theoreticaltraditions, I present an emergent framework of sociocultural interactions in classroomsettings—10 dimensions organized into three domains: Life Applications, Self in Group, andAgency. I describe the constructs and address implications for design research: the need forreliable observation, and stronger theories of classroom settings/contexts.21st Century LearningTwo important facts are important to bear in mind as researchers and practitioners continue to grapple with thepurposes and goals of American Pk-12 schooling in the 21st century (e.g., Darling-Hammond, 2010; Rueda,2013; Wagner, 2008). First, student demography is shifting toward a non-white majority. Already the case inCalifornia, New Mexico, and Texas, demographers project a non-white student majority nationwide within acouple decades (Hernandez, Denton, & Macartney, 2007). Second, the competencies demanded by employersand civic participation alike in the 21st century are expanding to include capabilities that are intra- and interpersonal in nature (Jensen, Under Review; NRC, 2012). Whereas cognitive skills like reading, writing,computation, and information processing are required at more complex levels than in the past (e.g., Carnegie,2010); social (e.g., collaboration, adaptability, oral communication) and conative (e.g., self-regulation, selfefficacy) competencies are increasingly in demand (Wagner, 2008). This is because the sought-after innovationsin government, business, and technology tend to be best nurtured in environments ripe in imagination,creativity, horizontal leadership, and purposeful group work (Murnane & Levy, 1996; Surowiecki, 2005).REM UnderperformanceA major challenge (and opportunity) for researchers and educators, therefore, is to find ways to meet 21stcentury demands for a large and rapidly growing population of racial and ethnic minority (REM) students with ateacher workforce that is currently more than four-fifths white, non-Hispanic (U.S. Dept. of Education, 2009).Meeting the challenge means unpacking the varied explanatory factors for the pervasive REMunderperformance (Lee, 2002) and designing curricula and instruction to address these factors.Currently, the academic underperformance of racial and ethnic minority (REM) students in the US—including Blacks, Hispanics, Native Americans, Pacific Islander, and some Asian groups (Lee, 2002; Pang, Han& Pang, 2011)—is better documented than it is understood. Many REM students continue to perform lower inreading, writing, math, and other areas than their white, non-Hispanic peers. And racial/ethnic differencespersist beyond the effects of socioeconomic status (Galindo, 2013; Miller, 1997, pp. 143-159). Whereas parenteducation, family income, occupation status, and associated factors account for a substantive portion of REMunderperformance, studies demonstrate performance gaps above and beyond socioeconomic effects (Reardon &Galindo, 2009). For example, analyzing data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, KindergartenCohort (ECLS-K), Galindo (2013) found persistent math performance gaps (.36 to .65 SD) between middleclass Mexican-American and White, non-Hispanic students from kindergarten through fifth grade.REM Developmental AssetsAt the same time, studies in educational anthropology and developmental psychology identify a series of socialand emotional assets nurtured in the out-of-school environments of many REM students. Research demonstrateschildrearing practices in Mexican-origin families, for example, to be rooted in cultural values of respect forauthority, hard work, and group solidarity (Bridges et al., 2012; Livas Stein, Garcia Coll, & Huq, 2013; Reese,2013; Reese, Balzano, Gallimore & Goldenberg, 1995). These values tend to translate into strong developmentICLS 2014 Proceedings903© ISLSfor children, especially interpersonal competencies like cooperation and communication, as well as intrapersonalabilities like self-beliefs and a robust work ethic (Fuller & Garcia Coll, 2010; Knight & Carlo, 2012).Researchers refer to the poor academic performance and relatively strong socioemotional competenceof REM students as a “developmental paradox” (Fuller & Garcia Coll, 2010) because in mainstream societychildren demonstrating stronger cognitive skills also tend to demonstrate stronger socioemotional competencies.Some argue for building on REM children’s intrapersonal and interpersonal strengths as a way of enhancingtheir cognitive and academic competence (Galindo & Fuller, 2010; Jensen, 2013; Jensen et al., Under Review;Reese, Jensen & Ramirez, 2014). This recommendation underscores the idea that complex academic tasks likeproblem solving and critical thinking demand a combination of social, emotional, and cognitive skills.Classroom CultureMany have argued that classrooms should build on REM students’ socioemotional competencies to improvetheir academic performance (Crosnoe, 2006; DiPerna, Volpe & Elliott, 2005; Galindo & Fuller, 2010; LivasStein, Garcia Coll & Huq, 2013), but little evidence demonstrates how. “Culturally responsive” classrooms forREM students propose useful approaches and offer claims, yet have not demonstrated evidence of narrowingperformance gaps.Sociocultural Learning TheoryWhereas there is no unitary theory of sociocultural learning, we situate our central arguments for greaterspecificity in the design of classroom improvement for REM students within the theoretical tradition ofVygotsky, Luria, and Leont’ev. Their work and corollary extensions accentuate inseparable relationshipsbetween human thought, action, and identity (John-Steiner & Mahn, 1996; Palincsar, 1998). Indeed,socioculturalists define human learning in terms of change in what the person knows and does, as well aschanges in the knower herself (i.e., identity—“who I am”). Packer and Goicoechea (2000) make the case thatsociocultural learning is marked not only by epistemological assumptions (what is known) but also ontologicalassumptions (who is the knower) of the world. Perhaps Dewey (1916) said it best when he described “the mindwith the self” (p. 293, italics added). Learning, from the sociocultural perspective, comprises communitypractices carried out in various settings (Lave & Wenger, 1998). It builds on prior cultural knowledge andexperience (Cobb & Yackel, 1996).Importantly, “culture” from this perspective should not be thought of as a series of “individual traits”,but rather as “community practices” associated with children’s daily routines (Gutierrez & Rogoff, 2003, pp. 2021). Culture does not consist of a fixed and static set of rituals, beliefs, and traits; to conceptualize students’culture this way runs the risk of reinforcing simplistic group stereotypes (Irizarry, 2007; Reese, 2013). This wayculture is not synonymous with race, ethnicity, social class or any other group label. We view culture as bothproduced and reproduced in daily interactions within diverse settings, rather than necessarily a function of groupdifference. This conception allows for changes in culture over time and for within-group variation, in responseto changing conditions (Nasir & Hand, 2006).Social interactions—i.e., the behaviors or actions that occur between two or more persons in responseto one another—are a central analytic unit in sociocultural theory (Vygotsky, 1978, pp. 24-30). Culturally boundrules, norms, values, and expectations shape how we relate, communicate, question, assist, and generally engagewith one another. Sociocultural interactions underlie our learning and development. Indeed, according toVygotsky (1978), differences between a child’s “actual developmental level as determined by independentproblem solving” and her potential level are “determined through problem solving under adult guidance or incollaboration with more capable peers” (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 86). We learn through prompts, clues, modeling,conversation, observation, imitation, joint participation, encouragement, etc.Culturally Responsive TeachingLiterature on “culturally responsive pedagogy”—connecting student knowledge and experience from nonschool to classroom settings (Bowers & Flinders, 1990; Gay, 2000; Irizarry, 2007; Stuart & Volk, 2002;Wortham & Contreras, 2002)—builds loosely on sociocultural learning theory. It also draws on a social justice(Brown-Jessy & Cooper, 2011) and socioaffective (Ladson-Billings, 1995) frameworks. Culturally responsiveteaching includes explicit (e.g., content personalization) and implicit (e.g., social motivations) efforts to connectstudents’ out-of-school lives with classroom experiences.Culturally responsive pedagogy is more than generic attributes of “good teaching” (Ladson-Billings,1995). It is important, thus, to distinguish universal (or global) from cultural (or local) dimensions of classroominteractions (Tharp, 1989). Global dimensions demonstrate positive effects on student development and learningin general, whereas local dimensions tend to favor some students’ over others within the same classroom.Typically the curricular content and forms of social interaction in school settings favor White and middle toICLS 2014 Proceedings904© ISLSupper-middle class children over underperforming REM students. Thus the culture of classroom learning ishypothesized to be more “responsive” for the already privileged than for REM students.Two issues undermine the uptake and influence of culturally responsive practices in REM classrooms.First, little inferential evidence exists to demonstrate how—i.e., casual pathways—they influence studentacademic learning (Goldenberg, Rueda & August, 2006). Most research on culturally responsive teaching—andsociocultural studies in classrooms more generally—are interpretive and non-interventionist. Withoutassociating sociocultural practices with student learning, however operationalized, it is difficult to ascertaininstructional principles that could be replicated and tested in across classroom settings. Second, there is a lot ofjargon and term confusion in the literature on culturally responsive teaching and related sociocultural studies.Semantic deviations can undermine a knowledge base for subsequent study and improvement.Global and Local Dimensions of Classroom InteractionsA significant hurdle to expand the knowledge base on culturally responsive teaching is to disentangle thecultural (or local) from universal (or global) nature of classroom interactions (i.e., what Tharp [1989] termed“psychocultural variables” and “constants”, respectively). These distinctions are necessary to understand how tofit academic content with REM students’ out-of-school knowledge and experiences. One of the problems withsociocultural research in education generally is the ambiguity between quality (i.e., universal action for allstudents) and cultural practices that inadvertently privilege certain students over others (Goldenberg &Gallimore, 1989). Literature on culturally responsive pedagogy (e.g., Bowers & Flinders, 1990; Gay, 2000;Ladson-Billings, 1995) often presents local dimensions of classroom quality as different from or somehowindifferent to global dimensions.Colleagues and I have argued that what is needed is a clearer articulation of how local dimensions areinstantiated by global dimensions of classroom interactions (Reese, Jensen & Ramirez, 2014). In general, globaldimensions address whether and to what extent quality interactions occur to spur student learning. Globaldimensions include affective quality of teacher-student interactions, classroom management, and genericfeatures (e.g., feedback, scaffolding, analytic discussion) of cognitive support during classroom instruction(Hamre & Pianta, 2001, 2005). Local dimensions address how that same interaction is socialized to draw onstudents’ previous knowledge, experience, routines, values, and traditions.We make three points to elucidate differences between global and local dimensions of classroominteractions (Jensen et al., Under Review). Each highlights the centrality of classroom context to makeappropriate distinctions. First, the global vs. local nature of classroom interactions depends on the complexity(e.g., memory vs. inference) of learning objectives. Cooperation (a local dimension below), for example, can beconsidered a feature of global quality when teaching complex scientific concepts (Sinatra & Chinn, 2011).Second, dimensions of classroom interactions can be considered local in terms of the differentialdegree of their influence (to student learning and development). Some work has found nurturing student choiceand autonomy in classroom discussion to be associated with stronger language and reading gains for nativeHawaiian children than for white, middle-class students in the same classrooms (Au & Mason, 1981).Third, dimensions of classroom interactions are considered “local” in terms of setting differences thatare functionally qualitative. That is, meaning from social interactions is made not exclusively in terms of “theextent to which” classrooms help students make personal connections through culturally responsive practice, butalso “how” practices are contextually enacted—i.e., qualitative differences in how teachers motivate andsocialize children. These differences are analytically inductive rather than deductive and have significantimplications for designing culturally responsive environments. Thus we assert that classroom dimensionsconsidered “local” are contextual and should incorporate qualitative information for valid interpretation.Our contention is that the amalgamation of local and global dimensions of classroom interactionsmatters to relevant learning for REM students. Classrooms deemed “high quality” are not necessarilyresponsive, and vice versa. Whereas REM students can certainly gain understanding of academic contentthrough universal quality alone, understanding is enhanced and intrinsic value for academic learning are greatlyincreased, in theory, when classroom interactions are also responsive to students’ out-of-school lives (Brophy,1999). On the other hand, classroom interactions that are highly responsive yet low in quality are characterizedas maintaining some student interest but little academic learning.Sociocultural Interactions in ClassroomsShown in Figure 1, we identify ten “local” dimensions of sociocultural interactions in Pk-6 classroom settings,and organize them into three abstract domains: Life Applications, Self in Group, and Agency. We draw theseconstructs from a variety of fields, including cultural psychology, educational anthropology, developmentalpsychology, social psychology, sociolinguistics, communication, and multicultural education. The constructsthemselves are not new, but the way we organize them into a single model sets the stage for a host of activitiesto design more relevant learning opportunities for underperforming REM students. Described at length below,our model provides a common schematic and nomenclature.ICLS 2014 Proceedings905© ISLSFigure 1. Model of sociocultural interactions in classroom settingsWe established a priori criteria to construct inclusion for the model. Namely, we were interested incapturing constructs that a) have received attention in the research literature, b) are at least purported to beassociated with children’s socioemotional and/or cognitive development, c) are detectable to the trainedobserver, d) are commonplace enough to be observed within most hour-long classroom observations, and e)demonstrate malleability for subsequent improvement.Life ApplicationsThe first domain addresses whether and how classroom interactions explore and value students’ interests,beliefs, knowledge, and experiences in order to make personal connections with classroom content (Aguirre,1988; Cazden, 2001; Gee, 2001; Gonzalez, Moll & Amanti, 2005; Wertsch & Toma, 1995). Interactions arescaled on a continuum from “disconnected” to “well connected.” Teachers in “well connected” classroomsdemonstrate commitment to learn about students’ lives, and they search for ways to incorporate what they learn.Dimensions include: Language Use, Difference Appreciation, Equity, and Content Personalization.Language Use refers to the extent to which classroom interactions gauge and incorporate the natal,non-school languages (varieties or systems) of students to enhance content understanding and social relations(Heath, 1983). Varieties refer to the organization of language (e.g., style, structure, tone, vernacular) whereaslanguage system refers to the actual language code (e.g., Portuguese, Korean, Spanish). Connecting classroomlearning objectives with student language repertoires requires teachers to “code-switch” (Aguirre, 1988;Gumperz, 1982; Hakuta & Garcia, 1989; Valdes-Fallis, 1978) between the school and the non-school languages.Switching can be relational (Garcia, 2005, pp. 27-29) and instructional (Cazden, 2001).Difference Appreciation refers to the extent to which teachers and peers value and address the diverseexperiences, knowledge, beliefs, and interests of students in the classroom. “Well-connected” classroomsfrequently discuss the out-of-school hobbies, activities, social roles, responsibilities, traditions, and peer andfamily relationships of children. This way, students learn more about one another, thereby developing their“cultural competence” (Ladson-Billings, 1995, pp. 160-161). They become more aware of their classmates’differences, and appreciate them rather than overlook, dismiss, or look down on them.Equity addresses how classroom interactions address societal injustices (past and present) associatedwith student differences. “Well-connected” classroom interactions in terms of Equity develop teacher andstudent consciousness of past and present prejudice and discrimination—real or perceived—in order to imaginesocial transformations (Freire, 1970). Equitable classroom interactions promote social justice and, according toOgbu (1987, 1992), are especially important for “involuntary” minorities—i.e., descendants of groups ofpersons thrust into a new society “against their will” (Ogbu & Simons, 1998, p. 165)—who identify withhistorical oppression (e.g., African American slavery, Native American subjugation).Content Personalization refers the connections made between students’ lives—routines, perspectives,social relationships, expertise, values, and traditions—and classroom learning objectives. Tharp and colleagues(2000) refer to Content Personalization as “making meaning” (p. 26-29). They argue that children “are willingto struggle with […] abstract notions in science, math, and other content areas when they are motivated by […]activities they and their families value” (p. 26). To do so, teachers orchestrate classroom interactions that “aresituated in problems and issues of students’ everyday lives [and] provide vivid opportunities [for] students tostretch their informal understandings to more abstract levels” (p. 26).Self in GroupSelf in Group, or “self-construal” (Kim, 2002), refers to how classroom interactions socialize students to relateto and work with one another to motivate learning and establish identities (Au & Mason, 1981; Greenfield,ICLS 2014 Proceedings906© ISLS1994). Do classroom conversations, for example, nurture a communal climate where team success is moresignificant than individual performance (Kim et al., 1996), or a setting in which the learning and achievement ofstudents are at odds with one another? We scale scores dimensions of this domain from “independent” to“interdependent.” Three dimensions of Self in Group include Competition, Cooperation, and Social Motivation.Competition refers to the extent to which student success in the classroom depends on the failure ofanother (individuals or groups). In competitive classrooms, students strive to perform well simply to outperformtheir peers. Doing well in relation to one’s peers is more important than understanding content (McInerney,Roche, McInerney & Marsh, 1997). Competitive classroom interactions are scaled as “independent.”Cooperation is defined as collaborative student effort to achieve a shared objective. Shared work,common goals, and social cohesion are indicators of Cooperation. Extant research on “cooperative learning”(Slavin, 2010) has found increased student learning outcomes, though some students benefit more than others(Stevens & Slavin, 1995). Webb & Farivar (1994), for example, found that Latino and African American middleschool students demonstrated greater mathematics gains and classroom participation from academic skilltraining in cooperative groups than their white, non-Hispanic peers. Depending on the cultural norms andcommunity practices, students may require close scaffolding to foster the pro-social skills (e.g., listening, turntaking, assertion) required to cooperate.Social Motivation refers to how classroom interactions incentivize student effort and participation. Aremotivations oriented toward independent or interdependent effort and accomplishment? The idea is that socialinteractions and interpersonal relationships are inherently motivating for student engagement and learning(Martin & Dowson, 2009). But some rewards are more authentic than others, and cultural values acrosscommunities vary with regard to social cohesion.AgencyThe last domain refers to how student choice and freedom are managed (Holland et al., 1998). It addresses howactive the classroom environment allows students to be—to exercise choice, undertake responsibility, take ondifferent social roles, and internalize learning expectations. This domain is concerned with who makes theinstructional, curricular, and organizational decisions in the classroom and how those decisions are enacted.Agency dimensions include Autonomy, Role Flexibility, and Equitable Expectations, scaled from “notdistributed” to “well distributed.”Autonomy addresses how much choice children are granted to select materials and tasks, monitor theirlearning progress, collaborate with peers, engage in relevant conversation, etc. It refers to an “internal perceivedlocus of causality” (deCharms, 1968). It does not refer to any ideal toward group activity (Chirkov, Ryan, Kim& Kaplan, 2003), though Western perspectives often associate autonomy with independence (Deci & Ryan,2008). Autonomy, however, “refers not to being independent, detached, or selfish but rather to the feeling ofvolition than can accompany any act, whether […] collectivist or individualist” (Ryan & Deci, 2000, p. 74).Role Flexibility refers to how rigid or malleable roles are between experts (e.g., teachers) and novices(e.g., students) to complete a task. Cultural psychologists find role flexibility to vary across communities(Paradise & Rogoff, 2009; Rogoff et al., 2007). In some communities, roles are rigid—divided and assigned bythe expert. In others, roles are more fluid: though with limited experience, the novice attempts to complete atask with guidance from the expert (Rogoff, 1990). “Distributed” agency is associated with flexible roles.Equitable Expectations are defined as the enacted beliefs that teachers have about their students’learning aptitude in the classroom. These beliefs—developed and communicated mostly through subtle, indirect,and ongoing interactions (Good & Brophy, 2008, pp. 54-57)—are associated with the distribution of studentagency. That is, teachers with equitable expectations induce autonomy for all students through complex tasks,opportunities for self-evaluation, individualized feedback, and shared respect (Good & Weinstein, 1986).A Stronger Sociocultural Design ScienceWe encourage further study to apply attributes of design research (van den Akker et al., 2006) to study (andimprove) these sociocultural dimensions in classroom settings. Design research provides opportunities not onlyfor establishing a broader base of empirical evidence regarding the influence of Life Applications, Self inGroup, and Agency in classrooms, but also information on when these features matter, for whom, and for whatpurposes. It does so by focusing on contextualized problems of practice through iterative study, cultivating closecollaborations between practitioners and researchers, blending multiple research methods as needed, andproviding “fine-grained” (diSessa & Cobb, 2004, p. 89) theoretical advances.Two major advances are needed in the field to establish a stronger design science on associationsbetween REM learning and sociocultural interactions in classroom settings. First, we need a reliableobservational system to capture “local” dimensions of classroom quality. This system should demonstrateinternal consistency, face and construct validity, a strong, interpretable factor structure. This task is certainlydaunting, as it requires capturing historically interpretivist constructs within a psychometric paradigm.ICLS 2014 Proceedings907© ISLSThoughtful efforts should capture context-sensitive markers for the dimensions described, yet clear enoughscoring rubrics for raters to reliably observe them across diverse classroom settings and cultural traditions.Second, by extension, stronger conceptions of classroom contexts associated with “cultural responsive”practice are needed (i.e., ecological validity). Whereas research findings associating sociocultural interactionsand REM student learning would generalize at the classroom or setting level, we need stronger schematics ofcontext attributes (i.e., covariates) that matter to these relationships. Said schematics are likely to includeattributes of the academic task (e.g., developmental demand, artifacts/tools), timing (e.g., duration, time of day,day of week), rules (e.g., participation structure, values) and, of course, participants—fixed qualities like race,age, and gender, as well as malleable qualities like identity, beliefs, and dispositions. To add further complexity,setting attributes of the classrooms are necessarily interwoven with characteristics at the intuitional (programs,policies, dominant beliefs) and community (socioeconomic status, racial/ethnic integration) levels that constrainand afford culturally responsive practice (Cobb, McClain, de Silvia Lamberg & Dean, 2003).ReferencesAguirre, A. (1988). Code switching, intuitive knowledge, and the bilingual classroom. In H. S. Garcia and R.Chavez (Eds.), Ethnolinguistic issues in education. Lubbock, TX: Texas Tech University.Au, K., & Mason, J. (1981). Social organization in learning to read: The balance of rights hypothesis. ReadingResearch Quarterly, 17, 115-152.Bowers, C. A., & Flinders, D. J. (1990). Responsive teaching: An ecological approach to classroom patterns oflanguage, culture, and thought. New York: Teachers College Press.Bridges, M., Cohen, S. R., McGuire, L. W., Yamada, H, Fuller, B., Mireles, L., & Scott, L. (2012). Measuringthe social behavior of Mexican American children. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 27, 555-567.Brophy, J. (1999). Toward a model of the value aspects of motivation in education: Developing appreciation forparticular learning domains and activities. Educational Psychologist, 34(2), 75-85.Brown-Jessy, S. & Cooper, J.E. (2011). Toward a conceptual framework of culturally relevant pedagogy: Anoverview of the conceptual and theoretical literature. Teacher Education Quarterly, 38(1), 65-84.Carnegie Council on Advancing Adolescent Literacy. (2010). Time to act: An agenda for advancing adolescentliteracy for college and career success. New York, NY: Carnegie Corporation of New York.Cazden, C. B. (2001). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning. Portsmith, NH:Heinemann.Chirkov, V. Ryan, R. M., Kim, Y., & Kaplan, U. (2003). Differentiating autonomy from individualism andindependence: A self-determination theory perspective on internalization of cultural orientations andwellbeing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 97–110.Cobb, P., McClain, K., de Silvia Lamberg, T., & Dean, C. (2003). Situating teachers’ instructional practices inthe institutional setting of the school and district, Educational Researcher, 32(6), 13-24.Cobb, P., & Yackel, E. (1996). Constructivist, emergent, and sociocultural perspectives in the context anddevelopmental research. Educational Psychologist, 31(3/4), 175-190.Crosnoe, R. (2006). Mexican roots, American schools: Helping Mexican immigrant children succeed. Palo Alto,CA: Stanford University PressDarling-Hammond, L. (2010). The flat world and education: How America’s commitment to equity willdetermine our future. New York: Teachers College Press.deCharms, R. (1968). Personal causation. New York: Academic Press.Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2008). Facilitating optimal motivation and psychological well-being across life’sdomains. Canadian Psychology, 49(1), 14-23.Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and education. The Macmillan Company.DiPerna, J. C., Volpe, R. J., & Elliott, S. N. (2005). A model of academic enablers and mathematicsachievement in the elementary grades. Journal of School Psychology, 43, 379-392diSessa, A. A., & Cobb, P. (2004). Ontological innovation and the role of theory in design experiments. Journalof the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 77-103.Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Continuum.Fuller, B., & Garcia-Coll, C. (2010). Learning from Latinos: Contexts, families, and child development inmotion. Developmental Psychology, 46(3), 559-565.Galindo, C. (2013). Math performance of young Mexican-origin children in the United States: Socioeconomicstatus, immigrant generation, and English proficiency. In B. Jensen and A. Sawyer (Eds.), RegardingEducación: Mexican-American Schooling, Immigration, and Bi-national Improvement. New York:Teachers College Press.Galindo, C., & Fuller, B. (2010). The social competence of Latino kindergartners and growth in mathematicalunderstanding. Developmental Psychology, 46(3), 579-592.Garcia, E. (2005). Student cultural diversity: Understanding and meeting the challenge, 3rd ed. Boston, MA:Houghton Mifflin.ICLS 2014 Proceedings908© ISLSGay, G. (2000). Culturally responsive teaching: Theory, research, & practice. New York: Teachers College. 	  Gee, J. P. (1989). What is literacy? Journal of Education, 171, 18-25.Goldenberg, C. & Gallimore, R. (1989). Teaching California's diverse student population: The commonground between educational and cultural research. California Public Schools Forum, 3, 41-56.Goldenberg, C., Rueda, R., & August, D. (2006). Sociocultural influences on the literacy attainment oflanguage-minority children and youth. In D. August & T. Shanahan (Eds.), Developing literacy insecond-language learners: Report to the National Literacy Panel on Language-Minority Children andYouth. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Gonzalez, N., Moll, L., & Amanti, C. (2005). Funds of knowledge: Theorizing practices, households,communities, and classrooms. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Good, T. L., & Brophy, J. (2008). Looking into classrooms (10th ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.Good. T.L., & Weinstein, R. (1986). Teacher expectations: A framework for exploring classrooms. In K.Zumwalt (Ed.), Improving Teaching. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and CurriculumDevelopment.Greenfield, P. M. (1994). Independence and interdependence as developmental scripts: Implications for theory,research, and practice. In P. M. Greenfield & R. R. Cocking (Eds.), Cross-cultural roots of minoritychild development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Gumperz, J. J., (1982). Discourse strategies. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Gutierrez, K., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits and repertoires of practice.Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19-25.Hakuta, K., & Garcia, E. (1989). Bilingualism and education. American Psychologist, 44(2), 374-379.Hamre, B. K., & Pianta, R. C. (2001). Early teacher-child relationships and the trajectory of children’s schooloutcomes through eighth grade. Child Development, 72, 625-638.Hamre, B. K., & Pianta, R. C. (2005). Can instructional and emotional support in the first grade classroom makea difference for children at risk of school failure? Child Development, 76(5), 949-967.Heath, S. B. (1983). Ways with words: Language, life, and work in communities and classrooms. New York:Cambridge University Press.Hernandez, D. J., Denton, N. A. & Macartney, S. E. (2007). Young Hispanic children in the 21st Century.Journal of Latinos and Education, 6(3), 209-28.Holland, D., Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge,MA: Harvard University Press.Irizarry, J.G. (2007). Ethnic and urban intersections in the classroom: Latino students, hybrid identities, andculturally responsive pedagogy. Multicultural Perspectives, 9(3), 21-28.Jensen, B. (2013). Finding synergy to improve learning opportunities for Mexican-origin students. In B. Jensen& A. Sawyer (Eds.), Regarding educación: Mexican American schooling, immigration, and binationalimprovement. New York: Teachers College Press.Jensen, B. (Under Review). Developmental-capabilities pedagogy to ameliorate the Mexican paradox.Jensen, B., Rueda, R., Reese, L., & Garcia, E. (Under review). Designing sociocultural interactions to improverelevant learning opportunities for underperforming minority students.John-Steiner, V., & Mahn, H. (1996). Sociocultural approaches to learning and development: A Vygotskianapproach. Educational Psychologist, 31(3/4), 191-206.Kim, M. S. (2002). Non-western perspectives on human communication: Implications for theory and practice.Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Knight, G. P., Kagan, S., & Buriel, R. (1982). Perceived parental practices and prosocial development. Journalof Genetic Psychology, 141, 57-65.Ladson-Billings, G. (1995). Toward a theory of culturally relevant pedagogy. American Journal of EducationalResearch,32(3), 465-491.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge.Lee, J. (2002). Racial and ethnic achievement gap trends: Reversing the progress toward equity? EducationalResearcher, 31(1), 3-12.Livas Stein, G., García Coll, C., & Huq, N. (2013). Fostering resilience in Mexican American youth throughcultural and family assets. In B. Jensen & A. Sawyer (Eds.), Regarding Educación: Mexican-AmericanSchooling, Immigration, and Bi-national Improvement. New York: Teachers College Press.Martin, A. J., & Dowson, M. (2009). Interpersonal relationships, motivation, engagement, and achievement:Yields for theory, current issues, and educational practice. Review of Educational Research, 79(1),327-365.McInerney, D. M., Roche, L. A., McInerney, V. & Marsh, H. W. (1997). Cultural perspectives on schoolmotivation: The relevance and application of goal theory. American Educational Research Journal,34(1), 207-236.Miller, L. S. (1997). An American imperative: Accelerating minority educational advancement. New Haven,ICLS 2014 Proceedings909© ISLSCT: Yale University Press.Murnane, R., & Levy, F. (1996). Teaching the new basic skills. New York: The Free Press.Nasir, N. S., & Hand, V. M. (2006). Exploring sociocultural perspectives on race, culture, and learning. Reviewof Educational Research, 76(4), 449-475.National Research Council (2012). Education for life and work: Developing transferrable knowledge and skillsin the 21st century. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Ogbu, J. (1987), Variability in minority school performance: A problem in search of an explanation.Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 18(4), 312-334.Ogbu, J. (1992). Understanding cultural diversity and learning. Educational Researcher, 21(8), 5-24.Ogbu, J., & Simons, H. (1998). Voluntary and involuntary minorities: A cultural-ecological theory of schoolperformance with some implications for education. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 29, 155-188.Pang, V. O., Han, P. H., & Pang, J. M. (2011). Asian American and Pacific Islander students: Equity and theachievement gap. Educational Researcher, 40(8), 378-389.Paradise, R., & Rogoff, B. (2009). Side by side: Learning by observing and pitching it. Ethos, 37(1), 102-138.Reese, L. (2013). Cultural change and continuity in U.S. and Mexican settings. In B. Jensen & A. Sawyer (Eds.),Regarding educación: Mexican American schooling, immigration, and binational improvement. NewYork: Teachers College Press.Reese, L., Balzano, S., Gallimore, R. and Goldenberg, C. (1995) The concept of “educación”: Latino familyvalues and American schooling. International Journal of Education Research, 23 (1), 57-81.Reese, L., Jensen, B., & Ramirez, D. (2014). Emotionally supportive classroom contexts for young Latinochildren in rural California. Elementary School Journal, 114(4)Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. New York: OxfordUniversity Press.Rogoff, B. et al. (2007). Children’s development of cultural repertoires through participation in everydayroutines and practices. In J. E. Grusec and P. D. Hastings (Eds.), Handbook of Socialization: Theoryand Research. New York: Guilford.Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, socialdevelopment, and well-being. American Psychologist, 55, 68–78.Rueda, R. (2013). Twenty first century skills: Cultural, linguistic, and motivational perspectives. In D.Alverman & N. Unrau, (Eds.), Theoretical Models & Processes of Reading. Newark, DE: InternationalReading Association.Sinatra, G. M., & Chinn, C. (2011). Thinking and reasoning in science: Promoting epistemic conceptual change.In K. Harris, C. B. McCormick, G. M. Sinatra, & J. Sweller (Eds.), Educational psychology:Contributions to education. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.Slavin, R. E. (2010). Instruction based on cooperative learning. In R. E. Mayer and P. A. Alexander (Eds.),Handbook of Research on Learning and Instruction. New York: Routledge.Stevens, R. J., & Slavin, R. E. (1995). The cooperative elementary school: Effects on students’ achievement,attitudes, and social relations. American Educational Research Journal, 32(2), 321-351.Stuart, D. and Volk, D. (2002). Collaboration in a culturally responsive literacy pedagogy:Educating teachers and Latino children. Reading Literacy and Language, 36(3), 127-134.Surowiecki, J. (2005). The wisdom of crowds. New York: Anchor Books.Tharp, R. (1989). Psychocultural variables and constants: Effects on teaching and learning in schools. AmericanPsychologist, 44(2), 349-359.Tharp, R., Estrada, P., Dalton, S., & Yamauchi, L. A. (2000). Teaching transformed: Achieving excellence,fairness, inclusion, and harmony. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.U.S. Department of Education (2009). Our future, our teachers. Washington, DC: U.S. DOE.Valdes-Fallis, G. (1978). Code-switching among bilingual Mexican-American women: Towards anunderstanding of sex-related language alternation. International Journal of the Sociology of Language,17, 65-72.van den Akker, J., Gravemeijer, K., McKenney, S., & Nieveen, N. (Eds.) (2006). Educational design research.New York: Routledge.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Wagner, T. (2008). The global achievement gap. New York: Basic Books.Webb, N. M., & Farivar, S. (1994). Promoting helping behavior in cooperative small groups in middle schoolmathematics. American Educational Research Journal, 31(2), 369-395.Wertsch, J. V., & Toma, C. (1995). Discourse and learning in the classroom: A sociocultural approach. In L.Steffe & J. Gale (Eds.), Constructivism in education. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Wortham, S., & Contreras, M. (2002). Struggling towards culturally relevant pedagogy in the Latino diaspora.Journal of Latinos and Education, 1(2), 133-144.ICLS 2014 Proceedings910© ISLS