Social, Motivational and Affective Dimensions of Learning throughSocial InteractionChrista Asterhan, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel, asterhan@huji.ac.ilSherice Clarke, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA, sclarke@pitt.eduAbstract: There is strong evidence of the cognitive benefits of collaborative-sense-makingthrough talk and dialogue. However, it is often challenging to elicit and sustain studentparticipation in such practices. This workshop emerges from growing enquiry across thelearning sciences on the social, motivational and affective dimensions of learning throughsocial interaction. Examining and integrating such dimensions in empirical research onlearning through social interaction raises fundamental methodological, conceptual andtheoretical issues for the field. This workshop aims to bring together scholars from differentdisciplines to critically examine these issues and to map the terrain for future research.Theoretical BackgroundThis workshop emerges from growing enquiry in the learning sciences on social, motivational and affectivedimensions of learning through social interaction. Research on talk and dialogue has produced strong evidencethat certain forms of collaborative sense-making that involves explanation and argumentation, can producerobust learning outcomes (a/o, Resnick, Asterhan & Clarke, in press).Until recently, research on dialogue has been limited to examining the cognitive processes and outcomesof dialogue. However, it remains challenging to both elicit and sustain student participation in dialogue (Clarke,in press). Social processes, (e.g. positioning, motivation, affect, and identity), engaged through dialogue mayserve as critical pathways to engagement in learning, and therefore, critical pathways to robust learningoutcomes. Thus, there is a need to understand the social processes and outcomes of dialogue, to betterunderstand how to support all learners so that they might benefit in terms of robust learning outcomes.Recently, scholars have become more sensitive to and interested in understanding the social, affectiveand motivational dimensions of collaborative sense-making, both in classroom as well as in computer-mediatedsettings (e.g., Baker, Andriessen & Jarvena, 2013; Kreijns, Kirschner & Vermeulen, 2013). Issues of identity,beliefs, interest, and authority can affect students’ willingness to engage in dialogue, as well as impact the wayin which they choose to engage in it. In computer-mediated dialogue, decreased social presence and sociabilityare believed to impede on the establishment of rapport, a sense of community and strong interpersonalrelationships, which may be necessary for productive learning interactions (Kreijns et al., 2013). In otherinstances, however decreased social presence may also facilitate learning outcomes, such as in the case oflearning through critical argumentation with a disagreeing peer (Asterhan & Babichenko, 2013).These non-cognitive constructs have been extensively researched in adjacent research fields, such asSociology (e.g., positioning, identity, norms) and Education (academic motivation), Social Psychology (e.g.,small group functioning), and Educational Psychology (e.g., identity, affect). The integration of social, affectiveand motivational constructs from other disciplines into the study of learning through social interaction thenrequires the development of new methodologies and, often time, revision or adaptation of ‘classical concepts’.This raises fundamental methodological, conceptual and evidentiary questions:• How can social, motivational and affective dimensions of learning be observed in learning interactionsand dialogue, and how can they be distinguished from cognitive processes?• What are the theoretical and methodological challenges of measuring social-affective- motivationaldimensions of learning through social interaction? (Particularly in light of new technologies forlearning that provide new forms of data on learning processes.)• How might we leverage these forms of evidence on learning processes to adapt instruction, in order tobetter support productive learning through dialogue in practice?Workshop GoalsThis workshop brings together scholars that are active in this emergent area of inquiry in the learning sciences.It aims to attract participants from a range of disciplinary and research traditions, both from within the LearningSciences, as well as from adjacent research traditions (e.g., classroom dialogue research, CSCL, cooperativelearning, argumentation, disciplinary teaching practices, HCI, positioning, motivation, and learning analytics),who use a range of methodological tools (experimental, discursive, ethnographic and computational). Thisworkshop builds on the 2011 AERA research conference on learning through dialogue, and a 2013 EARLIsymposium on the barriers and enablers of engaging in learning dialogue. It will constitute the first suchworkshop that brings together an emerging community of scholars from different disciplines to criticallyICLS 2014 Proceedings1684© ISLSexamine the issues and options for examining social, affective and motivational dimensions of learning in socialinteraction, and map the terrain for future research.Workshop AgendaPart I. Short presentations.The morning session will be dedicated to facilitating detailed knowledge of each other’s work, approaches,methodologies and frameworks. All the submitted papers and bios will be available on the workshop website,one week in advance. We will dedicate the morning session to becoming familiar with each other’s workthrough short presentations, Q&A and discussion opportunities. Presenters will be instructed to follow a strictpresentation format: 15 minute presentations that that will highlight the theoretical framework, the socialaffective-motivational construct investigated, methodology, extensive examples of data analyses and the typesof research questions addressed. This unified, focused format is expected to not only enhance understanding butalso facilitate comparison and integration for the afternoon activities. The review process will seek to identifyprovocative position papers to help stimulate the discussion on substantive issues.Part II. Science Café activities.The afternoon session will be based on question-oriented organization with lively discussions. 3-4 round tablesare organized, each managed by an assigned Moderator. Each Moderator/table will be focused on onesubstantive area to probe groups on in small group discussion. The 3-4 discussion topics will be decided andformulated in advance by the organizers in consult with the Program Committee and based on the submittedposition papers. The groups will go through a round-robin of discussions with each moderator, rotating tablesevery 20-30 minutes. Therefore, in the 1 ½ round-robin, each group will have spent 20-30 minutes in smallgroup discussions with all of the Moderators.The groups will be assembled so as to ensure maximum disciplinary heterogeneity, based on the shortbios submitted by each workshop participant. Moderators will begin their small group discussions with a briefoverview of their topics, and probe groups as they discuss, raising the challenging questions. The Moderatorwill write the main ideas for each group on a sheet. When groups move through the round-robin, the Moderatorwill lead subsequent groups in discussions that build on issues raised in previous group discussions. This isexpected to push the limits of these issues over the course of round-robin.The round-robin will be followed by a short coffee break, during which moderators will sort out themain themes from each table. Moderators will present these themes in a plenary session (30 minutes). The finalhour will be dedicated to a plenary open discussion with all participants, led by the one of the Committeemembers. This discussion will focus on four main questions:• What do we know?• What are the implications?• Where should we go next?• What are productive and fruitful venues for future interdisciplinary collaboration?ReferencesAsterhan C. S. C. & Babichenko, M. (2013). Learning Complex Scientific Concepts through PeerArgumentation: The Effect of Human Presence and Discourse Style. Paper presented at the BiennialEARLI conference. Munich, Germany.Baker, M., Järvelä, S., & Andriessen, J. (Eds.). (2013). Affective Learning Together: Social and EmotionalDimensions of Collaborative Learning: Routledge.Clarke, S. N. (in press). The Right to Speak. In L. B. Resnick, C. A. Asterhan & S. N. Clarke (Eds.), SocializingIntelligence through Academic Talk and Dialogue. Washington, DC: American Educational ResearchAssociation.Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P. A., & Vermeulen, M. (2013). Social aspects of CSCL environments: A researchframework. Educational Psychologist, 48(4), 229-242.Resnick, L. B., Asterhan, C., & Clarke, S. N. (Eds.) (in press). Socializing Intelligence through Academic Talkand Dialogue. Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1685© ISLS