Talk as a Window into Collaborative Lesson Design:Designing a Common Rubric in an Elementary School Work CircleKimberley Gomez, Nicole Mancevice, Ung-Sang Lee, and Jahneille CunninghamUniversity of California, Los Angeleskimgomez@ucla.eduAbstract: This poster aims to illustrate the analytic value of a design conversation thatoccurred during a multi-year practitioner-researcher partnership. This partnership takes theform of work circles (Fogleman, Fishman, & Krajcik, 2006; Reiser et al., 2000; Shrader et al.,1999; Shrader et al., 2001), which are a participatory, collaborative design setting. We presentan example of how a dialogue between elementary teachers and university researchers offersa window into the design process and design itself.IntroductionThis poster aims to illustrate the analytic value of a design conversation that occurred during a multi-yearpractitioner-researcher partnership. This partnership takes the form of work circles (Fogleman, Fishman, &Krajcik, 2006; Reiser et al., 2000; Shrader et al., 1999; Shrader et al., 2001), which are a participatory,collaborative design setting. The work is participatory in that it engages practitioners as central to the design andresearch process (Schuler & Namioka, 1993). In the case of work circles, researchers and practitionerscollaborate to analyze and set goals related to a problem of practice, and to design instructional materials thataddress an identified goal. Decision-making in the work circle is democratic (Shrader et al., 1999). However,external funding, policies, and other factors may set parameters for the work content, timelines, and products.The current practitioner-researcher partnership focuses on improving the quality of student writingacross the content areas. These work circles aim to improve students’ ability to make evidence-based claims intheir written work. To achieve this goal, the work circle teams: 1) create, share, and provide feedback on lessonsrelated to claims and evidence; 2) design common assessments of student writing; and 3) iteratively refineinstructional resources and the design process.Theoretical ApproachThe work circle reflects a distributed intelligence framework (Pea, 1993), which posits that intelligence iscreated and distributed in interaction and artifacts across an activity in relation to a goal. Knowledge aboutteaching and learning is shared through the participants’ interaction within the work circle in relation to the setproblem of practice. The design process should recognize and draw on the expertise of each participant.Although participants might not participate equally at each stage of the process, all do contribute to the work atdifferent points in the collaboration.In a work circle, there are two levels at which to consider learning – that of the participants, and that ofstudents. The instructional resources that the group designs are intended to share targeted knowledge withstudents. We suggest that the work circle participants, both researchers and practitioners, learn through theprocess of designing and revising instructional resources for students. It is through the participants’ negotiationof what to include, what not to include, and what to adapt in a lesson that the group gains a greaterunderstanding of the learning task. Through an analysis of the work circle meetings, we seek to understand howthe design conversations draw upon knowledge about practice, as well as how that knowledge is reflected in theartifacts that the participants create.Methodological ApproachThe current analysis focuses on one work circle, which was comprised of eight teachers from a laboratoryelementary school, a researcher, and a graduate student researcher. The group collectively determined theproblem of practice to address, and the design goals related to this problem of practice, as well as when, andhow often, the work circle meetings occurred during the school year. This work circle began meeting in fall2012, and convened approximately 1-2 times per month throughout the 2012-2013 school year. These meetingsoccurred on site during the school day. Each work circle meeting was approximately 1 hour. There were a totalof 15 work circle meetings.During the first work circle meeting, the participants considered problems of practice that would bemeaningful for the group to address. The group identified a need to create shared tools and language forteaching students to make evidence-based claims across the content areas. Over the course of the school year,the work circle designed and refined lessons, tasks, and a rubric related to this goal. The group would coordinateinstruction and collaboratively plan lessons during the work circle meetings, the teacher partners would enactthese lessons in the classroom, and then the group would discuss the lessons and learn from the resultant studentICLS 2014 Proceedings1671© ISLSwork. In order to document the design process, the researchers audio recorded and then transcribed each of thework circle meetings. The researchers also took notes during the meetings, and collected copies of lesson plans,rubrics, and other instructional resources that were discussed or created during a meeting.This analysis sought to examine “decision points” in the work circle design conversations. Wereviewed meeting transcripts to identify portions of a meeting during which the researchers and teachersdiscussed a particular topic related to a lesson or other instructional resource. We identified the point when aparticipant, or participants, first introduced an idea in the conversation, and then determined when the grouparrived at an agreement within the meeting. However, the topic may have been revisited in a subsequentmeeting. These segments range in the amount of dialogue that they include. The segment described in the nextsection was identified as a decision point in the design of a rubric for evaluating student work. It isrepresentative of several segments that occurred over the course of design meetings related to this rubric.Preliminary AnalysisIn this “decision point” segment, the work circle team members are engaged in the design of a rubric forevaluating claims and evidence in student writing. This moment of design discussion emerged at a midpointduring the school year. In previous work circle meetings, the group had decided that it was possible to analyzestudents’ claims and evidence work across the content areas, and that it would be useful to design a commonrubric that could be applied to student work. The group also determined that claims and evidence could beanalyzed according to three criteria: accuracy, relevance, and depth. In this segment of conversation, the groupworked to reconcile a description of accuracy in the rubric. However, this conversation was not simplywordsmithing. As the participants designed the rubric, they engaged in questions around the kinds of knowledgethey wanted to have about students’ ability to make claims and offer evidence. In probing the wording related tothe accuracy of claims, the participants tacitly and explicitly drew on the knowledge present in the group. Theyidentified potential redundancy in the knowledge that would be derived from two statements on the rubric. Theyread the statements aloud, and wondered about the differences between relevance and accuracy. They identifiedlikely points of confusion in the rubric, and they decided to annotate the document so that students would not beconfused. The researcher role was to seek clarity about the wording, and to offer recollection of previous ideasthat were part of earlier instantiations of the design.DiscussionThe theme of the 2014 ICLS conference is “Learning and Becoming in Practice.” In this poster, we present anexample of how a dialogue between elementary teachers and university researchers offers a window into thedesign process and design itself. We have suggested that participant talk, within the context of a collaborativepractitioner-researcher design context, helps us to recognize what teachers “call out” as important in a designedartifact, as well as how teachers and researchers make knowledge claims, resolve differences in recollection andin knowledge, and interact with each other to refine designs. In future explorations of talk in collaborativedesign contexts, we hope to offer additional evidence of how participants’ knowledge claims and expertise cometo bear on the design of common artifacts.ReferencesFogleman, J., Fishman, B., & Krajcik, J. (2006). Sustaining innovations through lead teacher learning: Alearning sciences perspective on supporting professional development. Teaching Education, 17(2),181‐194.Gomez, K., Sherrer, J., Borg, T., Dowling, J., & Evans, D. (2006). Literacy infusion in a high schoolenvironmental science curriculum. Spectrum, 31(3), 31-38.Pea, R. D. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.).Distributed cognitions (pp. 47-87). New York: Cambridge University Press.Reiser, B. J., Spillane, J. P., Steinmuller, F., Sorsa, D., Carney, K., & Kyza, E. (2000). Investigating the mutualadaptation process in teachers’ design of technology-infused curricula. In Fourth internationalconference of the learning sciences (pp. 342‐349). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Schuler, D., & Namioka, A. (Eds.). (1993). Participatory design: Principles and practices. Hillsdale, NJ:Erlbaum.Shrader, G., Williams, K., Lachance-Whitcomb, J., Finn, L. E., & Gomez, L. (2001). Participatory design ofscience curricula: The case for research for practice. Paper presented at the American EducationalResearch Association, Seattle, WA.Shrader, G., Williams, K., Lachance-Whitcomb, J., Finn, L.E., & Gomez, L.M. (1999). Work in the work circle:Collaborative design to improve teaching practice. Paper presented at Spencer Conference onCollaborative Research for Practice, New Orleans, LA.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1672© ISLS