Children’s Use of Inscriptions in Written Arguments AboutSocioscientific IssuesSihan Xiao, William A. Sandoval, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USAEmail: shxiao@ucla.edu, sandoval@gseis.ucla.eduAbstract: Engaging with science in everyday life typically occurs in the context ofsocioscientific issues, situations where science can play some role in helping people come tosome judgment or decision. Such issues often require the interpretation of inscriptions(graphic representations of information) to evaluate claims. Research on socioscientificreasoning has shown that students often do not use relevant science or subordinate it topersonal or social concerns. Research has not yet looked explicitly into how students interpretdifferent types of inscriptions as potential evidence for use in socioscientific reasoning. Thisstudy compares upper elementary students’ use of scientific and editorial inscriptions in theirarguments about socioscientific issues. Using a pre/post design, we investigate students’ useof inscriptions before and after a semester of science instruction focused on the coordinationof claims and evidence.IntroductionEngaging with science in everyday life often means being put in a position of having to evaluate claims. Thisincludes not just deciding whether or not to believe a claim, but also judging its relevance to the issue at hand.Being scientifically literate, therefore, entails becoming a competent outsider to science that identifies personalrelevance of particular scientific claims (Feinstein, 2011). Yet to complicate matters, in science-related issuespeople might encounter (e.g. What to do about climate change? Should I buy organic foods?), arguments for oragainst a particular position combine scientific and editorial claims. Educators have long wanted school scienceto prepare students to engage with science productively, but we have little evidence this happens. A good dealof research on science-related issues (i.e. so-called socioscientific issues) has explored questions around whenand how students use relevant scientific knowledge to reason about an issue. Yet, one's knowledge on a topic isvery often insufficient to contribute to a reasoned judgment. The problem becomes, then, how do studentsevaluate claims they encounter about which they know little? What do they think counts as evidence?Socioscientific issues (SSI), those where science can inform the judgments or decisions we have tomake in such fields as energy use, the environment, or health, are an arena in which students’ thinking aboutevidence can be linked with their daily life. We hope students use scientific knowledge to help them come toreasoned arguments and decisions (e.g. Kolstø, 2001; Zeidler, Sadler, Simmons, & Howes, 2005), yet studiesshow students often rely more on their personal experience, value judgments, and moral concerns (Grace &Ratcliffe, 2002; Jiménez-Aleixandre & Pereiro-Munoz, 2002; Yang, 2004). Why is that the case? Previousresearch has proposed several explanations. First, a lack of understanding of scientific concepts makes themunlikely to be used (e.g. Hogan, 2002; Sadler & Fowler, 2006). Alternatively, students may understandapplicable science knowledge but not consider it relevant to the situation at hand (e.g. Feinstein, 2011; Nielsen,2012c). Further, it is only natural that in everyday situations science serves merely to frame the focus of seeingwhile values play a more significant role in reasoning (Nielsen, 2012a, 2012b). This view opens the possibilitythat students make judgments about the appropriate role of scientific knowledge in SSI.This study explores the bases on which students might make such judgments, by focusing on aneglected yet critical aspect of SSI reasoning: the use of inscriptions as evidence. Inscriptions are graphicalrepresentations of information, such as photos, diagrams, graphs, tables, etc., mobilized in support of arguments(Latour, 1990). In science, inscriptions are a crucial means for representing the world and supporting or refutingexplanations about how it works. In the classroom, as in the science lab, they mediate efficient communication,foster evaluation of scientific knowledge, and support conceptual understanding (Cobb, 2002; Roth & McGinn,1998). Yet little is known about how students use inscriptions in SSI, even though when we face science in ourdaily life, we encounter inscriptions often simultaneously. For instance, a news article about hybrid cars maycontain a diagram of CO2 emissions by gasoline-powered cars and a photo of horrible traffic on a Californiafreeway. A picture of a peaceful river farm may be attached to the grocery shelf as advertisement for organicfoods. How do students perceive the role of these different inscriptions in reasoning about energy use or organicfoods? Do they interpret such images as evidentiary, or as evocative of particular feelings or ideas?To approach these problems, three research questions guide this study. First, what inscriptions doelementary-aged students use to argue about a SSI? Second, how do they use these inscriptions? Third, howappropriately do they use these inscriptions? Using a pre-/post-test design, we find patterns in which studentsuse different types of inscriptions, in varying ways, to support their decision-making at the beginning and theend of a semester of instruction geared towards coordinating evidence and claims. We discuss potentialICLS 2014 Proceedings1107© ISLSimplications for science teaching that fosters scientific argumentation and productive engagement withsocioscientific issues.MethodsParticipantsThis study took place in a public university laboratory school located in a large, ethnically and economicallydiverse city. The student population was 36% Caucasian, 28% Multiethnic, 20% Latino, 9% Asian, and 7%African-American. One intact 5th-grade classroom was recruited for this study, involving 2 science teachers and56 students aged 10-12 (30 boys, 26 girls). Students of this age have basic knowledge of science yet declininginterest (Osborne, Simon, & Collins, 2003), and SSI addresses this very feature by approaching everydaysituations, thus makes the sampled classroom analytically informative.SettingThe two teachers of the sampled students were participating, with the other teachers at their grade level, in thesecond year of an ongoing “work circle” (Shrader, Williams, Walker, & Gomez, 1999) with researchers todevelop practices to help students coordinate claims and evidence across the curriculum. In science, thisincluded learning routines of productive science talk (Michaels & O’Connor, 2012). Teachers organizedprojects and short-term group work to encourage students to share their ideas and work toward consensusexplanations for the science topics under study.MeasuresWe used two written tasks as pre-/post-test design to measure participants’ performance at the beginning andend of the fall semester. In each task, participants individually read a single-paragraph scenario of asocioscientific issue (alternative energy use in one task and genetically modified food in another). The scenariopresents a dilemma about which participants have to make a personal decision. We oriented participants topersonal decision making because it represents how people commonly encounter and use science in everydaylife. Participants were then asked to write down their decision and explanation, using inscriptions provided.Each scenario includes 8 inscriptions participants may use to support their written response. Four arescientific inscriptions: 2 tables and 2 diagrams. Tables refer to the arrangement of information, mostly numbers,in rows and columns. Diagrams refer to graphs, models, or maps. Four editorial inscriptions include 2 photosand 2 drawings. Inscriptions were selected by reviewing a variety of news reports related to the topic of eachscenario. Each inscription includes its original caption from the source article to help students comprehend theinformation it conveys. We divided inscriptions into scientific and editorial because students use both scientificand editorial resources to reason about SSI (Albe, 2008; Wu & Tsai, 2007), but it is not yet known whether ornot students prefer one form over the other, or if they choose different kinds of inscriptions to support differenttypes of claims. Finally, we chose 2 inscriptions for each type (8 in total) because it is an amount that is feasibleto handle yet maintains enough variation.ProceduresWe administered the pretest early in the fall semester (i.e. mid-October 2013) and the post-test following thesemester (i.e. late January 2014). Presentation of tasks is counter-balanced: participants are randomly dividedinto two groups in each class, with half of them completing the energy use task as the pretest and the GMO taskas the posttest, and the other half completing the tasks in the opposite order. This counter-balancing mitigatespotential effects from task ordering or difficulty. Twenty-seven students completed the energy task at pre-test,then the GMO task; 29 completed the GMO task first, followed by the energy task.We gave oral instruction to participants prior to the test. They were then asked to read the singleparagraph scenario and make a personal decision (either “if you lived in this city, which power plant would youvote for” or “would you buy GMO foods on a regular basis”), write down their decision and explanation, anduse inscriptions provided as many as necessary to support their decisions. No discussions were permitted duringthe testing, but they were allowed to ask us any questions regarding task comprehension.Analysis and FindingsIn what follows, we present our findings of content analysis on the written tasks. For descriptive purposes, weshow separate data in each task as well as combined data to delineate a comprehensive picture of students’ preto-post performance.What Inscriptions Do Students Use?For the first question, we counted the frequencies of students’ citing each inscription. As we predefine 4 typesof inscriptions and distinguish scientific ones from editorial ones, we documented how often they use each type,ICLS 2014 Proceedings1108© ISLSand specifically, which they use the most. These frequencies depict a general picture of students’ use ofinscriptions in the task, and in particular, whether students tend to use inscriptions that are more relevant toeveryday life (e.g. photos, drawings). The 56 students cited the given inscriptions 117 times in the pretest (63 inthe energy task and 54 in the GMO task) and 127 times in the posttest (64 in the energy task and 63 in the GMOtask; see Table 1). Across both tasks, 31% of cited inscriptions in the pretest and 32% in the posttest werescientific. As a group, students were more likely to use editorial inscriptions than scientific ones in both thepretest, χ2 (1, N=56) = 10.470, p < .01, and the posttest, χ2 (1, N=56) = 9.646, p < .01. Thus, students preferrededitorial forms of evidence to scientific ones, which suggests an orientation to the problems that is more social,in which the relevant science is subordinated to other kinds of concerns (e.g., economic, moral, etc.).Table 1. Frequency and percentage of types of inscriptions cited across Energy and GMO tasksPretestPosttestDiagram30 (26%)31 (25%)Table11 (9%)15 (12%)Drawing35 (30%)26 (20%)Photo41 (35%)55 (43%)Total117127More specifically, in the energy task, students frequently cited: 1) a drawing portraying nuclearreactors as green leaves with the title “Nuclear Energy Clean Air” (14 times in the pretest), 2) a photo ofworking coal-burning power plants in Ukraine (18 in the posttest), and 3) a photo of nuclear reactor explosionsin the 2011 earthquake in Japan (13 in the pretest and 14 in the posttest). In the GMO task, on the other hand,students frequently cited a line chart (i.e. diagram) that illustrates the increasing rates of inflammatory boweldisease after GMOs were introduced in U.S. public diet (16 in the pretest and 18 in the posttest). Often cited wasalso a photo in which a little girl was holding up a sign during a street protest against GMO. Overall, Table 1shows students tended to use photos the most, and tables the least, perhaps because they viewed photos as morecommon in and relevant to their everyday life. A semester of instruction did not change such perceptions.How Do Students Use Inscriptions?To understand how students deploy specific inscriptions within an argument, we adapted a coding schemedeveloped to categorize levels of “rhetorical reference” to inscriptions of data (Sandoval & Millwood, 2005).These levels range from less to more appropriate, from a scientific perspective, kinds of reference (examplesverbatim from students’ responses): 1) pointing, referring to some inscription as relevant without saying why(e.g. “I would vote for nuclear plant energy because of image 5.”); 2) description, describing the content of aninscription without linking it to a claim (e.g. “No [GMOs] because in pic 8, a food turned into a crazy animal.This animal can kill the humans and multiply.”); 3) assertion, asserting an inscription “shows” or “support” aclaim without explaining how (e.g. “I would vote for the coal power plant because it seems safer as shown inimage #5 compared to image #8.”); and 4) interpretation, explicating how specific features of an inscriptionrelate to a claim (e.g. “In picture 2 it states that the rate of inflammatory desease has increased a lot since beforeGMO started. It pretty much doubled since GMO, and if it keeps up, our community will be full of desease.”). Asufficient use of inscription should involve as much interpretation as possible.The level of rhetorical reference is coded for each citation of an inscription. The scale of these levels isordinal, so we cannot simply create a sum of scores for each participant. Instead, there are two ways to use thisscheme to understand students’ references to inscriptions. At the aggregate level, we computed the frequenciesof each type of reference across the corpus of written responses (see Table 2).Table 2. Frequency and percentage of rhetorical use of inscriptionsPretestPosttestPointing65 (56%)49 (39%)Description25 (21%)28 (22%)Assertion15 (13%)37 (29%)Interpretation12 (10%)13 (10%)Total117127Chi-squared tests indicate that students were most likely to merely “point” to particular inscriptions,χ2pretest (3, N=56) = 61.427, p < .001, and χ2posttest (3, N=56) = 21.756, p < .001.This echoes Sandoval &Millwood’s (2005) earlier claim that students may see data as self-evident, with no need for interpretation.Compared with those of the pretest, on the other hand, the percentage of pointing decreases and that of assertionincreases, both in a notable way, in the posttest.We also computed ratio scores of the four levels of rhetorical reference for each student (e.g. one used5 inscriptions: 60% pointer, 20% description, and 20% assertion). Non-parametric correlations show that, in thepretest, only the level of interpretation is significantly correlated with scientific types of inscriptions (r = .247, p< .05). Though quite mild, this might suggest that students see the scientific types of inscription as more open toICLS 2014 Proceedings1109© ISLSinterpretation, and thus more in need of being explicitly justified in relation to their claims. The percentage ofscientific inscriptions does not significantly correlate with any level of reference in the posttest.How Appropriate Is Students’ Use of Inscriptions?The third question focuses on the functional role of inscriptions in relation to their content. We anticipated twomajor functional roles, varying by the type of inscription: eliciting values or emotions vs. providing data. Forinstance (from students’ responses), a claim, “The nuclear power is so dangerous, people will get injured orkilled, like in [a photo of nuclear reactor explosion in Japan],” was coded as eliciting emotions or values, for thephoto is used to show the horror of a nuclear accident. To be clear, it is not that such a photo is not evidentiary;the value of such images is exactly that they show quite viscerally a risk of nuclear energy. Yet, such an imageis used, in this case, to elicit an emotion rather than to convey evidentiary information. An example of providingdata is: “It also looks as in [a diagram that shows the increasing rates of inflammatory bowel disease afterGMOs were introduced in U.S. public diet] that GMO foods are possibly causing inflammatory bowel disease.”The inscription provides data to support the causal claim.Our assessment of appropriateness entails an explicit correspondence between contents and functions;that is, using scientific inscriptions to provide data about the state of the world, and using editorial inscriptionsto elicit values, emotions, or moral concerns. Taking up this stance, we counted as appropriate all instanceswhere a claim corresponded to the inscription cited as evidence, shown in Table 3 for both tests.Table 3. Frequency and percentage of functional use of inscriptions (types of inscriptions : functions)PretestPosttestSci : Data27 (23%)35 (28%)Appropriate UseEdit : Values23 (20%)40 (31%)Total50 (43%)75 (59%)Sci : Values13 (11%)11 (9%)Inappropriate UseEdit : Data54 (46%)41 (32%)Total67 (57%)52 (41%)Chi-squared test on the 4 combinations of functional use in the pretest shows that students were morelikely to use editorial inscriptions to provide data, χ2 (3, N=56) = 31.479, p < .001. It reveals a mismatchbetween the content of inscription a student use and its function being deployed at the beginning of study. Yettheir appropriate vs. inappropriate use in total did not significantly differ. In the posttest, on the other hand,students were more likely to use inscriptions in appropriate ways, χ2 (1, N=56) = 4.165, p < .05. From Table 3, itis clear that the increase of appropriate use could be attributed to the increase of using editorial inscriptions toelicit values and the decrease of using them to provide data, suggesting students’ improvement in functionallydeploying editorial inscriptions in their arguments.In addition, non-parametric correlations reveal that, in the pretest, appropriateness of functional use issignificantly correlated with percentage of scientific inscriptions (r = .459, p < .01), which indicates thatstudents who used more scientific inscriptions were more likely to use inscriptions appropriately. Theappropriate use is also modestly correlated with the rhetorical level of interpretation (r = .283, p < .05), whichmay suggest a covariant tendency of coordinating the content of an inscription with its function and interpretingan inscription to support a claim. Counterpart analyses on the posttest, again, do not yield significant results.DiscussionThis study addresses an immediate question that has not been explored in sufficient depth in studies of SSIreasoning. That is, how do students deploy different types of inscriptions in their arguments about SSI, giventhat in everyday situations, SSI often come with a variety of inscriptions? Our analyses show that at thebeginning of the semester, students tended to: 1) use editorial inscriptions, especially photos, more thanscientific ones, 2) only “point” to an inscription without making clear how it is related to a claim, and 3) useeditorial inscriptions as data to support a claim. A semester of science instruction that highlighted scientificargumentation, coordinating evidence and claims in particular, did not significantly change what inscriptionsstudents tended to use, but, more or less, how students used inscriptions to argue about SSI.Agreeing with Nielsen (2012a, 2012c) on SSI argumentation, we do not expect students to use onlyscientific inscriptions and make only scientific arguments. In everyday situations, people make decisions notabout “what is true,” but about “what to do,” in which non-scientific considerations play a significant role. Yetwe do argue that school should teach students to explicitly distinguish evidentiary demands in arguments,supporting the veridicality of claims, from other rhetorically meaningful uses of inscriptions, and to understandthe strengths and weaknesses of kinds of inscriptions for supporting particular kinds of claims.Our analyses shed needed light on children’s understanding of different forms of evidence and theiruses. The prevailing view in science education is that students see data as objectively self-evident, althoughyoung students are capable of learning the need to justify evidence-claim relations (Ryu & Sandoval, 2012).This study extends this work, through our contrast between scientific and editorial inscriptions. The findings weICLS 2014 Proceedings1110© ISLSpresent here suggest that, students may be capable of learning to use editorial, if not scientific, inscriptions moreappropriately, and to take the self-evidence of data less for granted.This study opens up a new direction of research on public engagement with science focused on thefeatures of potential forms of evidence and their influence on how students coordinate claims and evidence.Although our design does not enable causal inferences from classroom instruction to changes in pre-/post-tests,it takes a very first step to understanding use of inscriptional evidence in arguing about socioscientific issues. Aseducators become more concerned with how students warrant claims, scientific and otherwise, this study alignswith efforts to understand children’s ideas of what makes a good warrant for particular kinds of claims. Becausescience knowledge is inevitably subordinate in socioscientific issues, by their nature, it is important to developdetailed accounts of how students make sense of what counts as “scientific” and what does not. This, in otherwords, is to explore children’s capacity for becoming competent outsiders to science (Feinstein, 2011) byidentifying relevant scientific resources and deploying them in their own everyday judgments and decisions.ReferencesAlbe, V. (2008). When Scientific Knowledge, Daily Life Experience, Epistemological and SocialConsiderations Intersect: Students’ Argumentation in Group Discussions on a Socio-scientific Issue.Research in Science Education, 38(1), 67–90.Cobb, P. (2002). Reasoning With Tools and Inscriptions. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11(2-3), 187–215.Feinstein, N. W. (2011). Salvaging science literacy. Science Education, 95(1), 168–185.Grace, M. M., & Ratcliffe, M. (2002). The science and values that young people draw upon to make decisionsabout biological conservation issues. International Journal of Science Education, 24(11), 1157–1169.Hogan, K. (2002). Small groups’ ecological reasoning while making an environmental management decision.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(4), 341–368.Jiménez-Aleixandre, & Pereiro-Munoz, C. (2002). Knowledge producers or knowledge consumers?Argumentation and decision making about environmental management. International Journal ofScience Education, 24(11), 1171–1190.Kolstø, S. D. (2001). Scientific literacy for citizenship: Tools for dealing with the science dimension ofcontroversial socioscientific issues. Science Education, 85(3), 291–310.Latour, B. (1990). Drawing things together. In M. Lynch & S. Woolgar (Eds.), Representation in scientificpractice (pp. 19–68). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Michaels, S., & O’Connor, C. (2012). Talk science primer. Cambridge, MA: TERC.Nielsen, J. A. (2012a). Arguing from Nature: The role of “nature” in students’ argumentations on a socioscientific issue. International Journal of Science Education, 34(5), 723–744.Nielsen, J. A. (2012b). Co-opting Science: A preliminary study of how students invoke science in value-ladendiscussions. International Journal of Science Education, 34(2), 275–299.Nielsen, J. A. (2012c). Science in discussions: An analysis of the use of science content in socioscientificdiscussions. Science Education, 96(3), 428–456.Osborne, J., Simon, S., & Collins, S. (2003). Attitudes towards science: A review of the literature and itsimplications. International Journal of Science Education, 25(9), 1049–1079.Roth, W.-M., & McGinn, M. K. (1998). Inscriptions: Toward a Theory of Representing as Social Practice.Review of Educational Research, 68(1), 35–59.Ryu, S., & Sandoval, W. A. (2012). Improvements to elementary children’s epistemic understanding fromsustained argumentation. Science Education, 96(3), 488–526.Sadler, T. D., & Fowler, S. R. (2006). A threshold model of content knowledge transfer for socioscientificargumentation. Science Education, 90(6), 986–1004.Sandoval, W. A., & Millwood, K. A. (2005). The Quality of Students’ Use of Evidence in Written ScientificExplanations. Cognition and Instruction, 23(1), 23–55.Shrader, G., Williams, K., Walker, L., & Gomez, L. (1999). Work in the “work-circle”: A description ofcollaborative design to improve teaching practice. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of theAmerican Educational Research Association, San Diego, CA.Wu, Y., & Tsai, C. (2007). High School Students’ Informal Reasoning on a Socio-scientific Issue: Qualitativeand quantitative analyses. International Journal of Science Education, 29(9), 1163–1187.Yang, F.-Y. (2004). Exploring high school students’ use of theory and evidence in an everyday context: the roleof scientific thinking in environmental science decision-making. International Journal of ScienceEducation, 26(11), 1345–1364.Zeidler, D. L., Sadler, T. D., Simmons, M. L., & Howes, E. V. (2005). Beyond STS: A research-basedframework for socioscientific issues education. Science Education, 89(3), 357–377.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1111© ISLS