Community-Based Engineering andNovice Elementary Teachers’ Knowledge of Engineering PracticesKristen B. Wendell and Tejaswini DalviUniversity of Massachusetts Boston, Center of Science and Mathematics in ContextEmail: kristen.wendell@umb.edu, tejaswini.dalvi@umb.eduAbstract: The goal of our research is to study the extent to which a community-basedengineering component of a teacher education program can impact new elementary teachers’abilities to identify and respond to students’ science and engineering ideas and practices. Ourmixed methods study design includes a novel Video Case Diagnosis task where teachersanalyze video of elementary students discussing engineering design problems.IntroductionAccording to the writers of the Next Generation Science Standards (National Research Council, 2013), onefundamental way in which the NGSS differ from previous national science education frameworks is thatengineering design has been elevated “to the same level as scientific inquiry in science classroom instruction atall levels” (NRC, 2013, p. 337). This shift raises new questions for the elementary teacher educationcommunity. How can teacher preparation programs help pre-service teachers develop the knowledge andunderstanding they need to include both science and engineering practices in their elementary classrooms?Previous work reveals strategies for improving novice teachers’ competence in inquiry-based science teaching(e.g., Forbes, 2011). However, there is limited research on how elementary teachers learn to teach engineeringdesign (Hsu, Cardella, & Purzer, 2010), and preparing pre-service teachers to guide their students in bothengineering design and scientific inquiry is a new challenge.In response to this challenge, we propose to develop and investigate an innovative model thatintroduces novice elementary teachers to “community-based engineering design” as a strategy for teaching andlearning in urban schools. The goal of our research is to explore how community-based engineering experiencescan contribute to new elementary teachers’ abilities to identify and respond to students’ emerging science andengineering ideas and practices. The study is in its early stages. In this poster we report on our initial yetsignificant effort to understand novice teachers’ understandings of science and engineering practices with aninstrument we introduce as the Video Case Diagnosis task.	  Theoretical ApproachOur work is framed by engineering design cognition literature (e.g., Cross, 2004), situated learning theory (e.g.,Lave & Wenger, 1991), and the resources perspective on children’s science learning. Focused on the“productive conceptual, meta-representational, linguistic, experiential, and epistemological resources thatstudents have for advancing their understanding of scientific ideas” (Warren et al., 2001, p. 531), the resourcesperspective is aligned with the idea that students come to school with “funds of knowledge” from theirexperiences at home and in their communities (Moll, Amanti, Neff, & Gonzalez, 1992). These funds ofknowledge can be used as a foundation for engaging students who are typically left on the margins of schoolscience. A key objective of the proposed study is to use community-based engineering experiences as a situatedlearning context to help new teachers identify and build upon the resources of students in urban elementaryschools. Studies of professional engineers have revealed that the enterprise of engineering draws uponindividuals’ cognitive, sociocultural, and affective resources (Cardella, Atman, Turns, & Adams, 2008).Our research question has two parts: During the course of community-based engineering experiences,what is the evolution of novice urban elementary teachers’ (a) understandings of engineering practices and theirrelationship to science practices and (b) identification and response to students’ engineering and science ideasand practices?Methodological ApproachParticipants in the study are graduate students in their final year of an elementary teacher preparation program.During their science teaching methods course, they solve a sample community-based engineering problemdeveloped by the course instructor and expert elementary science educators and design and implement acommunity-based engineering mini-lesson. A subset of participants then attends a summer institute where theycreate and implement with elementary students a full community-based engineering module that is connected tothe school district’s science curriculum.We employ a mixed methods study design. We measure teachers’ understandings of science andengineering practices with a new instrument called the Video Case Diagnosis task. Building upon work that usesvideo cases of student work in science and mathematics (Hammer & van Zee, 2006; Norton, McCloskey, &ICLS 2014 Proceedings1565© ISLSHudson, 2011; van Es & Sherin, 2008) the VCD task asks novice teachers to watch a brief video of elementarystudents attempting to solve an engineering design problem. It then asks teachers to list (a) the ideas that thestudents express about science phenomena and engineering solutions, (b) the science and engineering practicesin which the students engage, and (c) three suggestions for how the teacher could respond productively to thestudents. To develop the scoring rubric, we synthesize expert science educators’ and science educationresearchers’ responses to create an “exemplar” answer for each video case (Norton et al., 2011). Additional datasources for the overall study include video recording of the novice teachers during community-basedengineering tasks and written artifacts from the summer institute and methods course assignments, whichinvolve the critique and revision of science and engineering lessons.Preliminary FindingsOur preliminary findings are primarily based on the initial administration of the Video Case Diagnosis task.This exploratory stage serves the dual purpose of informing us of novice teachers’ initial understanding ofscience and engineering practice and serving as a pilot version of the instrument. Thirty elementary pre-serviceteachers participated in this pilot run. The video featured two fourth-grade students engaged in conceptualplanning for a device that could lift a heavy object out of the ocean. The boys use verbal language, writtennotes, sketches, and rough physical prototypes to communicate their design ideas to each other and create aninitial design plan. Preliminary analysis of teacher responses indicates that they tend to focus on two aspects ofthe students’ work: a) students’ use of science and engineering technical vocabulary (e.g., “lever,” “weight”)and b) the students’ physical prototypes, including the rudimentary lever the students created out of a waterbottle and pencil. Preliminary analysis also indicates that the teachers do not frequently notice the importantengineering practices of problem identification and consideration of multiple solutions. In our poster we presentdetailed findings from these initial exploratory stages.Relevance to Conference Theme: “Learning and Becoming in Practice”Our work contributes to the conference theme through its dual focus on pre-service teacher engagement inengineering practice as well as their learning to notice and respond to young students’ science and engineeringpractice. We investigate how novice teachers, especially in tightly constrained urban elementary schools, learnabout science and engineering practice, and become science and engineering educators.ReferencesCardella, M. E., Atman, C. J., Turns, J., & Adams, R. S. (2008). Students with differing design processes asfreshmen: Case studies on change. International Journal of Engineering Education, 24(2), 246-259.Cross, N. (2004). Expertise in design: an overview. Design Studies, 25(5), 427–441.Forbes, C. T. (2011). Preservice elementary teachers’ adaptation of science curriculum materials for inquirybased elementary science. Science Education, 95, 927-955.Hammer, D. & van Zee, E.H. (Eds.) (2006). Seeing the science in children’s thinking: Case studies of studentinquiry in physical science. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.Hsu, M.-C., Cardella, M., & Purzer, S. (2010). Assessing elementary teachers' design knowledge before andafter introduction of a design process model. In Proceedings of the 117th American Society forEngineering Education Annual Conference and Exposition, Louisville, KY.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Moll, L.C., Armanti, C., Neff, D., & Gonzalez, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitativeapproach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory into Practice, 31 (2), 132-141.National Research Council. (2013). Next generation science standards. Washington, D.C.: The NationalAcademies Press.Norton, A., McCloskey, A., & Hudson, R. A. (2011). Prediction assessments: Using video-based predictions toassess prospective teachers' knowledge of students' mathematical thinking. Journal of MathematicsTeacher Education, 14, 305-325.van Es, E. A. & Sherin, M. G. (2008). Mathematics teachers ”learning to notice” in the context of a video club.Teaching and Teacher Education: 244-276.Warren, B., Ballenger, C., Ogonowski, M., Rosebery, A. S., Hudicourt-Barnes, J. (2001). Rethinking diversityin learning science: The logic of everyday sense-making. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38,529 – 552.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant 1253344. Any opinions, findings andconclusions expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1566© ISLS