Capturing Personal and Social Science: Technology for Integratingthe Building Blocks of DispositionTamara Clegg, Elizabeth Bonsignore, June Ahn, Jason Yip, Daniel Pauw, Michael Gubbels,Becky Lewittes, and Emily Rhodes{tclegg, ebonsign, ahnjune, jasonyip, dpauw, mgubbels, charley, eerhodes}@umd.eduUniversity of Maryland, 2117 Hornbake South Wing, College Park, MD 20742Abstract: The development of a scientific disposition opens opportunities for youth to seescience as relevant in their daily lives. Four building blocks promote disposition development:gaining competence, sparking curiosity, belonging and contributing to one’s communities, andbridging personal connections. In this paper, we explore the role technology played insupporting unified disposition development by detailing the experiences of two focal learners.We found that technology can act as a boundary object that supports connections across thebuilding blocks in integrated ways, and we include challenges and implications for design.IntroductionTo advance our nation’s goal of “science for all learners” (Rutherford & Ahlgren, 1991), researchers note that itis increasingly important to help young learners develop scientific dispositions (e.g., Borda, 2007). Thedevelopment of a scientific disposition opens opportunities for learners to explore potential roles that they canplay in science, whether they choose to pursue scientific careers or to use science practically in their everydaylives (Barton, 1998). We define disposition as values of, ideas about, and ways of participating in a disciplinethat come frequently, consciously, and voluntarily (e.g,. Gresalfi, 2009). We focus on scientific inquiry as adisposition that will help learners explore their worlds, and we analyze disposition through the lens of scientificinquiry practices. To support learners’ efforts to develop scientific dispositions, we must devise ways to helpthem move beyond abstract facts and phenomena, to extend their classroom experiences beyond the bounds ofschool (Bereiter, 1995). Specifically, we must enable learners to scientize their daily activities, which involveshelping learners see the world through scientific lenses, and to integrate this vision in practical applicationsacross the contexts of their everyday lives (Clegg & Kolodner, 2014).To that end, we have developed life-relevant learning environments (LRL) that include programs andtechnologies designed to help learners to engage in science in the context of pursuing their own personallymeaningful goals and to explore potential roles they can play in science. Kitchen Chemistry (KC) is one suchLRL program, and is the contextual focus of this paper. KC is an out of school program in which learnersengage in scientific inquiry through cooking. Technology has been widely used to support learners’ scientificinquiry experiences and understanding (e.g., Barab et al., 2010). Additionally, the ubiquity and culture oftechnology in today’s society, especially among youth (Madden, Lenhart, & Duggan, 2013) suggests thattechnology holds powerful potential for supporting personal and social applications of inquiry among youth.While technology has been effective at promoting the development of specific aspects of dispositionindividually, less is known about how technology might promote learners’ unified experiences across thesebuilding blocks of disposition development. Particularly, we ask: 1) what role can technology play in supportinglearners’ integrated development across the building blocks of disposition? and 2) how can we designtechnology to support learners’ unified development across the building blocks of disposition?BackgroundBased on prior disposition research, we have identified four building blocks that promote learners’ dispositiondevelopment (Clegg & Kolodner, 2014): 1) procedural and conceptual understanding support learners’ efforts todevelop the competence needed to engage in scientific inquiry; 2) interest helps learners develop a curiosityabout the world – a desire to learn more; 3) social interactions promote learners’ engagement in communities ofindividuals who share similar interests as well as communities to which they can make contributions; and 4)personal connections help learners develop personal values for scientific inquiry and reasoning and acommitment to engaging in scientific inquiry. While there is a wealth of literature on promoting these buildingblocks individually, less is known about how we should integrate them into more unified scientizingexperiences, and how learners’ dispositions develop through more unified experiences. Our previous work inthe KC learning environment has shown that LRL environments can be places where the building blocks cometogether to promote learners’ scientific disposition development (Clegg & Kolodner, 2014). We now aim tounderstand the ways in which we can draw upon the features and affordances of technology to promote learners’unified experiences across the building blocks of disposition development.Given the ubiquity of technology in children’s lives, they are engaged in a multiplicity of personallyrelevant, technology-based experiences, such as gaming (e.g., Squire & Jenkins, 2003) and social mediaICLS 2014 Proceedings455© ISLSparticipation (boyd, 2009). Through these deeply personal and interest-driven experiences, learners participateincreasingly in affinity groups (Gee, 2005), which foreground common interests over membership in moreformal structures. Key to unifying learners’ development in the building blocks of disposition is then helpingthem to connect their life-world subcultures to the subcultures of science (Aikenhead, 1996). One potentiallytransformative factor in helping learners make these connections is the creation and management of boundaryobjects (Star & Greisemer, 1989; Wenger, 2000), or artifacts, tools, and processes that help people fromdifferent communities collaborate in meaningful and productive ways (Star & Greisemer, 1989; Wenger, 2000).Our design-based research efforts (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004) over the past few years suggestthat technology holds potential to be an effective boundary object for bringing disposition building blockstogether. Our initial efforts in life-relevant learning focused on connecting learners’ scientific inquiry practices(i.e., procedural and conceptual understanding) to their personal interests (Clegg et al., 2012). We found thatcertain affordances of mobile technologies (e.g., storytelling) can help learners mediate between their interests,personal connections, and scientific engagement to promote unique approaches to and expressions of science.Next, we used a social media tool specifically designed to support learners’ collaborative scientific inquiry(Clegg et al., 2013). We found that technology can help diverse learners recognize common interests and buildon the contributions of others, even in tense social environments, to facilitate productive social collaborations inscience (Clegg et al., 2013). While this work suggests the potential of technology as a boundary object to bringtogether the building blocks of disposition, few studies exist that examine how technology can be designed andused to promote an integrated experience across the four building blocks of disposition.Our Approach: Life-Relevant LearningWhile previous work looks at bringing subsets of the disposition building blocks together, the question remains:How do we design technology to integrate all four into a unified experience? Existing technologies haveattempted this integration, but tend to foreground procedural and conceptual understanding. This makes it lesslikely learners will want to pick up the tool on their own in experiences that are important to them. Ourapproach has been to foreground the personal, using it as a means of promoting further learning. We have donethis through the design of (1) LRL technologies and (2) LRL programs.Figure 1. Timeline view in ScienceKit.One component of our work is designing a LRL technology - ScienceKit (SK) (Figure 1) - thatintegrates the affordances we have found useful for unifying learners’ experiences across the building blocks ofdisposition. SK is a mobile and social app that allows learners to capture and share snippets of daily life –similar to social media tools such as Instagram – but frames these sharing practices through a lens of scientificinquiry. SK is designed to scaffold learners’ scientific inquiry in their daily lives by enabling them to createmicro-contributions to the inquiry process. In SK, learners create entries with their choice of photos, videos,text, or drawing. With these media, they develop questions, observations, experiment sequences, cause andeffect claims, or “just because” entries. These entries are shared on a sequential, public timeline for everyone toview. Learners can then “star” contributions as a means of favoring them. We used SK in the KCimplementation presented in this paper. In the initial sessions of KC, learners engage in semi-structuredactivities, becoming familiar with processes in measurement, data collection, and technology usage in thecontext of cooking experiments aimed to answer scientific questions (e.g., What do eggs do in brownies?). OnChoice Days, learners are given opportunities to use what they learned to develop questions, hypotheses,experimental procedures, and data collection techniques for their own food investigation. They also makedecisions about recipe modifications, controlling variables, data collection, and interpretation of their findings.We designed these experiences in KC to support learners’ scientific practice through interest-driven experienceswith peers and adults to support learners’ development across the building blocks of disposition development.MethodsFor this study, we employed the methods and standards of a comparative case study (Yin, 2003). The case is asingle 1-week summer camp implementation of KC. In this exploratory study, we focus on the role oftechnology in supporting learners’ integrated experiences across the building blocks of disposition developmentICLS 2014 Proceedings456© ISLSas we highlight their experiences in KC. We focus this case study on two learners: DeMarco and Allen (allnames are pseudonyms). We selected these two children for this study as a comparison between how technologycan support scientific inquiry and disposition development in sociable (DeMarco) and reticent (Allen) learners.Context and Data CollectionFor this implementation of KC, we met as an out-of-school, summer camp program for four consecutive halfdays (Monday – Thursday, 4.5 hours per day) in a lower socioeconomic status public school in the WashingtonDC metro area. Seven learners (9 to 11 years old) from the school participated in the program. Our KCimplementation was comprised of eight adult facilitators, one of whom focused primarily on technical support.The first two sessions were semi-structured days and the last two were Choice Days. On Day 1, learnersobserved brownies made with different amounts of eggs and did an experiment with eggs, oil, and water tounderstand how eggs work in brownies. Day 2 involved a cookie experiment to test and explore the roles ofdifferent leaveners. On Days 3 and 4, learners chose new dishes to perfect and worked on their Choice Dayinvestigations with facilitators. Each day we collected video recordings of all activities and discussions.Additionally, to understand learners’ identity development as they participated in the program, learners createdshort personal reflection videos in SK at the end of Days 1 - 3 in which they responded to the prompt: “Today, Iwas more like a … Chef, Investigator, Scientist, A combination (tell us which combination you felt like), orsomething else (tell us what or who). Then, tell us what you did to make you feel like that.” We conductedinterviews with each learner on the third day of the program, focusing on their use of SK, their experiences inscience, and their experiences in KC. Facilitators also recorded post-observational field notes of theirexperiences each day in KC. Lastly, we collected analytics (e.g., time stamps, account logins, SK posts) asparticipants posted contributions to the SK app.Data AnalysisOur data analysis process included two phases. In the first phase, we analyzed data types individually. For eachlearner’s personal reflections, we transcribed and conducted open coding (Corbin & Strauss, 2008) to identifythemes for each learner based on the identity-related information they provided. Based on this analysis, weselected two focal learners with the most drastic differences in participation styles: very sociable to very shy.This comparison is important because participation styles play a significant role in learners’ disposition andidentity development (Clegg & Kolodner, 2014) and we want our tools and programs to support a diverse rangeof learners. Next, three authors coded the SK posts of the two focal learners, describing each media file andcoding entries for aspects of learners’ scientific practice based on Chinn and Malhotra’s (2002) inquiryframework. We also coded for themes related to the types of interest-based, social, and personally meaningfulexperiences learners were having with the technology (Clegg et al., 2012). Finally, four other researchers builtcontextualized stories of each learner’s experience in the program, using a combination of observation data(e.g., post observation field notes, video transcriptions). While SK entries represented snapshots of specificexperiences learners had, contextualized stories provided a broader perspective of learners’ daily experiences.The second phase of our analysis consisted of a collaborative analysis session in which all three data types wereintegrated. All researchers gathered and printed out each set of data (with media files from learners’ SK entriesand photos from the contextualized stories). We lined each learner’s data sources up side-by-side sequentially torepresent that learner’s experiences with SK. The visual nature of our data enabled us to have an axial codingsession in which researchers used sticky notes to create analytic memos that were grouped into major themes foreach learner. We followed with selective coding (Corbin & Strauss, 2008), to identify themes across cases.FindingsHere, we present the cases of each focal learner, DeMarco and Allen, organized by the themes underlying ourresearch questions.DeMarco: A Social Entry Into ScienceDeMarco was a rising 5th grader who entered KC with a calm demeanor but took a social approach to scientificinquiry throughout the session. DeMarco’s initial participation in KC involved using SK to take photos andvideos of other learners in the program. During almost all whole group conversations, DeMarco recordedconversations with SK, moving the camera to record the speaker. DeMarco actively participated in thesediscussions, contributing thoughts and questions as he recorded. He began to ask questions in KC at breakfaston the first day. As the learners ate Apple Jacks™ cereal, a facilitator, Naomi, wondered if the cereal actuallycontained apples. She referred to the ingredients label on the container and was surprised to see that they didcontain apples. Seeing DeMarco’s interest in the question, Naomi encouraged him to create a question in SK.DeMarco then shifted from recording his friends at breakfast, to creating a video about the question they had,showing the ingredients label to answer the question. Later, during breakfast, DeMarco repeated this process ofcreating question videos when he heard another learner ask a similar question about milk. In his video, DeMarcoICLS 2014 Proceedings457© ISLSdisplayed and read the ingredients label on the milk carton, then concluded that milk does not have sugar. Hecontinued to ask questions about ingredients that he was interested in during the following days’ activities.Semi-Structured Sessions: Scientific ReportingDeMarco continued to take this reporter role in the initial sessions of KC. In this role, he documented andnarrated the types of experiences they were having in KC, often interviewing group members about what theywere doing. DeMarco’s reporting became more scientific on Day 1 as John, the facilitator working withDeMarco’s group, was careful to model the types of observations to make and ways to use SK to recordobservations. On his own, DeMarco took photos of their experiment variations, paying close attention to capturedetails about the variations in his photos (e.g., variation in ingredient quantities, before and after photos, etc.).As he made observations about their experiments, he also began to make predictions and claims based on thoseobservations about the differences in the brownie samples, and how eggs work in brownies. DeMarco’s reporterrole also involved taking photos and short video clips that documented their individual experiment procedures,recording measurements of their cookie heights, and documenting their procedures for measuring.Personal Science: Fried Chicken ExperienceDeMarco worked with facilitator, August, to plan his Choice Day experiment. This was a very personal andscientific experience for DeMarco, and it involved significant social motivations for him in and out of KC.DeMarco’s idea arose because he wanted to make the fried chicken his mom cooks at home. He expressed thatshe never let him in the kitchen and he thought she would be proud of him for making a complex recipe.Facilitators noted that it “made his day” to be able to make fried chicken. However, due to safety concerns,DeMarco’s project also was a source of much consternation for the facilitators. These concerns were a greatsource of humor and helped develop rapport between DeMarco, facilitators, and other community members(like the school lunch lady – Ms. Carlitta). DeMarco’s pride in this project was illustrated as he posted sketchesof fried chicken in SK (e.g., drawing a chicken leg with a heart around it) during planning on Day 2.As DeMarco engaged in his Choice Day project, two primary ways he engaged in scientific inquirywere: 1) experiment planning and 2) observing and analyzing experiment results. DeMarco worked withfacilitators John and August to plan his Choice Day experiment. John suggested they fry the chicken in differentoils to learn about the differences. The facilitators reported that he warmed up to the idea when he saw that they(the facilitators) were excited about it. He even brought his mom’s olive oil on the first Choice Day (Day 3) touse in the experiment. They planned a 2 x 2 experiment that started with testing different chicken breaders (i.e.,flour versus flour + egg wash) and oils (i.e., olive oil vs. canola oil). On Day 4, the group cooked each breadervariation in different oils. As the group conducted different experiments, they had DeMarco observe andanalyze the results in different ways, such as blind taste tests with the results with DeMarco describing theresults as he tasted them. Facilitators reported that DeMarco was excited to see observable differences in thecolor and texture chicken fried in olive oil versus canola oil (regardless of breader variation). As DeMarcodescribed the results of each variation of chicken, August created two graphs to visualize his results.Challenges with Scientific InquiryAlthough DeMarco engaged in these scientific practices during Choice Day, facilitators observed that he stillneeded significant scaffolding to think of his fried chicken in a scientific way. The facilitators found it morechallenging than previous days to get DeMarco to think scientifically in the context of such a personallymeaningful endeavor. They had difficulty helping him move from opinion to more descriptive observation (e.g.,moistness and crispiness as observable outcomes versus “it tastes good”). Additionally, August thoughtDeMarco was “a little lost” during the graphing exercise and more generally, less interested when they talkedabout the science. DeMarco’s SK posts also demonstrate some of the challenges he faced engaging in scientificinquiry during Choice Day activities. Of a total of 107 entries that DeMarco created throughout the KC summercamp, only 16 of them were created on Days 3 and 4 (Choice Days). The Choice Day entries were primarilyrecordings of DeMarco by others and not entries created by him. Personal and social photos were taken ofDeMarco, and science videos were posted of facilitators interviewing him about their experiment procedures.DeMarco’s Personal Positioning in ScienceAlthough the facilitators noticed a decrease in DeMarco’s interest in scientific inquiry during their Choice Dayproject, they observed a resurgence of energy and engagement during the children’s oral presentations. Inpreparation for showing their parents, families, and the school community about their Choice Day experiencesand products, DeMarco set up his presentation behind the librarian’s desk. He used both the chicken he madeand the graphs generated during their reflections to present his results to the community. He described to hisaudience the experiment they did and explained the results represented on the graphs with competence andgusto. Based on their data, he told his audience he would suggest to his mom a different oil to use in the future.In field notes, the facilitators observed the pride, confidence, and authority with which DeMarco presented hisICLS 2014 Proceedings458© ISLSresults. One facilitator noted, “He totally owned his graphs as he explained his results to others.” As DeMarcocarried out his experiment, he received recognition from others in KC, his own family members, and the largerschool community. Another facilitator noted that the other KC children often viewed a photo DeMarco posted toSK in which he posed confidently with his chicken, showing the gloves he wore as he prepared the friedchicken. Facilitators also noted that DeMarco “just beamed” as he presented his work to the broader communityand received accolades not only from his siblings but also from others’ family members and the school staff.Role of Technology in Promoting DeMarco’s Disposition Building BlocksDeMarco’s technology use matched his experience in the physical environment. First, he used SK to documenthis social experiences in KC using videos. With modeling and prompting from facilitators, he began to use SKto express the interest he had in new questions and the observations (procedural and conceptual understanding)he made using SK’s integrated multimedia. While these observations were scientific in nature, manysimultaneously reflected the social and playful experiences DeMarco had during KC. He referred back to theseentries later in KC discussions as well as in his personal reflections as evidence for his participation as a chefand scientist. During Choice Day, he made contributions that expressed his interest and personal connections tomaking chicken (drawing, photos). He posted photos and videos that showed his engagement in the process.Although DeMarco also had scientific contributions during these highly personally experiences, his use of SKdropped significantly. However, the contributions he did create were widely viewed (on the timeline) receivinga total of 14 favorites, helping DeMarco to be recognized socially for his contributions.Allen: Seeing Science Through the Lens of ScienceKitIn contrast to the social antics of DeMarco, Allen’s overall case narrative and associated vignettes reflect theways in which SK supported a painfully shy learner’s efforts to develop his building blocks of scientificdisposition. Allen often acted nervous and quiet, during whole group discussions and in smaller cooking groups.He was hesitant to talk unless explicitly prompted, even in one-on-one situations. When facilitators addressedhim in small group settings, he wavered, often putting his hand to his head or mouth and delaying a response. Attimes, he did not speak at all, and would duck behind his iPad™ screen, as if waiting for the group’s attention totransition from him. Allen also appeared embarrassed about being “on camera,” particularly during his personalreflection videos or when other KC learners tried to record him. In their small groups, facilitators often observedAllen distancing himself from his group. Because of the ways in which he held back during small groupactivities, facilitators were concerned that he was not engaging in scientific inquiry. One facilitator’s field notescaptured this sentiment with her hope that Allen would soon “put one foot in the experiment instead of none.”The First Day: Connecting with Others through MinecraftAlthough Allen was timid in his interactions with others, he appeared more focused and adventurous in hisinteractions with SK. During our initial review of facilitator field notes and learners’ personal reflections, itappeared on the surface that Allen did not evolve as much as we had hoped in terms of scientific disposition andinquiry practices. His silence and physical distance during small group interactions made it difficult to detectany overt progress. However, Allen’s SK data, corroborated by vignettes from the session videos, indicates thatAllen did advance across several disposition building blocks, by participating through the lens of ScienceKitand the iPad™. Like most learners in this group, Allen immediately began by using SK tools to make sketches.Allen connected his initial forays with SK to his personal interests by drawing scenes and images about thegame Minecraft™. One result of SK’s social media design was that Allen’s drawings were seen in the publicSK timeline. One facilitator, Naomi noticed Allen’s drawings of “creepers” (characters in Minecraft™) andengaged him in a discussion about it. These small moments were important ways that Allen developed rapportand connection to the KC program, despite his outwardly shy persona.Through the Eyes of Allen: ScienceKit as an Expressive ToolAs the week progressed – in contrast to his aversion to being recorded by others – Allen would sometimes talk,sing, or dance to his iPad™, in his own personal “selfie” SK videos. In one vignette, he made a short video ofhimself singing, “Here we’re cooking.” This example was corroborated both in SK data analysis and in ourreview of the session camera video that captured him standing apart from, and unnoticed by others working inthe environment at the time. This was just one instance of several playful and focused connections he made toshare his personally meaningful experiences through SK.Perhaps the most compelling evidence of Allen’s efforts to connect personally to scientific inquirywere the sketches he made of his Choice Day experiment, which involved making s’mores, a marshmallow,chocolate, and graham cracker sandwich. In the beginning, Allen focused most of his energy on connectingpersonally to this project. Daniel, a facilitator, noted that because Allen was less vocal about his ideas than theother learners, his drawings often functioned as a communication tool throughout the planning and execution ofhis s’mores’ investigation. Many of Allen’s SK entries on s’mores were sketches, especially those completed asICLS 2014 Proceedings459© ISLShe and Daniel planned his experiment. For example, he imagined his s’more as a mythical Minecraft character(the “herobrine”), and included the written description, “they will look like a herobrine skin, lol, I am makings’mores.” This entry proved to be one way in which he also tried to connect socially with Tonya, a facilitator, asshe asked him what questions he wanted to answer with his experiment. In the video vignette, Allen located thisentry in the SK public timeline and showed it to Tonya, after she had asked what s’more shapes he wanted toevaluate. He explained that his s’more was a “herobrine s’more,” and he wanted to add eyes and a mouth. Ofnote, the square structure of a s’more echoes the pixelated block that is the base building unit in Minecraft. Thisinteraction not only offers evidence of attempts by Allen to connect his personal interests to his scientificinquiry efforts, but also highlights his attempts to communicate this connection to others.Allen’s Scientific Dispositions through the Lens of SKOur session videos and SK data indicated that Allen was actively involved in documenting scientific proceduresand making observations. During the semi-structured activities, he would take short videos of experimentalsteps (e.g., shaking water bottles), sometimes recording the procedure as he was taking part in it. He also took aphoto of a brownie through a magnifying glass to show a closer view of its surface irregularities. Although wedid not observe Allen recording measurements (e.g., the diameter or area of the s’mores), he made several SKentries of the other KC learners, with accompanying text. Thus, SK’s image and video capture features enabledAllen to develop procedural and content knowledge aspects of his scientific disposition. Allen also used SK tomake predictions or claims about experimental outcomes, and to pose questions about his observations. Forexample, when prompted, he contemplated reasons why different batches of brownies exhibited distincttextures. Of note, these SK entries contrast with his first day working in a KC group, during which time he didnot verbally offer any explicit hypotheses or claims. In addition to scientific observations that Allen madeduring group experiments, he documented experimental results through SK. Sometimes he would capture onevariation at a time in a separate entry until he had captured them all. At other times he would take photos of allvariations or several at one time, looking across them. In one entry, he used SK to sketch “good” versus “bad”cookies by highlighting brown, burned edges for the “bad” cookies. Allen’s active capturing in this patterndemonstrated his being attuned to the experiment at hand and comparing across variations.Recasting Minecraft S’mores as EngineeringAs noted earlier, Allen chose to make s’mores for his Choice Day Project. As his s’mores planning developed,he made SK entries that concretized his ideas, and helped him imagine variations that were both playful andengineering or design-based. For example, he imagined and sketched s’mores as a house, a jail, and a differentMinecraft character. His SK sketches became increasingly more engineering and design-oriented after hisexperiment. For example, one SK entry reflects a workflow how-to reference for assembling s’mores: “cracker cracker + chocolate  cracker + chocoloate + marshmallow” (note the sequential arrows as visual cues). Healso continued to practice other dispositions in his Choice Day project. For example, he took photos comparingthe different s’mores ingredients (e.g., baker’s chocolate versus milk chocolate bars) and evaluating his finisheds’mores. From an overtly social perspective, however, Allen still hesitated when carrying out tasks and makingdecisions, despite the fact that the s’mores investigation was his Choice Day design.Finding a Niche in KCOver the course of the week, Allen earned a social reputation and identification as an experienced iPad™ user.Facilitators would point toward Allen’s iPad™ use as an example of best practices (e.g., switching his iPad™camera lens). Fellow learners sometimes asked him for help, or followed his (mostly silent) lead. In contrastwith his engagement in the physical environment and activities, during which he hesitated or made mistakesbecause he did not inform facilitators or ask timely questions, he was meticulous about his SK entries. In onevideo vignette, Allen’s longest unprompted discussion with facilitators (~3 minutes) occurred because he had aquestion about how SK loaded media onto its timeline. He was frustrated that some of his work might be lostdue to delays in loading media, or server crashes. In response to Allen’s thoughtful, designer-oriented concerns,Daniel suggested that he record his question as a design idea for future iterations of SK, and Tonyarecommended that he confer with Michael, the SK developer who could attend to his ideas more deeply.Role of Technology in Promoting Allen’s Disposition Building BlocksWhile facilitators had difficulty seeing Allen’s scientific disposition develop in person, our analysis of his SKentries and video data revealed a different story. We observed evidence that Allen used SK to begin to makepersonal connections to science-based KC activities, increase his procedural awareness of scientific inquiry(e.g., making observations), and to initiate social connections in ways that he could not have done without atechnology support like SK. Allen connected with SK as he first used it to relate to his personal connections(drawing and Minecraft™). He continued to develop this relationship as he had expressive moments with theiPad™ not observed by others. He used it to connect to scientific inquiry practices as he meticulouslyICLS 2014 Proceedings460© ISLSdocumented his observations and experiment procedures using SK’s multimedia capture features (photos,videos and sketches). Not only did Allen document scientific elements when prompted, he also documentedpersonally meaningful aspects of his scientific experiences. Furthermore, he described and articulated hisinterest in making s’mores through drawing, and used SK to communicate with facilitators about his ideas. Inthis way, SK served as a mediator for Allen’s social interactions.Discussion: Boundary Encounters and ObjectsScience education literature establishes that science learning is a matter of border crossing between multiplecommunities (Aikenhead, 1996). In fact, learners transition between sub-cultures of home, school, peers, andmedia everyday. Their engagement in science learning is a matter of becoming enculturated into the customsand practice of scientific inquiry (Aikenhead 1996). Participating in KC can thus be seen as a boundaryencounter for learners – a place where they were confronted with the idea that cooking and science were relatedand valued activities. KC was an environment where learners were introduced to a form of social and interestdriven science that seemed new to them. Allen and DeMarco’s initial hesitance to share their own ideas suggeststhat this was indeed a new form of science engagement and learning for them. The people, processes, and normsin KC were quite different than school (e.g., working with researchers, cooking, coming up with new scientificideas to explore). Promoting learners’ development across the building blocks in this context thus requiredhelping learners connect to a new community socially, personally, and scientifically. It also involved helpingthem connect their participation in outside communities to their participation in KC in meaningful ways.Role of Technology in Disposition: ScienceKit as a Boundary ObjectBoundary encounters are facilitated through boundary objects. We conjecture that SK served as a boundaryobject that could potentially enable multiple building blocks to be integrated into one tool for many differenttypes of learners. The diversity of Allen and DeMarco’s participation styles shaped different life-worldconnections and scientific progressions for each of them. DeMarco connected to scientific engagement throughfirst linking it to his social practices and home values, while Allen first connected SK to his interest andpersonal connections to the gaming community of Minecraft™.Wenger (2000) discusses three types of boundary objects for connecting diverse communities:processes, discourses, and artifacts. We found that SK served as an artifact within the environment that helpedlearners connect different aspects of their participation, and also influenced the processes and Discourses of theenvironment. Learners developed norms of use (processes) for using SK that included taking on the role ofreporter to document what was happening socially and scientifically in the environment, and capturing their owninterests and scientific engagement. These norms also included scrolling through SK to see what others weredoing. Learners’ continuous browsing through SK enabled DeMarco to be recognized socially for hiscontributions in KC by others early on and later as others continuously viewed his contributions to SK. SK alsoshaped the language of science (Discourse), helping it to become more personal and social with multi-mediaand social media features. As an artifact, SK served as a repository of learners’ experiences that helped us to seeAllen’s previously unnoticed participation and those that DeMarco often referred back to during his personalreflections. The repository represented this new form of social, personal, and interest-driven science byintegrating the four building blocks of disposition through its technical features.Design Implications and Challenges for Disposition DevelopmentEven as an effective boundary object, some aspects of SK presented challenges for learners, educators, anddesigners. DeMarco’s case showed that in boundary spaces, if learners move too far over into one buildingblock (e.g., personal connections), it can be more challenging to motivate their scientific participation.DeMarco’s case suggests that boundary objects may be more effective at integrating the disposition buildingblocks if designed to foster additional connections to broader communities (e.g., family, peer, or media) that aremotivating audiences for learners. For example, future iterations of SK could include a means for learners toshare self-selected media artifacts outside the local KC community (e.g., with family). Allen’s case revealsanother boundary space in which learners participated – the space between the virtual and the physical. SKprimarily supported Allen’s integration of the building blocks in the virtual environment. However, he neededmore help with social interests in the physical environment, particularly with respect to social interactions andbeing recognized. His case illuminates the potential to use data and analytics from applications like SK, to helpmake educators and others aware of learners’ participation. These in-situ data snapshots can strengthen ourawareness of the link between learners’ virtual and face-to-face participation, and suggest opportunities forauthentic, formative evaluation of disposition development.Conclusion: Contributions of This WorkThe work presented in this paper contributes to our understanding of how to promote disposition developmentwith technology. We appropriated common media sharing features of social media in the design of SK. ByICLS 2014 Proceedings461© ISLSallowing children to capture and share their daily experiences, through a lens of inquiry, SK helped learnersintegrate the disposition building blocks in ways that began to promote learners’ comprehensive scientizingexperiences. This analysis suggests that viewing technology as a boundary object is helpful for understandinghow to better promote such unified scientizing experiences for learners. When we recognize practices, tools, andartifacts as boundary objects we can better design them to promote learning (Wenger, 2000). Therefore,pointing to technology as a boundary object for promoting disposition can foster a useful perspective fordesigning new technologies (of all types) to promote disposition. This work also highlights challenges thatremain in understanding how to best design and use technology to promote disposition development.Specifically, it points to the need for understanding ways to effectively connect learners’ participation tobroader communities and for using learning analytics as a means to alert educators of learners’ progress. Morework is needed to understand the role of technologies that serve as boundary objects over longer periods of timeand how such technologies can be integrated into learning environments to successfully promote disposition.ReferencesAikenhead, G. S. (1996). Science education: Border crossing into the subculture of science. Studies in ScienceEducation, 27, 1-52.Clegg, T., & Kolodner, J. (2014). Scientizing and Cooking: Helping middle-school learners develop scientificdispositions. Submitted to Science Education Special Themed Collection on The Intersection of theLearning Sciences and Science Learning in Everyday Life.Clegg, T., Yip, J. C., Ahn, J., Bonsignore, E., Gubbels, M., Lewittes, B., & Rhodes, E. (2013). When face-toface fails: Opportunities for social media to foster collaborative learning. In Proceedings, CSCL 2013,International Society of the Learning Sciences, 113–120.Clegg, T., Bonsignore, E., Yip, J., Gelderblom, H., Kuhn, A., Valenstein, T., … Druin, A. (2012). Technologyfor promoting scientific practice and personal meaning in life-relevant learning. In ProceedingsInteraction Design and Children 2012, ACM Press, 152–161.Barab, S. A., Sadler, T. D., Heiselt, C., Hickey, D., & Zuiker, S. (2010). Relating narrative, inquiry, andinscriptions: Supporting consequential play. Journal of Science Ed. and Technology, 19(4), 387-407.Barton, A. C. (1998). Teaching science with homeless children: Pedagogy, representation, and identity. Journalof Research in Science Teaching, 35(4), 379-394.Bereiter, C. (1995). A dispositional view of transfer. In A. McKeough, J. Lupart, & A. Marini (Eds.), Teachingfor transfer: Fostering generalization in learning (pp. 21–34). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum Associates, Inc.Borda, E. J. (2007). Applying Gadamer’s concept of disposition to science and science education. Science &Education, 16(9-10), 1027–1041.boyd, D. (2007). Why youth (heart) social network sites: The role of networked publics in teenage social life. InD.Buckingham (Ed.), Youth, identity, and digital media (pp. 119–142). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 119-42.Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoreticalframework for evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86(2), 175–218.Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42.Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (Eds.). (2008). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures fordeveloping grounded theory. Sage.Gee, J. P. (2005). Semiotic social spaces and aﬃnity spaces: From The Age of Mythology to today’s schools.In D. Barton & K. Tusting (Eds.), Beyond communities of practice: Language, power, and socialcontext (pp. 214–232). New York: Cambridge University Press.Gresalfi, M. S. (2009). Taking Up Opportunities to Learn: Constructing Dispositions in MathematicsClassrooms. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(3), 327–369.Madden, M., Lenhart, A., & Duggan, M. (2013). Teens and Technology 2013. Pew Internet & American LifeProject. Retrieved Oct 21, 2013 from: http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Teens-and-Tech.aspx.Rutherford, F., & Ahlgren, A. (1991). Science for all Americans. New York: Oxford University Press.Squire, K., & Jenkins, H. (2003). Harnessing the power of games in education. Insight, 3(1), 5-33.Star, S. L., & Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology, translations' and boundary objects: Amateurs andprofessionals in Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39. Social Studies of Science, 19(3),387-420.Wenger, E. (2000). Communities of practice and social learning systems. Organization, 7(2), 225–246.Yin, R. K. (Ed.). (2003). Case study research: Design and methods (Vol. 5). Sage.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank our KC participants, faculty and parents at the school in which KC was held.ICLS 2014 Proceedings462© ISLS