Learning as Multi-Dimensional Psychological and CulturalEcological SpacesCarol D. Lee, Northwestern University, School of Education and Social Policy2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208 USAEmail: cdlee@northwestern.eduShirin Vossoughi, Stanford University, Graduate School of Education485 Lasuen Mall, Stanford, CA 94305-3096 & San Francisco Exploratorium, USAEmail: shirinvossoughi@gmail.comKris D. Gutiérrez, University of Colorado, BoulderSchool of Education, Education Building 124, 249 UCB, Boulder, CO USAEmail: kris.gutierrez@colorado.eduNa’ilah Suad Nasir, Maxine McKinney de RoystonUniversity of California, Berkeley, Graduate School of Education5641 Tolman Hall, MC 1670. Berkeley, CA 94720-1670 USAEmail: na'ilahs@berkeley.edu, mmckinney@berkeley.eduDiscussant: Barbara Rogoff, University of California at Santa CruzAbstract: This symposium addresses challenges of understanding learning as multidimensional and embedded within and across multiple levels of contexts. Each paperarticulates frameworks for designing and evaluating the impact of interventions in single andmultiple settings that explicitly address how issues of identity, relationships, and beliefsystems within and across non-dominant communities can be leveraged and understood tosupport robust learning. Paper one presents a multi-dimensional, ecologically focused designframework for supporting literacy as identity building among a cohort of African-Americanurban adolescents and presents data from a longitudinal study implementing the framework.The second presents the framework for a multi-site ethnographic methodologyconceptualizing learning as expansive, focusing on generative repertoires for learning indiasporic and other non-dominant communities. The third presents design principles enactedin a program for African-American adolescent male development addressing issues of identity,perceptions, and relationships as drivers for robust learning and implications for policy andpractice.Symposium OverviewThis symposium addresses the challenges of understanding learning as multi-dimensional and embedded withinand across multiple levels of contexts. In contrast to much of our efforts to address learning as essentially a setof cognitive processes within the minds of individuals and even attention to the dynamic interactions amongpeople within settings where people learn, these symposium papers attempt to target the design challenges of aconceptualization of learning that goes beyond these traditional constraints. We will first describe theconceptualization of learning that informs the research presented across papers.There is an increasingly accepted proposition that learning entails the transformation of cognitiveprocesses for individuals through people’s interactions with one another and artifacts over time. However, thereis also a strong accumulation of evidence from across disciplines that the processes through which humansactively engage in learning include their perceptions, their emotional states, and their relationships with others.The mechanisms through which these occur are embodied in physiological processes. Perceptions of the self, oftasks, of settings, and others with whom we interact matter for goals and effort. These perceptions includeemotional states and impact the nature of relationships that we strive to develop. These perceptions are deeplyinfluenced by the broader ecologies in which we live, such that shared values and practices around kinds ofidentities (regarding gender, ethnicity, race, class, and abilities) matter. The sources within the various contextsin which we routinely participate (e.g. family, school, peer social networks, neighborhoods, the cultures,institutions and practices within nation states and across diaspora communities) provide a hybrid medium for theconstruction of these perceptions over time. These multi-dimensional intra-psychological processes (e.g.cognitive, emotional, phenomenological, social) interact with features of learning environments that inevitablyentail multiple settings. Moreover, what kinds of learning environments are available to us are highly linked,ICLS 2014 Proceedings1382© ISLSespecially in the U.S., with class, race, and ethnicity. One of the limitations in education broadly speaking andin the learning sciences has been the dominance of hegemonic belief systems about the affordances of differentcontexts for learning, compounded by particular constraints imposed largely by economic status (e.g.underfunded schools; "food deserts"; inadequate access to health care; few neighborhood youth organizations,etc.).And so we argue that attention to the design of robust learning environments requires understanding:(a) the multiple cognitive, social, phenomenological, physiological and emotional processes that are deeplyintertwined in acts of learning; (b) the ways that these multiple intra-psychological processes of learning areinfluenced by participation in current and historical cultural practices; (c) the centrality of relationship building;(d) the repertoires that are both available and developed through people’s participation within and across themultiple settings of their lives; and (e) how these repertoires are deeply connected to contemporary andhistorical cultural ecologies as well as to political and economic ecologies. These complex relationshipsentailed in learning are also deeply sensitive to time, especially time within and across the life course; and sounderstanding patterns of development within cultural communities from childhood into adolescence intoadulthood matters for what learners must wrestle with and what repertoires are available to them for suchwrestling. And finally, we will argue for a discipline specific focus on the tasks or objects of learning. Bydisciplines we refer not only to forms of academic knowledge typically associated with learning in schools, butequally to forms of disciplined knowledge entailed in a variety of learning tasks outside of school.We think that a significant center to this multi-dimensional psychological and ecological space we havedescribed has to do with the work of identity building and thus is connected to the conference theme of“Learning and Becoming in Practice.” We hope to push this theme by proposing that this intellectual space wehave described affords multiple identities, becoming persons who can navigate within and across multiplespaces, and explicit attention to the ways that political and economic positioning can complicate what learnersmust wrestle with in order to develop multiple identity repertoires and possibilities of becoming.We are very clear that these grounding propositions are wide ranging and as a consequence difficult tocapture in the design of robust learning environments and in thinking about the kinds of data and methods ofanalyses we will employ to understand what and how people learn in such designed environments. The papersin the symposium offer models for approaching the kind of complex, multi-dimensional and multi-contextuallearning we have described. Each paper articulates the rationale for addressing the multiple dimensionsidentified in the problem space we have described; describes the rationale for how the questions posed attemptto struggle with this complexity; and describes how the data collection and methods of analysis seek to examinecomplex multi-dimensional relationships in ways that take culture as well as political and economic positioninginto account.Multidimensional Design Framework for Learning as Identity WorkCarol D. LeeThis paper documents the Cultural Modeling Eco-Cultural, Developmental and Psycho-Social DesignFramework that embodies the multi-dimensional and ecological focus of this symposium. The goal of thedesign research is the transformation of a low-achieving urban high school serving a low-income AfricanAmerican population to improve literacy outcomes in terms of reading and argumentation in the disciplines.This design stands in contrast to more traditional design research to support academic learning in that it goesbeyond attention solely to the cognitive structures underlying the growth of expertise and beyond attentionprimarily to interactional patterns within classrooms. These more traditional approaches, even within theLearning Sciences, tacitly presume students will be active participants under the features of the designedenvironment and that who the students are doesn’t really matter. Such interventions, especially in the contextsof schools, run up against the challenges of schools as organizations that can substantively unravel theintervention; and the challenges of teachers’ opportunities to learn to engage new practices.This design is multifaceted, focusing on psycho-social as well as cognitive needs of students, onschools as learning organizations that enable learning among adults and students, and on the specific literacydemands of reading in the disciplines. In each focal area, the design requires gathering and building on data thatinforms what students bring as challenges and repertoires of reasoning and practice that are sometimescomplementary and sometimes in tension with the requirements of robust schooling, understanding that thesechallenges and repertoires are situated inside historical, cultural, social, political and economic ecologies thatsurround these young people. These foci entail identity work for students, for faculty and staff, and for theschool as an organization. For students the intervention supported wrestling with “Who am I?”, “Who and whatcan I become?”, and “What is available to me to help me?”Specifically, the literacy interventions in disciplinary classrooms make discipline specific strategies forcritical comprehension explicit through modeling and scaffolding; the modeling and scaffolding draw from theCultural Modeling framework to build upon tacit understandings of strategies based on students’ everydayICLS 2014 Proceedings1383© ISLSrepertoires; the content and thematic foci in instruction invite wrestling with explicit social, economic, culturaland political issues that emerge from the ecologies of youths’ communities through the examination of texts andproduction of written and oral arguments. Socio-emotional supports are designed through teachers and staffserving as individual personal advisors for students, enrichment clubs aimed at expanding the horizon ofpossibilities available to youth in the school, specialized support services (anger management groups, conflictresolution groups, trauma groups, teen parenting groups) as well as structures for student leadership (grade levelstudent councils, leadership roles in clubs, participation in the process of hiring new teachers, restorative justicegroup). Attention to organizational learning occurs through faculty leadership in all aspects of the school,including the collection and analysis of data on all aspects of the intervention; and through structures such as theInstructional Leadership Team, faculty committees, weekly data driven full faculty/staff meetings; and throughprofessional development ranging from studying adolescent development to the demands of reading in thedisciplines. This intervention design is comprehensive in its efforts to address the multidimensionality oflearning processes, the complexities of the broader ecologies of students’ lives, the specificity of disciplinarylearning demands, and the structures of organizations as learning communities in which these activities aresupported. Specifically this program of design research seeks to examine person-context-process relationships.This complex framework requires a broad of array of data collection. In order to document what in thecontexts of the communities from which these youth came posed challenge and opportunity we collectedepidemiological data on neighborhood density, housing, poverty distributions, crime rates, presence of fooddeserts, and availability of community youth organizations and health care. This allowed us to create casesreflecting the broader ecologies through which youth had to navigate and our design had to address. In order todocument intra-psychological orientations with regard to identity and perceptions of threat, of ability and theschool context, we administered an array of validated survey measures. To document proximal processes ofclassroom instruction, we collected video data and analyzed for participation structures that supported closereading and argumentation. To further ground these observations, we collected samples of student work thatreflected the architecture of the literacy intervention. To document proximal learning outcomes, weadministered discipline specific pre-post assessments evaluating close reading and argumentation. To documentdistal transfer learning outcomes, we used data from PSAE scores. This is the 2nd year of a 3 year longitudinalstudy where we examine not only nested relationships among these categories of variables (identity andphenomenological; process data; and learning outcomes) within a given year, but across years. We have alongitudinal focus because of our developmental lens proposes that there will be differences between early andlate adolescence.FindingsFindings show, despite data showing that most students experienced significant traumas outside of school,adaptive coping and positive racial identity as well as comfort with others, a belief that ability is malleable andreading with a social justice and personal meaning making orientation were positively correlated with gains inreading.SignificanceEfforts to address the challenges of low-performing urban high schools typically focus on organizationalaccountability via test scores through efforts aimed solely at curriculum and/or professional developmentinterventions. This study, grounded in understanding learning as entailed in identity processes that are sensitiveto life course development, offers a holistic model of school transformation that integrates a focus on deepdisciplinary knowledge with regard to content area literacies and attention to the social and emotional demandsof rigorous learning, as these are complicated by positioning in non-dominant communities plagued withpoverty. The significance is both conceptual as well as methodological, as exemplified in the multi-dimensionaldesign of the intervention and the layers of data collection and analyses employed.Studying Movement, Hybridity, and Change: Towards a Multi-Sited Sensibilityfor Research on Learning across Contexts and BordersShirin Vossoughi and Kris D. GutiérrezIn this presentation, we bring together cultural-historical approaches to human development with interpretiveand multi-sited ethnography as a means of working the intersections between expansive theories of culture andlearning and methods that place human activity at the center of analysis (Cole, 1996; Erickson, 1986). We arguethat this discussion will help us develop ethnographic tools that attend to the ways young people learn withinand across multiple contexts, and glean principles that help constitute a “multi-sited sensibility” (Marcus, 1995)appropriate for taking a more expansive approach to learning, and a more adequately complex stance towardsyoung people from non-dominant and diasporic backgrounds (Vossoughi & Gutiérrez, in press). In line with ourprevious work on social design experiments — design based research oriented towards transformative andICLS 2014 Proceedings1384© ISLSconsequential learning — we offer resources for the design, practice, and study of education as it could be(Gutiérrez & Vossoughi, 2010).We are interested in understanding, designing, and sustaining learning environments that account forthe institutional, political, and social demands and contradictions youth negotiate as they move in and across theecologies that constitute everyday life (Ito, et. Al., 2013; Nasir, et. Al., 2006). Following Gutiérrez (2008), weuse the metaphor “learning as movement” to call attention to the ways in which youth develop repertoires ofpractice, and to push on extant theoretical understandings in which the cultural nature of learning isunderspecified or misunderstood. We offer an alternative to methodological approaches that do not accountsufficiently for current sociopolitical and demographic realities, or attend to the literal and symbolic borderlandsand hybrid spaces that give refuge to and engender ingenuity for diasporic and non-dominant communities. Incontrast, multi-sited research is centrally concerned with displacement, hybridity, and multiply constitutedsubjectivities. This approach is useful for unsettling normative assumptions about culture and learning andretooling our interpretive lenses for the intellectual work involved in navigating modern borders in all theirmyriad macro- and micro-political forms. From a multi-sited perspective, such interpretation involves attendingto the ways young people forge new connections and forms of resistance, and participate in the creation ofhybrid environments and tools.A “multi-sited sensibility” for studying learning across contexts may therefore inquire into the wayspeople, ideas, tools, artifacts and questions, move and become reconstituted across the boundaries of school,home, and community spaces and across the multiple contexts and environments that constitute a singles setting.As equity-oriented researchers, we emphasize the fact that such movement is always mediated by questions ofpower and politics. In this vein, we ask: Whose linguistic, cultural, and intellectual resources are free to moveacross settings or hybridize, and whose are prohibited, devalued, and marginalized? How do teachers andstudents enact, disrupt and reimagine these boundaries in everyday practice? How might the borderlands createparticularly rich opportunities for students to syncretize and ply their learning? We consider how developmentsin multi-sited ethnography (Falzon, 2009; Marcus, 1998; 2009) offer tools for grappling with these questions,and for challenging the imposition of normative cultural categories on the learning experiences of young peoplefrom migrant, immigrant and diasporic backgrounds.Our broader interest lies in developing methodological and theoretical resources for the creativeexpansion of equity-oriented educational research and practice. To this end, we articulate the contours of amulti-sited sensibility as an emergent tool, one that we hope offers new ways of seeing, listening, understandingand working to identify spaces for potential and possibility across the settings young people experience andtraverse in their everyday lives. We argue throughout that a “multi-sited sensibility” draws on the analytic powerof ethnographic approaches to study and advance conceptions of learning as movement in ways that callattention to cultural repertoires that are necessarily co-constituted and leveraged across places, spaces, and timescales. We are drawn to the notion of a methodological “sensibility” as we believe it connotes and invites us todevelop a disposition towards equity-oriented and ecologically valid research that can be generative for bothsingle and multi-sited ethnographic studies.Creating Productive Ecologies of Learning for African American Students:Successes and Challenges in OaklandNa’ilah Suad Nasir and Maxine McKinney de Royston	  Learning scientists have attended to the ways that creating optimal learning environments requires attending notonly to the cognitive dimensions of learning, but also to the identity dimensions, the interpersonal dimensions,and the ways that learning arrangements are cultural and racialized spaces (Nasir, 2012, Polman & Miller, 2010).While scholarship in the learning sciences has begun to examine these psychosocial dimensions of learning,contexts of learning, especially those related to school, also involve policy and district contexts which areconsequential to the way learning environments unfold, and the ways they engage students from marginalizedgroups.This presentation focuses on a district-wide initiative, the African American Male AchievementInitiative (AAMAI) in the Oakland Unified School District, and describes the learning opportunities created bythe initiative in two key ways: 1) a focus on whole school reform to support the success of African Americanstudents, and 2) all-Black, all-male “manhood development” courses which were offered to 9th-10th gradestudents in several district high school and middle schools. Our analysis highlights the multiple levels of policyand practice, from the ideologies and policy decisions at the district level, to school level implementation, to thenature of experiences (experiences of learning, of identity-building, and of engagement) that get enacted at theschool and classroom levels. We draw on data from a multi-year study of the AAMAI, including a 3-year studyof the manhood development classes, and emerging findings from nine whole-school case studies (includingobservation at the school and classroom levels, and interviews with administrators, teachers, parents, andICLS 2014 Proceedings1385© ISLSstudents) of middle and high schools with varying levels of success in increasing learning opportunities forAfrican American students. Findings show that learning opportunities for African American students in Oaklandwere influenced by factors at each of multiple levels. In the presentation we detail the characteristics ofclassroom and whole school environments that provide productive and transformative learning identities forstudents, that position Black students as thinkers and learners, and that build productive and transformativecaring relationships for students.In particular, findings highlight three dimensions of successful classroom learning environments: 1)They employ new kinds of culturally-congruent disciplinary practices, 2) They debunk and reframe negativestereotypes about Black students, and 3) They attend to the building of multi-layered community relationships.With respect to the ways that whole-school settings support or challenge the creation of successful learningsettings for African American students, emerging findings suggest that a shared mission on the part of schooladministrators and teachers, and attention to creating a whole school climate that centers creating supportive andengaging experiences for African American students, and explicitly countering dominant ideologies andpractices are all critical aspects of successfully supporting African American learning. Implications for thedesign of learning environments are discussed.ReferencesBoykin, A. W. and C. T. Bailey (2000). The role of cultural factors in school relevant cognitive functioning:Synthesis of findings on cultural contexts, cultural orientations, and indiidual differences (ResearchReport No. 42). Washington, DC, Center for Research on the Education of Students Placed at Risk.Bronfenbrenner, U. and P. A. Morris (1998). The ecology of developmental processes. Handbook of ChildPsychology: Theoretical Models of Human Development. W. Damon and R. M. Lerner. NY, Wiley &Sons. 1: 993-1028.Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching. In M. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of researchon teaching (pp. 119-161). New York, NY: Macmillan.Falzon, M. (2009). Multi-sited ethnography: Theory, praxis and locality in contemporary research. Surrey,England: Ashgate Publishing.Gutiérrez, K. & Vossoughi, S. (2010). Lifting off the ground to return anew: Mediated praxis, transformativelearning and social design experiments. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1-2), 100-117.Gutiérrez, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading Research Quarterly,43(2), 148-164.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Schor, J, Sefton-Green, J. & Watkins, S.C. (2013). Connected learning: An agenda for research and design. Irvine, CA: Digital Learning andMedia Research Hub.Lee, C. D. (2002). “Interrogating race and ethnicity as constructs in the examination of cultural processes indevelopmental research.” Human Development 45(4): 282-290.Lee, C. D. (2007). Culture, Literacy and Learning: Taking Bloom in the Midst of the Whirlwind. NY, TeachersCollege Press.Lee, C. D. (2008). “The Centrality of Culture to the Scientific Study of Learning and Development: How anEcological Framework in Educational Research Facilitates Civic Responsibility.” EducationalResearcher 37(5): 267-279.Marcus, G. E. (1995). Ethnography in/of the world system: The emergence of multi-sited ethnography. AnnualReview of Anthropology, 95-117.Marcus, G. E. (1998). Ethnography through thick and thin. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Marcus, G. E. (2009). Multi-sited ethnography: Notes and queries. In M. Falzon (Ed.), Multi-sited ethnography:Theory, praxis, and locality in contemporary research (pp. 181-196). Surrey, England: AshgatePublishing.Nasir, N. (2012). Racialized Identities: Race and achievement for African-American youth. Stanford UniversityPress.Nasir, N.S., Rosebery, A.S., Warren B., & Lee, C.D. (2006). Learning as a cultural process: Achieving equitythrough diversity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 489504). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Polman, J., & Miller, D. (2010). Changing stories: Trajectories of identification among African American youthin a science outreach apprenticeship. American Educational Research Journal, 47(4), 879-918.Spencer, M. B. (2006). Phenomenology and ecological systems theory: Development of diverse groups.Handbook of child psychology. W. Damon and R. M. Lerner. NY, Wiley. 1: 829-893.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1386© ISLSVossoughi, S. & Gutiérrez, K. (In press). Studying movement, hybridity, and change: Toward a multi-sitedsensibility for research on learning across contexts and borders. NSSE Yearbook. Designingeducational programs with children and youth: Alternative & flexible contexts for learning.	  ICLS 2014 Proceedings1387© ISLS