Explanations that Make Sense:Accounting for Students’ Internal Evaluations of ExplanationsShulamit Kapon, Faculty of Education, University of Haifa, 199 Aba Khoushy Ave., Mount Carmel, Haifa3498838, Israel, shulamit.kapon@edu.haifa.ac.ilOrit Parnafes, Education Department, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O. Box 653, Beer-Sheva8410501, Israel, Oritpa@bgu.ac.ilAbstract: This paper discusses students’ internal evaluation of explanations, as opposed toexternal evaluations of explanations that are based on compatibility with formal scientificexplanations. We propose a theoretical construct, metaphorically termed the internal metricfor certainty in explanation, to account for the process of internal evaluation. We suggest thatthe internal metric is multidimensional, and discuss three dimensions: (1) intuition; (2) localcoherence; (3) mechanistic reasoning. We argue that these three dimensions are highly activein self-evaluating explanations about phenomena in the physical world. We operationalizethese dimensions into empirically traceable terms. We illustrate our framework through ananalysis of an episode of a student's reasoning about what causes a plastic bottle to shrinkwhen air is pumped out of it. The analysis demonstrates that the framework can explainconviction in an explanation, as well the preference for one explanation over another.IntroductionOne of the most common words in young children's vocabulary is "why." This word, indicating curiosity,points to children’s essential need to understand and explain the world around them, a need that does notdisappear as they grow older. From a very young age, humans try to explain the phenomena they encounter(Gopnik, 1998) for sense making purposes (Berk, 1985; Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989) and forsocial purposes (Dagher & Cossman, 1992). Moreover, humans frequently evaluate various explanations of thesame phenomenon, choosing the one that seems better to them and rejecting the one that seems worse (Harman,1965; Kapon & diSessa, 2012; Keil, 2006). The assumption that guides this work is that the ability to selfevaluate explanations according to internal and not only external measures, is important for sense making and inthe progression from one explanation to another. Although students’ explanations are commonly evaluated bymeans of their compatibility to formal socially-constructed scientific explanations, students’ internal evaluationsof explanations may have different dimensions, and may rely on different resources. This study aims to explorethe dimensions by which students evaluate their own explanations and those of others.We suggest a theoretical construct that is aimed to account for the process of internal evaluation, whichwe metaphorically term the internal metric for certainty in explanation. Our goals in this paper are two-fold.First, we argue based on the literature that humans indeed possess such internal metric, and that this metric ishighly contextually dependent. Second, we aim to operationalize this elusive metaphorical term into empiricallytraceable terms for the special case of explanations of phenomena in the physical world. We illustrate ourframework through an analysis of an episode of a student's reasoning about what causes a plastic bottle to shrinkwhen air is pumped out of it.What Counts as a Good Explanation: Extrinsic and Intrinsic ConsiderationsThe word metric implies standard measurement. Philosophers of science have long been debating the nature,characteristic features and developmental patterns of formal scientific explanations (e.g., Bechtel &Abrahamsen, 2005; Friedman, 1974; Machamer, Darden, & Craver, 2000; Salmon, 1989; Toulmin, 1972).Indeed, the most commonly used metric in educational practice to evaluate an explanation of a phenomenon inthe physical world is the degree of its adherence to the formal scientific explanation, which comes to bear forinstance as regards the nature of the argument students generate (e.g., Driver, Newton, & Osborne, 2000), andthe way scholars conceptualize students' learning progressions (e.g., Mohan, Chen, & Anderson, 2009). Thedegree of adherence to the formal scientific narrative is an external metric that is culturally shaped by the natureof the discipline. In contrast, the metric that concerns us is an internal one that functions at the individual sensemaking level.The basic idea that humans have an intrinsic sense of what counts as a good explanation is not new.Harman (1965), for instance, discussed people's inference of the best explanation, namely, the ability to drawinferences that do not follow logically from premises, but are rather based on temporal assumptions about whatwould be the best explanation. Keil, Rozenblit, and Mills (2004) noted the incomplete nature of understanding,terming it the "illusion of understanding", and suggested that asking people to explain makes people aware ofgaps in their understanding. Gentner and colleagues pointed out that people evaluate analogical explanationsbased on their structural similarities (Gentner & Gentner, 1983), and Holyoak and Thagard (1995) emphasizedICLS 2014 Proceedings887© ISLSthe role of pragmatic constraints (e.g., the goal of the explanation) in this evaluation. diSessa (1993) suggestedthat as humans interact with the physical world they develop simple unitary and non verbal schemas(phenomenological primitives, or p-prims) that when activated account for people’s comfort with certainsituations or surprise in others. Hence, explanations that resonate with an activated p-prim will be evaluated asmore plausible (diSessa, 1993, forthcoming; Kapon & diSessa, 2012). Moreover, diSessa (1993) suggested thateach p-prim has a reliability priority which results from processing feedback that can reinforce or undo theinitial activation. Reliability priority expresses the degree of conviction a person attaches to a particular p-primin a particular context of thought. High reliability priority means that it is unlikely that the p-prim will bedeactivated by subsequent processing. Kapon and diSessa (2012) noted that often people activate conflictingexplanatory primitives (not necessarily just p-prims) and they internally negotiate their relative priority.Parnafes (2012) conceptualized explanations as comprised of carefully assembled knowledge elements ofdifferent types. She argued that people are sensitive to the local coherence of these elements; namely,knowledge elements that comprise an explanation that makes sense cannot suggest conflicting inferences.The above review suggests that people have an intrinsic sense of what counts as a good explanation,and thus the assumption that they have developed an internal metric for this purpose is reasonable. The questionthat concerns us is whether we can operationalize this internal metric into external traceable terms in sufficientdetail that will allow us to explain the relative evaluations of competing explanations that individuals constantlymake (i.e., why does a person prefer one explanation over another) by different values along this metric.The Internal Metric for Certainty in Explanations: Three DimensionsWe believe that the internal metric for certainty in explanations are multidimensional, and that differentdimensions are active in different contexts of thought. This is not a radical assumption. In a review entitledExplanation and Understanding Keil (2006) argued that "explanations can be contrasted in terms of domainsroughly corresponding to academic disciplines" (p. 232). In fact, it has long been argued that even youngchildren are sensitive to different domains of thought such as naive psychology (human behavior), naive biology(living things), and naive physics (the physical world around us) (Carey, 1985; diSessa, 1993; Inagaki &Hatano, 2002; Keil, 1994). Hence, it is likely that examining the internal metric for evaluating explanations indifferent domains of thought will help reveal different dimensions of this metric. Here we limit our discussion toa particular domain of thought, explanations about phenomena in the physical world; namely, phenomena thatcould, at least in principle, also be explained by formal scientific explanations. In this section we operationalizethree dimensions of the internal metric that in our view are highly active in self-evaluating explanations aboutphenomena in the physical world: (1) Intuition; (2) Local coherence; (3) Mechanistic reasoning. We emphasizethat these are not an exhaustive list of dimensions of the internal metric of certainty in explanations, and thereare probably other dimensions. In what follows, we describe each of the three dimensions.IntuitionDrawing and elaborating on diSessa's (1993) model of p-prims, Kapon and diSessa (2012) developed a modelof explanation and change in explanation focusing on knowledge elements (KE) that provide a sense ofsatisfaction to those judging the explanation. They termed these KE explanatory primitives (e-prims). Like pprims, e-prims are self-explanatory, unquestioned units of explanation, which students take as simply “the waythings are,” within the time span of evaluating an explanation. P-prims are a subcategory of e-prims, hence, notall e-prims are p-prims. For instance, a p-prim, by definition, is abstracted from experience in the physicalworld, whereas the source of an e-prim can be social interactions, language, or even explicit instruction.According to this model, explanations are accepted or rejected on the basis of the individual’s convictionsconcerning particular e-prims and how these primitives fit the context of thought. The e-prims model suggestsone dimension to our internal metric of certainty in explanations; namely, that at the base of any conviction liesan e-prim. Table 1 present a list of criteria for identifying e-prims.Table 1: Criteria for identifying e-prims (Kapon & diSessa, 2012)CriterionFunctionalityObviousnessDevelopmentalhistoryTriangulationof expressionDefinitionThe knowledge element is explanatorily useful to the goal of reasoning and responsive to thecontext in which this reasoning takes place.The knowledge element is regarded with explicit statements or unelaborated confidence andacceptance.We are able to identify familiar experiences from which the knowledge element could havebeen abstracted.The knowledge element reappears frequently in a variety of manifestations during thereasoning process.ICLS 2014 Proceedings888© ISLSCriterionTriangulationof form andcontentDefinitionThe knowledge element matches documented p-prims or other documented intuitive notions.This criterion cannot always be satisfied, but when it does, we can consider our interpretationto be on a safer ground.Local CoherenceThe idea of consistency or coherence was used by Thagard (2007) for judging the quality of scientificexplanations. In reference to Thagard’s coherence, Hammer, Elby, Scherr, & Redish (2005) coined the term“local coherence”, to highlight that the activation of knowledge elements and the formation of specificcoherences are context sensitive. Sherin, Krakowsky, & Lee (2012) also supported this notion by suggestingthat when a student explains a phenomenon, a temporary conceptual structure underlying the explanationexhibits consistency which may shift to a different explanation as the activity unfolds. Drawing on the notion oflocal coherence, Parnafes (2012) suggested that an explanation that makes sense to a student ties together a setof knowledge elements of different types that cohere, locally, in a specific context. A student’s (temporary)explanation is viewed as a collection of activated knowledge elements that the student feels fit together at theparticular time and for the particular purpose, hence the explanation make sense. Parnafes suggested that astudent who is trying to understand a phenomenon goes through iterations of self-explanations, with temporarilystable stages of satisfaction with the explanation she generates in between. This comfort is interpreted as atemporary plateau of local coherence.Mechanistic ReasoningCausality plays a privileged role in explanations (Keil, 2003). Moreover, the ability to construct a mechanisticexplanation for a physical phenomenon seems to be a developmental achievement (Metz, 1991). Wehypothesize that the internal metric of certainty in explanations has a scale of causal strength of an explanation,and that this dimension is active in assessing explanations and self explanations about phenomena in thephysical world. Russ, Scherr, Hammer, and Mikeska (2008) adapted an account of mechanism from thephilosophy of science (Machamer et al., 2000) and developed a coding scheme that attempts to identifymechanistic reasoning in students' discourse in inquiry-based science classrooms. An underlying assumption oftheir coding scheme is that evidence of mechanistic reasoning in students' talk does not guarantee that theexplanations they generate are scientifically correct. This assumption makes Russ et al.'s framework a promisingtool to empirically assess the level of mechanistic reasoning in students' explanations, and whether it correlateswith students' relative convictions in these explanations. Table 2 presents the coding scheme in Russ et al.. Notethat Russ et al. conceptualized the first seven codes in Table 1 as hierarchically ordered, namely that code #7,chaining, is the highest evidence for mechanistic reasoning. The last two codes according to the Russ et al.framework are not necessarily connected to a particular level of mechanistic reasoning and the numbering of A& B are arbitrary.Table 2: Coding scheme for mechanistic reasoning in students' talk (Russ et al., 2008)Code(1) Describing theTarget Phenomenon(2) Identifying SetupConditions(3) Identifying Entities(4) IdentifyingActivities(5) IdentifyingProperties of Entities(6) IdentifyingOrganization ofEntities(7) Chaining Backwardand Forward(A) AnalogiesICLS 2014 ProceedingsDefinitionA clear statement or demonstration of the particular phenomenon or result that thestudent is trying to explain.Descriptions of the spatial and temporal organization of entities that enable themechanism to run and produce the phenomenon.Recognizing the objects that affect the outcome of the phenomenon.Identifying the various doings in which the entities engage, articulate the actionsand interactions that occur among entities, describe the things that entities do thatcause changes in the surrounding entities.Identifying and articulating general properties of entities that are necessary for theparticular mechanism to run.Identifying how the entities are spatially organized, where they are located, andhow they are structured.Using knowledge about the causal structure of the world to make claims about whatmust have happened previously to bring about the current state of things (backward)or what will happen next given that certain entities or activities are present now(forward).Using analogies to similar mechanisms in other contexts or fields as a frameworkfor understanding new situations, comparing the target phenomenon to anotherphenomenon.889© ISLSCode(B) AnimationsDefinitionUsing external animated models (gestures, body movements, etc.) to illustrate howcertain entities act in the mechanism.We now turn to a case study in which we highlight two explanations put forward by one student andanalyze the internal metric in reference to these two explanations, using our framework.Illustrative Case StudyThe episode that will be analyzed here is drawn from a large corpus of data that was collected as part of thesecond author’s project on the role of self-generated representations for promoting conceptual understanding.As part of the project, the second author and her research group interviewed pairs of students who were asked togenerate, discuss and come to an agreement on explanations for phenomena in the physical world whilegenerating representations and elaborating them. Interventions were kept to a minimum during students’discussions, and if made, were done for the purpose of clarifying meanings, or cuing students to consideroverlooked conceptual issues. The episode (~ 3.5 minutes) is drawn from the first part of a 90 minute session.The students, two 6th graders, Reut and Natalie (pseudonyms), were trying to explain why a plastic bottleshrinks when air is pumped out of it. The analysis will focus on Reut's reasoning.We chose the episode and the focus on Reut's reasoning since the explanations that Reut generated atthe beginning of the episode and at the end of the episode were very different, and although she seemed quitesure of her explanation at the beginning of the episode she ended with a different one, allowing us to use ourmodel to compare and contrast the two self-generated explanations, and account for Reut's internal evaluation.In each episode, we code and analyze the three dimensions, and then integrate the findings into one integratedmetric. The three dimensions were analyzed as follows: (1) intuition: we listed all the knowledge elements inthe explanation and those that were likely to be an e-prim, were checked using the criteria listed in Table 1. (2)Local coherence: we reexamined the knowledge elements that were coded for each explanation and examinedthe degree of fit. (3) Mechanistic reasoning was examined using the codes in Table 2.Due to space limitations we cannot reproduce the full transcripts. To illustrate the function of theinternal metric of certainty in explanation, we focus only on Reut's explanations and often regard the interactionwith Natalie and the interviewer as part of the context in which Reut's explanation acquire its meaning, and addthem as comments to Reut's explanation. We start by presenting the explanations that Reut generated, and thenmove to their analysis using our framework to explain why Reut preferred the second over the first. Wesystematically number each student's utterances to allow us to refer to specific utterances later in our analysis.Utterances are numbered as follows: student name, #of explanation, and a letter that numbers the utterances ofthis student. Thus, "Reut1B" denotes Reut's 1st explanation, second utterance. Italicized square brackets "[]"denote our interpretive and other comments.The aim of the analysis is to illustrate the operationalization of the internal metric of certainly inexplanations. Hence, we examine the two explanations that Reut generated using the metric, explain her initialconviction in the first explanation, and the reason why she later preferred the second explanation over the firstvia differences between the two explanations along the three dimensions specified above.Explanation 1The students watched an experiment in which a plastic bottle shrinks when air is pumped out of it, and they thengenerated drawings to explain what happened. Using their own drawings they explained the phenomenon toeach other, and occasionally the interviewers joined in. Reut and Natalie generated different explanations at thebeginning of the episode. Table 3 presents Reut's first explanation.Table 3: Reut's first explanation (three turns)Reut1a:Reut1b:Reut1c:It [the bottle] shrank in order to fill the vacuum, to reduce it.[Answering a question from the interviewer "Why should the bottle care about the vacuum?"]What… [points to her drawing] I don’t know is why this happens, but I know it does… I evendon’t know why I know it, but… if there is a vessel that has vacuum inside it and there areparticles outside[Natalie introduced "particles" to the discussion], or something… it alwaysenters the vacuum to fill it. I don’t know why it happens… hmmm…Points again on her drawing] this is what I know, that always, if there is a vacuum so somethingwill fill it. This is why here, there is more than – there is vacuum [points to Natalie’s drawing]and the bottle shrank to fill it out [demonstrates the change in the shape of the bottle with herhands]. It’s like, shrink inside.ICLS 2014 Proceedings890© ISLSReut's Initial Evaluation to Natalie's ExplanationNatalie constructed a very different explanation. We provide here only what she said after Reut's turn 1C, sinceReut later refers to this explanation.Natalie 1D:Because the outside, it's like the pressure on the outside is bigger than theinside. A lot of pressure is activated towards the inside because the...ah... thenumber of particles outside, say for this area, is bigger than the number ofparticles inside for this area. So the outside pushes the bottle, to... shrink.At this point the interviewer asked Reut: "What do you think Reut about what Natalie just said (Natalie1D)?" Reut replied: "I have no idea if its right or wrong". In other words, at this point she did not think thisexplanation was better than her own.Analysis of Explanation 1Table 3 presents the development of Reut's first explanation during the discussion. We start by listing theknowledge elements that Reut used in her explanations:Reut1A: (1) A vacuum tends to be filled; (2) A vacuum needs to be reduced.Reut2A: (3) Particles are things (4) Things in the vicinity of vacuum will eventually enter in to fill it.Reut 3A: (1) A vacuum tends to be filledIntuitionWe argue that the core of this explanation is an e-prim - "a vacuum has to be filled" - and that the knowledgeelements # 1, 2, 4 are different manifestations of this. " A vacuum has to be filled" meets the first fourmandatory criteria in Table 1 for identifying an e-prim: Functionality: it explains to Reut why the bottle shrank.Obviousness: Reut says: "I don’t know why this happens, but I know it does… I even don’t know why I knowit" (Reut1b), "this is what I know" (Reut3c). Developmental history: source in language - the phrase "a vacuumwill always be filled" is a common idiom in Hebrew (a nearly equivalent idiom in English is "nature abhors avacuum"), source in interactions in the physical world - e.g., drinking from a straw, playing with a syringe.Triangulation of expression: KE 1, 2, 4 are different manifestations of the same e-prim. Triangulation of formand content - the notion that a vacuum has to be filled is mentioned in other studies. For instance Wiser andSmith (2008) discuss "a deeply held metaphysical principle that vacuum does not exist in nature" (p. 220), anddiSessa (1993) identifies "vacuum impels" as a p-prim, but admits that this p-prim might be cultural to someextent. Given the fact that all five criteria were met we assumed that "a vacuum has to be filled" is an e-prim inReut's knowledge system.Local CoherenceAll the knowledge elements that Reut activated (1, 2, 3, 4) locally cohere with one another and suggest coherentinferences that can explain the observed phenomenon in a convincing way: The bottle shrunk to fill the vacuumbecause the vacuum had to be filled (Reut1c).Mechanistic ReasoningTo establish this measure we used the codes listed in Table 2 (Russ et al., 2008).Reut1a: (1) Describing the target phenomena ("the bottle shrunk"); (3) identifying entities:("vacuum");Reut1b: (3) identifying entities ("vacuum", "vessel", "particles or something"); (4) identifyingactivities ("if there is a vessel that has vacuum inside it and there are particlesoutside, or something… it always enters the vacuum to fill it"); (5) identifyingproperties (the property of vacuum) (6) Identifying the organization of entities (thevacuum is inside the vessel the particles are outside the vessel).Reut1c: (1) Describing the target phenomenon ("the bottle shrunk"); (3) identifying entities:("vacuum"); (5) identifying properties (the property of vacuum - "if there is a vacuumso something will fill it"), (6) Identifying organization of entities ("here there is morethan...").We argue that there is no chaining backwards (7) in this utterance, even though the structure ofReut's1c utterance approximates chaining backwards. We use the definition of chaining backwards in thefollowing manner: using knowledge about the causal structure of the world (the property of a vacuum that it hasto be filled) to make the claim (the bottle shrank to fill the vacuum) about what brings about the current state(the bottle has shrunk). In our view, this would be valid only if the bottle's "walls" were explicitly identified asICLS 2014 Proceedings891© ISLSan entity, but they were not, and hence Reut's argument is circular. Without this identification, chaining is notpart of Reut's explanation.SummaryAll in all, we argue that it is not surprising that Reut did not immediately abandon the explanation shegenerated. It was based on a strong intuition, it presented local coherence that was developed during the threeutterances, and its causal strength was not complete but was quite impressive, since apart from chaining, almostall the components of mechanistic reasoning seemed to be present (#1, 3, 4, 5, 6 in Table 2).Explanation 2The interviewer asked Reut: "Can you repeat what you understood [from Natalie 1D]? Table 4 presents theconversation between Natalie, Reut and the interviewer in which Reut constructed her second explanation,which started as a mere repetition of Natalie's idea and gradually developed and became "her own".Table 4: Reut's second explanationReut2a:What I understood... like, what I understood - there is the bottle… now… hm... one second [looksto the side]... first the particles move, right? So what happens is that they bounce into the bottleand they push it inside [gestures pushing with her hand]. Now, before, there were more, therewere many particles…Can you explain it using one of the drawings? Try doing it here [gives them a blank page][Reut and Natalie take the paper] Can I try on this? Say this is a bottle [draws a rectangle]lovely [laughs] now what is happening, we have plenty of particles here that push in thisdirection, and try.... to push it out [gesturing "out" with her hand] and particles from thisdirection that try to push it inside [draw arrows on the page and gesture with her hand "inside"].This is what I understood, this is what I know.And now with the pump, we took out, like,YeahLots of particle from hereSo now we have here, like just two particles...More... more force pushing from the outsideAnd less force to resist, so it shrinks. It has nothing to do with a vacuum.Int.:Reut2b:Natalie:Reut2c:Natalie:Reut2d:Natalie:Reut2e:Reut Prefers the Second Explanation Over the FirstNote that in the second part of utterance Reut2e, Reut states "It has nothing to do with a vacuum." Thus sherejected her previous explanation and accepted the current one.Analysis of Explanation 2Table 4 presents the development of Reut's first explanation during the discussion. Before we start, we wouldlike to note the interviewer response when Reut said that she had no idea whether Natalie's explanation iscorrect or not. The interviewer asked her to restate it. During her restatement and elaboration of this explanationshe changed her mind and became convinced of the explanation that she constructed during this process. Again,we start by listing the knowledge elements that Reut used in her explanations:Reut2a: (1) the particles move; (2) the particles bounce on the walls of the bottle and push it;(3) particles outside of the bottle push the bottle's walls inside (4) pumping takes theparticles out of the bottle.Reut2b: (2) the particles bounce on the walls of the bottle and push it; (3) particles outside ofthe bottle push the bottle's walls inside; (5) particles in the bottle push the bottle'swalls outside.Reut2c: (4) pumping takes the particles out of the bottle.Reut2d: (4) pumping takes the particles out of the bottle.Reut2e: (6) fewer particles means a smaller pushing force; (7) the stronger force wins(overcoming p-prim; diSessa, 1993).IntuitionAt the core of Reut conviction lies the p-prim - "overcoming" - the intuitive schematization of one force orinfluence that overpowers another (diSessa, 1993). Note that Reut did not start the explanation with conviction.At first she was merely reconstructing Netalie's explanation, and her use of the word "push" (Reut2A) was toreference Natalie's explanation (Natalie1d). But in the next utterance Reut discussed conflicting forces: "wehave plenty of particles here that push in this direction, and try.... to push it out [gesturing "out" with her hand]ICLS 2014 Proceedings892© ISLSand particles from this direction that try to push it inside [draw arrows on the page and gesture with her hand"inside"] (Reut2b). Note the triangulation of expressions for conflicting forces. Not only did Reut verbalize theconflicting forces, she also simulated them with her hands. P-prims are non verbally encoded, and it may wellbe that the gestures imitating the conflicting forces activated the notion of overcoming. After Reut explicitlyexpressed how pumping will result in fewer particles in (Reut2c & Reut2d, KE #4) and that fewer bouncingparticles means less force (Reut2E, KE#6), the overcoming p-prim was activated, and was used with strongconviction.Note that the reliability priority of overcoming is much higher than that of the e-prim "a vacuum has tobe filled", and after it was activated Reut concluded that the shrinking of the bottle "has nothing to do with avacuum" (Reut2e). The differences in the reliability priority could be attributed to the fact that e-prims that arealso p-prims are abstracted from the very basic and frequent interactions with the physical world, whereas theroots of an e-prim such as "a vacuum has to be filled" are not as deep.CoherenceThe knowledge elements that Reut activated (#1-7) locally cohere and support one another, suggesting coherentinferences that can explain the observed phenomenon in a convincing way: The bottle shrunk since the particlesout of the bottle pushed on the bottle harder than the opposing push of the particles in the bottle (Reut2e).Mechanistic ReasoningReut2a: (3) Identifying entities (bottle, particles); (4) Identifying activities (the particlesbounce, push); (5) Identifying properties of entities (particles move); (B) Animatedmodel (Reut gestures with her hand to mimic the pushing of the particles)Reut2b: (3) Identifying entities (bottle, particles); (4) Identifying activities (the particlespush); (6) Identifying organization of entities (particles outside and inside of thebottle); (B) Animated model (Reut gestures with her hand to animate the conflictingdirections of the particles being pushed in and out of the bottle)Reut2c: (2) Identifying setup conditions (when we start pumping we take particles out of thebottle); (6) Identifying organization of entities (particles outside and inside)Reut2d: (2) Identifying setup conditions (due to the pumping there are very few particles leftin the bottle); (6) Identifying organization of entities ("we have here like twoparticles")Reut2e: (7) Chaining backwards - using knowledge about the causal structure of the world(pumping the bottle took out particles from the bottle, thus fewer particles hit theinside of the bottle relative to those that hit the outer walls ) to make claims (the forceapplied by more particles outside the bottle, overcame force applied by fewerparticles inside the bottle) about what brought about the current state (thus, the bottlehas shrunk).SummaryReut changed her mind and preferred the second explanation to the first one. This was accounted for in terms ofthe three dimensions of the internal metric for certainty in explanations. Intuition: The second explanationactivated a stronger intuition than the first one (a p-prim vs. "just" an e-prim). Local coherence: The degree ofcoherence of the second explanation was higher than the first, since more knowledge elements cohered andsupported one another. Mechanistic reasoning: The degree of mechanistic reasoning was higher since all thecomponents of mechanistic reasoning were present.ConclusionIn this paper we attempted to highlight students’ internal evaluation of explanations, as opposed to externalevaluations of explanations that are based on compatibility to scientific formulations. We explored the sourcesof students’ sense of conviction of their own explanations and what guides their preferences for one explanationover another. We described the process of internal evaluation with a metaphorical theoretical construct theinternal metric for certainty in explanation. The main contribution of this paper is the operationalization of thisinternal metric into empirical traceable terms. We envision the internal metric as composed of severaldimensions. In the case of the internal evaluation of explanations of phenomena in the physical world, wesuggested three dominant dimensions that form the internal metric: intuition, local coherence, and mechanisticreasoning. We operationalized each dimension and specified criteria for its evaluation based on students' selfgenerated explanations. The illustrative analysis shows that the framework can explain conviction in anexplanation, as well as relative conviction and the preference of one explanation over another.It is important to note that paths of developing explanations guided by external evaluation and internalevaluation may not necessarily converge. This raises the the issue of the educational merits of the ability toICLS 2014 Proceedings893© ISLSexternally measure students' internal convictions. We argue that students’ agency in the developmental pathfrom intuitive to scientific explanation is crucial for maintaining a sense of understanding, and hence the abilityto assess students’ convictions in explanations is a key component in instructional design.ReferencesBechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2005). Explanation: A mechanist alternative. Studies in History andPhilosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and BiomedicalSciences, 36(2), 421-441.Berk, L. E. (1985). Why children talk to themselves. Young Children, 40(5), 46-52.Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How studentsstudy and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive science, 13(2), 145-182.Dagher, Z. R., & Cossman, G. (1992). Verbal explanations given by science teachers: Their nature andimplications. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 29(4), 361-374.diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an Epistemology of Physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10(2&3), 105-225.diSessa, A. A. (forthcoming). The Construction of Causal Schemes: Learning Mechanisms at the KnowledgeLevel. Cognitive science.Driver, R., Newton, P., & Osborne, J. (2000). Establishing the norms of scientific argumentation in classrooms.Science education, 84(3), 287-312.Friedman, M. (1974). Explanation and scientific understanding. The Journal of Philosophy, 71(1), 5-19.Gentner, D., & Gentner, D. R. (1983). Flowing waters or moving crowd: Mental models of electricity. In D.Gentner & A. L. Stevens (Eds.), Mental Models (pp. 99-130). Hilisdale, NJ: Lawrence Eribaum.Gopnik, A. (1998). Explanation as Orgasm*. Minds and machines, 8(1), 101-118.Harman, G. H. (1965). The inference to the best explanation. The Philosophical Review, 74(1), 88-95.Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1995). Mental leaps : analogy in creative thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Inagaki, K., & Hatano, G. (2002). Young children's thinking about biological world. New York, NY:Psychology Press.Kapon, S., & diSessa, A. A. (2012). Reasoning Through Instructional Analogies. Cognition and Instruction,30(3), 261-310.Keil, F. C. (1994). The birth and nurturance of concepts by domains: The origins of concepts of living things. InL. Hirschfield & S. Gelman (Eds.), apping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture (pp.234-254). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Keil, F. C. (2003). Folkscience: Coarse interpretations of a complex reality. Trends in cognitive sciences, 7(8),368-373.Keil, F. C. (2006). Explanation and understanding. Annual review of psychology, 57, 227-254.Keil, F. C., Rozenblit, L., & Mills, C. (2004). What lies beneath? Understanding the limits of understanding. InD. T. Levin (Ed.), Thinking and seeing: Visual metacognition in adults and children (pp. 227-249).Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.Machamer, P., Darden, L., & Craver, C. F. (2000). Thinking about mechanisms. Philosophy of science, 1-25.Metz, K. E. (1991). Development of explanation: Incremental and fundamental change in children's physicsknowledge. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28(9), 785-797.Mohan, L., Chen, J., & Anderson, C. W. (2009). Developing a multi-­‐year learning progression for carboncycling in socio-­‐ecological systems. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 675-698.Parnafes, O. (2012). Developing Explanations and Developing Understanding: Students Explain the Phases ofthe Moon Using Visual Representations. Cognition and Instruction, 30(4), 359-403.Russ, R. S., Scherr, R. E., Hammer, D., & Mikeska, J. (2008). Recognizing mechanistic reasoning in studentscientific inquiry: A framework for discourse analysis developed from philosophy of science. Scienceeducation, 92(3), 499-525.Salmon, W. C. (1989). Four decade of scientific explanation. In P. Kitcher & W. C. Salmon (Eds.), Scientificexplanation, Minnesota studies in the philosophy of science (Vol. 13, pp. 3-219). Minneapolis:University of Minnesota Press.Toulmin, S. E. (1972). Human understanding. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Wiser, M., & Smith, C. (2008). Learning and teaching about matter in grades K-8: When should the atomicmolecular theory be introduced? In S. Vosniadou (Ed.), International handbook of research onconceptual change (pp. 205 – 237). NY: Routledge.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank Rosemary Russ for a useful discussion about the application of the framework ofmechanistic reasoning.ICLS 2014 Proceedings894© ISLS