An Interactional Analysis of Gaze Coordination during OnlineCollaborative Problem Solving ActivitiesMurat Perit Çakır and Selin Deniz UzunosmanoğluInformatics Institute, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkeyperit@metu.edu.tr, sdeniz@metu.edu.trAbstract: Simultaneous tracking of eye gaze patterns of two or more students while they areengaged in a collaborative learning activity has recently attracted increasing interest in thelearning sciences literature. The dual eye tracking paradigm allows researchers to quantify thedegree of gaze overlap over the course of a learning activity, which is often treated as anestimate of the degree of joint attention among peers. In this paper we employ the dual eyetracking paradigm in the context of online collaborative geometry problem solving to quantifythe degree of joint attention evidenced in gaze patterns, and explore what qualitative factorsfacilitate gaze coordination by focusing on the interactional organization of sequences inwhich gaze recurrence takes place.IntroductionInvestigating ocular correlates of learning with eye tracking methods has become an important focus of researchin the learning sciences, particularly in the area of multi-media learning (van Gog & Scheiter, 2010). Themajority of eye tracking studies in this field consider the individual as the primary unit of analysis. Such studiesoften control for the content and the pace of the instructional materials presented to the learners, measure theeye fixation patterns of the learners to identify what parts of the interface they allocate their attention, andfinally relate these measures to learning outcomes to identify which presentation strategies were more effective.Since fixation sequences by themselves do not reveal what subjects are thinking or whether they are reallypaying attention, think-aloud protocols are frequently employed to interpret the eye-tracking data. However,since learning to see relevant visual structures at a scene and to associate them with appropriate linguisticterminology are primarily socially shaped processes (Goodwin, 1994), think-aloud alone may not be adequate tounderstand how students learn to allocate their visual attention to relevant objects in a particular domain.The dual eye tracking paradigm, where the eye gaze of multiple subjects are monitored simultaneouslywhile they are collaborating on a shared task, provides important opportunities to investigate the mechanismsunderlying joint attention (Nüssli & Jermann, 2012). The degree of overlap or cross-recurrence among fixationsequences of interlocutors provides important information regarding to what extent the participants mutuallyorient to each other and to the objects in the shared scene (Richardson, Dale & Kirkham, 2007). A generalfinding in this emerging literature is that there is a positive correlation between the degree of gaze recurrenceand collaborative learning outcomes (Jermann et al., 2011). In the context of well-defined tasks, it may even bepossible to predict whether a dyad will succeed in solving a puzzle based on the patterns of synchronizationdetected in their raw gaze and speech data via machine learning algorithms (Nüssli, 2011). These findings alsomotivated the design of learning environments where users’ gaze information is visualized on the screen in realtime as an awareness mechanism. A recent study on such a joint learning environment reported significant gainsin gaze coordination and learning outcomes (Schneider & Pea, 2013).Current studies that employ the dual eye tracking paradigm in the context of collaborative learningfocus on devising quantitative metrics that reveal the type and the quality of collaboration, without particularlyfocusing on the role sequential organization of actions/utterances play in the achievement of joint attention. Inthis paper we focus on the relationship between changes in gaze recurrence and the sequential organization ofinteraction in a chat environment called Virtual Math Teams (VMT), where we asked dyads to collaborativelywork on dynamic geometry problems. In this short paper we present our preliminary findings regarding (a) howmeasures of gaze recurrence relate to the overall success of collaboration in the context of collaborative mathproblem solving online, and (b) how variation in gaze recurrence relate to specific interactional events.MethodologyThis study was conducted with 18 volunteered university students at METU in Ankara, Turkey. Participantswere grouped into 9 pairs and asked to collaboratively work on 10 geometry problems by using the VMTenvironment (Figure 1). Before the experiments participants received a short training that illustrated basicfeatures of VMT. VMT is a CSCL environment that provides chat, shared whiteboard and wiki features tosupport discussions on math topics online (Stahl, 2009). Most recent version of VMT supports GeoGebra-baseddynamic geometry constructions. The tasks were selected among activities presented in Stahl (2013), whichincluded ruler and compass constructions such as constructing a perfect equilateral triangle, an isoscelestriangle, and a perfect hexagon in GeoGebra. Participants coordinated their work and discussed strategies via theICLS 2014 Proceedings1112© ISLSchat, and took turns to construct the desired dynamic geometry representations. Dyads were also asked to comeup with an informal proof detailing why they thought that their construction was correct upon completion ofeach problem. Teams posted their proofs on a separate summary tab. During the online sessions eye movementsof the participants were recorded with two desktop eye trackers (Tobii T1750 and Tobii T120) at a resolution of50Hz.Figure 1. A screen shot of the VMT environment is presented on the left. The screen shot on the right shows the16 areas used for partitioning the screens into areas of interest.Eye-tracker data were analyzed both quantitatively and qualitatively. Gaze recordings were split intosynchronized excerpts in the Tobii Studio Software. The screen recording of each participant was then split intoa 4x4 matrix of non-overlapping areas of interests (AOIs) as shown in Figure 1. 12 of the AOIs covered the areawhere the dynamic geometry representations were constructed and 4 AOIs covered the chat component on theright. The time course of gaze duration falling over each AOI was then visualized by a custom software writtenin Java. The visualization provides a scarf plot that represents which AOI participants looked at, when their eyegazes overlapped, and over which AOI (Figure 4). The third row in the visualization indicates gray bars thathighlight those time points where both participants’ gaze fall on the same AOI. The whitespace indicate thoseinstances where the participant is not looking at any of the AOIs (e.g. during typing).Each of these 16 regions was considered as an approximation of the part of the screen over which theparticipants were attending to at any given time. While monitoring the shared scene users either moved their eyegaze with saccadic movements or fixated on specific locations by keeping their eyes still over a location. Duringa fixation event the fovea, which is the part of the retina that has the highest concentration of light sensitivecells, is oriented towards the fixated location. The fovea covers approximately 1-2 degrees of visual field, and ata distance of 65 cm from a screen, 1-2 degrees of visual field corresponds to a circular area with a diameter of2.2 cm on the screen (Duchowski, 2007). The visual attention span is considered to cover a larger area coveredby the foveal projection, as evidenced in dual-task experiments (Holmqvist et al., 2011). Since 17 inch displayswith 4:3 aspect ratios were used during our experiments, the width and the length of the screen was 35 cm and26 cm respectively. Splitting this area into 16 equal non-overlapping rectangular AOIs covers an areaapproximately 9 cm wide and 7 cm long. In this study this rectangle was considered as a rough approximationof where the person is attending to at any given time. Using the same AOI definitions on both screens oversynchronized eye-tracking data allowed us to quantify gaze overlaps. Since the screens were divided equally,the probability that one of the participants allocate their attention on a given AOI is 1/16. Assumingindependence of random gaze events, the possibility that two people allocate their attention on the same AOI is1/16x1/16 = 1/256. So, the likelihood of having systematic gaze overlap among 2 people by chance is 0.004,despite the low spatial resolution provided by 16 AOIs.In addition to the scarf plot, the software also computes a gaze recurrence plot for each problemattempted by every pair. The plots computed for each pair were then combined into a single recurrencepercentage plot by taking the average of all corresponding data points coming from the plots for individualproblem solving segments (see Figure 2). This yields a recurrence plot that summarizes the gaze patterns overall problem solving segments of the particular pair. In the combined summary plot, data points range from -4000msec to +4000 msec with a 100 msec resolution. Point 0 indicates the recurrence percentage for synchronousgaze overlaps, -200 indicates the recurrence percentage in which B’s gaze follows A’s with a 200 msec delaywith respect to A, and vice versa. The blue line shows the baseline recurrence level, which is computed overrandomly shuffled gaze data. The vertical lines are the standard error bars, which indicate the amount ofdeviation in the data for the corresponding time.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1113© ISLSResults and DiscussionIn order to test the relationship between group performance and the degree of gaze overlap, 9 pairs were splitinto 3 achievement groups in terms of the number of problems they could solve correctly, whether they workedon tasks in a coordinated way and whether both participants contributed to the discussion. The degree of gazeoverlap observed during each session was used as an indicator of the level of joint attention achieved by eachgroup. Previous studies conducted with voice enabled computer-mediated communication systems found thatparticipants took on average approximately 2 seconds to focus their attention on an object after it was mentionedby her partner (Richardson & Dale, 2005). In the present study the communication among partners is mediatedby a chat and a shared drawing tool. One may expect that reading a chat utterance and then allocating one’sattention to the referred object on the drawing board take more than two seconds. However, the gaze recurrenceplots with various lag combinations indicated that the highest degree of gaze overlap occurs within a similartime interval. Therefore, those instances in which one subject looks at the same area of the screen that hispartner looked at within two seconds were treated as instances of gaze overlap.The high achievement group exhibited on average 31% gaze overlap, which is followed by the mediumand low achievement groups with 24% and 13% gaze overlap respectively. A one-way ANOVA conducted overgaze overlap values indicated that this difference is statistically significant, F(2,8) = 11.917, p<0.001, η 2 =0.341. Games-Howell post hoc tests found a significant difference between low and medium achievementgroups (MD=-12.32, p<0.05), as well as between low and high achievement groups (MD=-20.19, p<0.01). Thedifference between medium and high achievement groups was not significant. In other words, higher achievinggroups exhibited significantly higher gaze coordination during collaborative problem solving sessions.Figure 3 shows the overall gaze recurrence plots corresponding to the entire session of two differentdyads. The plot on the left of Figure 3 corresponds to the best performing dyad in our sample, whereas the ploton the right corresponds to the worst performing team. The better performing team’s recurrence plot differ fromthe other team’s plot in several ways. First, the mean percent recurrence values are much higher for the betterteam. Second, the better team’s recurrence plot significantly deviates from the random baseline, whereas theother team’s recurrence plot cannot be distinguished from the baseline. The recurrence plot for the better teamhas two peaks, one around -1500 msec, whereas the other at 1500 msec. This suggests that both partners equallyfollowed each other’s gaze, indicating a high degree of coordinated behavior. Such a pattern is not visible forthe other team.Figure 2. Overall gaze recurrence plots for the highest achieving (left) and the lowest achieving (right) dyads.In an effort to explore some of the factors underlying these global gaze recurrence patterns, weconducted an interaction analysis of a sample excerpt obtained from both groups’ chat sessions. We used thescarf plot in Figure 4 as a guide to index those moments in collaboration with greater degree of gaze overlap.The excerpt shown in table 1 shows the high achieving dyad’s work on question 6, which asked them toconstruct a perfect hexagon by using points, circles and line segments only. In the first three lines, A orients hispartner to the new problem. In line 4, after reading the question (as indicated by fixation patterns in the videorecording) B solicits A’s help for ideas. Next A raises a question which proposes a possible way to characterizea hexagon in terms of 6 equilateral triangles. B’s responses in the next two lines suggest that he is not sure aboutthe proposed relationship. Next A takes control of the drawing area and adds a circle. Then, he posts a chatmessage stating that he does not know how to proceed. He also mentions that he thought about using angles butthat did not help him proceed any further.While A was constructing the circle, B was looking at the unfolding construction on the GeoGebra tab.Since he was following these steps right after they were committed into the system and broadcasted to allICLS 2014 Proceedings1114© ISLSclients, there is a slight lag between A’s and B’s gaze patterns. Once A seems to be done with his drawing, Bmakes a suggestion that A should consider drawing an equilateral triangle. As A is drawing the triangle, B looksat places where he expects the next line segment to appear. Such anticipatory gaze patterns highlight a strongerdegree of common ground or indexical symmetry between the two partners as compared to a situation whereone partner merely follows the drawing actions of the other partner.Table 1. Excerpt from the high achieving dyad#12345UserABABATime23:43.223:46.023:46.023:57.024:32.667891011121314151617BBAAAABBBABA24:46.325:16.925:19.71819BA30:46.42021BB31:37.231:41.026:58.127:04.527:10.027:20.027:31.929:29.8Chat Message / Drawing Action6ya geçelim (Lets move to 6)her şey silindi bende (everything is erased)ben sildim 6ya bakalım :) (I did that lets take a look at 6:))nasıl yaparız? (how can we do it?)Şimdi altıgenin içinde 6 tane eşkenar üçgen var di mi (now there are 6 equilateral trianglesinside the hexagon, right?)6 mı (6?)bilmem (I don't know)dur bi başlayalım (let's just start)constructs a circle with center A and a point Bbilemedim nasıl yaparız (I don't know how we should do it)açı kullancaktım ama yok (I would use angles, but there are none)düşünelim (let's think about it)yukarda 3 kenar olcak aşağıda da (There should be 3 edges at the top and also at the bottom)nasıl buluruz (How can we find it)adds point C on circle then draws the diameter connecting B and C (see Figure 3, left)eşkenar üçgen oluştursan (how about you draw an equilateral triangle)removes diameter, adds another circle sharing the radius with existing circle, draws anequilateral triangle by using the radius (see Figure 3, middle)aynısını diğer tarafa da yap (do the same to the other side)draws lıne segments DB and BC, adds a new circle passing through A and B, marks theintersection E (see Figure 3, right)aferim (good job)tebrkler (congrats)Figure 3. The evolution of A’s drawing actions for question 6Once A completes the triangle (see Figure 3, middle) B suggests him to draw the same triangle on theother side. This is followed by the addition of line segment BC, which is monitored by B. Next, A adds anothercircle centered at C and sharing a radius with the two other circles. When he defines point E at the intersectionof the new circle and the circle on the top right, B recognizes this as the solution. At that moment his eye gazetraverses over the projected new intersections that will become the hexagon once connected by line segments.Analysis of excerpts from the other team reveals a very different form of interactional organization. Aspart of their task description, each team was asked to summarize their findings on a separate tab calledSummary. Starting with question 2, this team switched to a cooperative mode of operation, where one partneraimed to solve the next question on the GeoGebra tab, while the other partner was busy summarizing theprevious solution on the Summary tab. This led to very little transactive interaction among the partners andhence very small degree of gaze overlap. The scarf plot in Figure 4 summarizes the gaze overlap distribution ofthis team while they were working on one of the questions. The whitespace in the scarf plot also reveals that thefirst user was busy typing the textboxes in which the team was summarizing their solution for the first question.Occasional gaze overlaps occurred at the chat component when participants exchanged occasional messages.Overall, the preliminary results of the interaction analysis were consistent with the gaze recurrenceanalysis. Gaze recurrence analysis is successful for giving a global view of gaze patterns, such as if there is aICLS 2014 Proceedings1115© ISLSsignificant amount of gaze cross recurrence and if there is an asymmetry among peers (e.g. one partner tended tofollow the eye gaze of the other). For instance, the cross recurrence map for the successful dyad was symmetricwith respect to the origin, meaning that both partners almost equally followed each other’s gaze, which signalsthat there is a stronger level of coordination among their actions. As far as qualitative aspects of collaboration isconcerned, the quality of collaboration increased together with the increase in gaze overlap if both participantsactively contributed to the problem solving process by proposing ideas, constructing geometric diagrams andmonitoring each other’s actions.Figure 4. Scarf plot showing the distribution of eye gaze of A and B while they were working on the hexagonproblem. The lower graph shows the scarf plot for the lower achieving group.The degree of gaze overlap was closely related to the achievement of indexical symmetry amongpartners that renders indexical terms such as “the other side”, “draw an equilateral” etc. meaningful to theparticipants. In the sequentially unfolding context of their interaction, such terms attain their specificity throughthe actions of the interlocutors. The presence of indexical symmetry seems to be best evidenced in the case ofanticipatory gaze patterns, where one partner fixates on a location where he/she expects the next relevant actionto happen. In future work, we are planning to do a more fine-grained analysis of the temporal course of gazerecurrence in an effort to distinguish anticipatory gaze patterns from simple forms of action following. Suchfeatures may lead to more fine grained ocular correlates of joint attention and transactive reasoning, which areimportant factors on the overall success of collaborative learning.ReferencesDuchowski, A. T. (2007). Eye tracking methodology: Theory and practice. New York, NY: Springer.Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.Holmqvist, K., Nyström, M., Andersson, R., Dewhurst, R., Jarodzka, H., & Van de Weijer, J. (2011). Eyetracking: A comprehensive guide to methods and measures. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.Nüssli, M., & Jermann, P. (2012). Effects of sharing text selections on gaze cross-recurrence and interactionquality in a pair programming task Proceedings of CSCW’12, 1125-1134. New York, NY: ACM.Nüssli, M. A. (2011). Dual eye-tracking methods for the study of remote collaborative problem-solving.Unpublished PhD thesis, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne.Richardson, D. C., & Dale, R. (2005). Looking to understand: The coupling between speakers' and listeners' eyemovements and its relationship to discourse comprehension. Cognitive Science, 29(6), 1045-1060.Richardson, D. C., Dale, R., & Kirkham, N. Z. (2007). The art of conversation is coordination common groundand the coupling of eye movements during dialogue. Psychological science, 18(5), 407-413.Schneider, B., & Pea, R. (2013). Real-time mutual gaze perception enhances collaborative learning andcollaboration quality. Int Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 8(4), 375-397.Stahl, G. (2013). Topics in Dynamic Geometry for Virtual Math Teams. Retrieved fromhttp://gerrystahl.net/elibrary/topics/topics.pdfStahl, G. (Ed.). (2009). Studying virtual math teams. New York, NY: Springer.van Gog, T., & Scheiter, K. (2010). Eye tracking as a tool to study and enhance multimedia learning. Learning& Instruction, 20(2), 95-99.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1116© ISLS