Tightening Research-Practice Connections:Taking ISLS Findings to Public DebateSusan McKenney, Open University of the Netherlands & Twente University, susan.mckenney@ou.nlKimberley Gomez, University of California, Los Angeles. kimgomez@ucla.eduBrian J. Reiser, Northwestern University, reiser@northwestern.eduAbstract: This session will: sensitize participants to the importance of sharing researchfindings with non-researchers (e.g. teachers, school leaders, policy makers, parents); informparticipants about existing strategies for engaging in public debate; and support participants informing collaborative outreach projects. During the workshop, collaboration teams willidentify specific research insights to be shared with non-researchers; start shaping keymessages; and select approaches for engaging in public debate (e.g. New York Timeseditorial, NSTA workshop). After the workshop, teams will develop and implement theplanned outreach approaches. Thereafter, a paper and/or journal special issue is envisioned,documenting the processes.BackgroundA robust body of knowledge now exists to describe how policymakers and educators access, value and useresearch; various modes through which knowledge is generated and shared; and what aspects of evidence-basedpractice and research utilization in other fields can be applied to education. However, both the scholarly insightsand effective practices have yet to become widely spread. Even though researchers are becoming increasinglyrequired to disseminate research findings among practitioners, few graduate programs devote serious attentionto preparing researchers for the task, and many researchers find it daunting. The proposed workshop addressesthis element of “learning and becoming” in researcher practice by (a) sharing insights and examples fromexisting projects that stimulate fruitful research-practice connections; and (b) facilitating the design of strategiesthrough which ISLS can contribute to public debate.Theoretical underpinningsEducational research has long been criticized for its weak link with practice. Explicit attempts to close theresearch-practice gap have been underway for over four decades. These efforts have included design teamapproaches and researcher-teacher models aimed at making practice the object of investigation. Shrader,Williams, Whitcomb, Finn and Gomez (1998), for example, described a research for practice approach, in theLearning Sciences, that involved working collaboratively with teachers to design, enact, and refine sciencematerials. Lampert (1992) and Ball (Lampert & Loewenberg-Ball, 1998) taught in classrooms and made theirpractice an object of study. Yet, much of the work that would be useful happens in silos, is known to a few, andis rarely leveraged by policy makers, school administrators and teachers to improve educational practice. Wehave learned much about what aspects of evidence-based practice and research utilization in other fields can beapplied to education, yet, how to share current knowledge, generate and share new knowledge, and walk theknowledge-sharing communicative path between research and practice remains a significant challenge in theLearning Sciences. Internationally, enormous efforts have been launched to improve the practical relevance andactual use of research knowledge, especially in the fields of education and health care.Informed by the work of Rogers (1969), and review of over 2600 research studies, Havelock (1971)published a landmark report on the dissemination and use of scientific outputs. Havelock identified sevengeneral factors that could account for how scientific outputs are taken up and used: linkage, structure, openness,capacity, reward, proximity and synergy. He identified several modes in which those factors can be seen: socialinteraction; research, development and diffusion (RDD); and problem solving. More recently, attention has alsobeen given not only to the use of scientific knowledge for educational practice (e.g. Hargreaves, 1999; Levin,2004), but also to how it is produced (Vanderlinde & van Braak, 2010). Specifically, there is growing attentionfor how researchers and practitioners can collaboratively bear the responsibility for both producing and usingrelevant knowledge in education.Burkhardt and Schoenfeld (2003) identify seven models to describe the relationship between researchand practice, five of which feature strong divisions of labor, relate more to evidence-based practice and alignwell with the RDD model described by Havelock, and two of which show more characteristics of Havelock’sproblem solving model (both featuring design). Each of these models denotes different assumptions andexpectations regarding the roles of practitioners and researchers in the generation and application of theoreticalunderstanding.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1700© ISLSThe proposed workshop draws on evidence-based practice from RDD and design research to initiatewhat we hope will provide the foundation for the design of principles that inform ISLS members aboutapproaches to sharing research findings with non-researchers (teachers, school leaders, policy makers, parents,the general public), and raise awareness about existing strategies for engaging in public debate about the use ofevidence-based research for practice. In addition, we hope to contribute to the ways that Schools of Educationsupport graduate students in building scholarship that keeps consideration of how to share findings withpractitioners as a central component of the research and dissemination process.Workshop StructureBefore the WorkshopA Call for Participation will be issued in early February though the ISLS mailing list. Participants will submittheir experiences and insights concerning the workshop theme in the form of short papers (1000-2000 words).This may be based on theoretical, methodological or practical work that has been presented elsewhere, or in thecurrent conference, and will provide seed ideas to be synthesized into specific outreach messages. Through astructured review process by the workshop organizers, all papers clearly relevant to the workshop theme will beinvited for inclusion. All participants will be given access to all papers, and encouraged to read especially thosethat have been clustered into the same –emergent– theme as their own. Authors will be asked to send a briefpresentation (1 powerpoint slide) to the organizers the week before the workshop. Though working groupsduring the workshop may change slightly, the screening and clustering process will help us make the mostefficient use of our precious time together.During the WorkshopAs previously indicated this workshop aims to: (a) sensitize participants to the importance of sharing researchfindings with various stakeholder groups (teachers, school leaders, policy makers, parents, the general public);(b) inform participants about existing strategies for engaging in public debate; and (c) support participants informing collaboration teams that will get started identifying and shaping a core message (during the workshop)as well as developing and implementing an outreach vehicle (e.g. New York Times editorial, NSTA workshop)to inform public debate (after the workshop).To meet these aims, the workshop is divided into four main stages. The first stage is intended tosensitize and inform participants by sharing insights and strategies from existing examples of both successfuloutreach strategies, and incidents where an ISLS voice (or similar) seemed severely lacking. With the goal ofinforming and inspiring, the examples will exhibit variation in message content, target groups and disseminationmedia. Strategies for sharing (emerging) insights will be discussed in terms of: content (focus), form (productsand activities), medium (face-to-face, online, etc.) and time (sustained, bursts, frequency, etc.). At least oneproject will represent each of the aforementioned orientations (RDD; design research). During the second stageof the workshop, participants will be encouraged to articulate the kinds of messages they might like todisseminate, and to discuss these with like-minded individuals. This will be facilitated by single powerpointslides that participants will have created ahead of time. Working groups will discuss message content andpotential target groups.During the third stage of the workshop, working groups will consider and outline a specific outreachvehicle they intend to develop and implement. They will document their work using shared GoogleDocs, live,during the session. During the final stage of the workshop, participants will report back to the group, discusspotential overlaps and give constructive feedback to each other.The workshop will lasts for 3.5 hours with a 30 min break at the standard break time. The workshopagenda is provided below.2.00-2.45: Welcome, brief introductions, goals, background, examples2.45-3.30: Brief presentations, group forming3.00-3.30: Break, form working groups for designing after break3.30-4.00: Identify focus, establish mission, set goals4.00-5:00: Refine focus, outline outreach strategy, document work5.00-5.30: Report back, conclusions, action itemsAfter the WorkshopFollowing the workshop, teams will be supported in the process of realizing their outreach strategies, sharingthem with one another, and more broadly. Specifically, a paper or journal special issue is envisioned whichdocuments messages worth sharing outside the ISLS community, and journeys taken to do so.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1701© ISLSReferencesBurkhardt, H., & Schoenfeld, A. (2003). Improving educational research: Toward a more useful, moreinfluential, and better-funded enterprise. Educational Researcher, 32(9) 3-14.De Vries, B., & Pieters, JM (2007). The meaning of conferences, knowledge communities and knowledgeconscious schools in a crackled education. Educational Studies, 84, 233-240.Hargreaves, D. (1999). ‘The Knowledge-creating school.’ Journal of Education Studies, 47(2) .Lampert, M. (1992). On teaching , in R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in instructional psychology, 4. Erlbaum,Hillsdale, NJ.Lampert, M., & Loewenberg-Ball, D. (1998). Teaching, multimedia and mathematics: investigations of realpractice. New York: Teachers' College Press.Levin, B. (2004). Making research matter more. Educational Policy Analysis Archives. 12(56).Shrader, G., Williams, K., Lachance-Whitcomb, J., Finn, L.E., & Gomez, L.M. (1999). Work in the work circle:Collaborative design to improve teaching practice. Paper presented at Spencer Conference onCollaborativeResearch for Practice, New Orleans, LA.Vanderlinde, R., & van Braak, J. (2010). The gap between educational research and practice: views of teachers,school leaders, intermediaries and researchers. British Educational Research Journal, 36(2), 299-316.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1702© ISLS