Using Contrasting Video Cases of the Enactment of CognitivelyDemanding Science Tasks in Professional DevelopmentMiray Tekkumru Kisa, Mary Kay Stein, University of Pittsburgh, Learning Research and Development CenterEmail: mit34@pitt.edu, mkstein@pitt.eduAbstract: Prior research indicated the challenges of getting students to think at high levels asthey work on cognitively demanding tasks. Teachers often unwittingly lower the cognitivedemands of tasks during their enactment. We argue that teachers should be provided withopportunities that can support them to make sense of the ways in which teachers’ actions canbe consequential for the level and type of thinking in which students engage. In this paper, weexamined how the use of contrasting video cases can support participants’ learning to identifythe ways in which teachers’ actions shape students’ opportunities to think and reason duringtheir engagement with cognitively complex instructional tasks. Qualitative analysis of twosequential professional development sessions revealed that contrasting video cases supportedparticipants’ productive discussions about teacher’s pedagogical actions and the ways thatthese actions shaped how students work on cognitively demanding tasks.IntroductionThe new rigorous standards for science education in the United States set the stage for students’ thinking andreasoning about disciplinary ideas and their engagement in scientific practices (Next Generation ScienceStandards, 2013). For these standards to be realized, however, the nature of the classroom work needs to becomemore cognitively demanding; teachers need to select and effectively implement high-level instructional tasksthat will position students as active agents in generating ideas, developing explanations, and designing modelsand investigations. However many studies in science and mathematics demonstrate the challenges of gettingstudents to think and reason at a high level as they work on such cognitively demanding tasks (Blumenfeld etal., 1991; Blumenfeld & Meece, 1988; Doyle 1983; Stein, Grover, & Henningsen, 1996).Prior research indicates that even when cognitively demanding tasks are selected, the level and type ofstudent thinking that they require often declines during their enactment (Doyle 1983; Henningsen & Stein, 1997;Sanford, 1987; Stein et al., 1996). Teachers often unwittingly lower the cognitive demands of tasks by focusingon the correctness and completeness of procedures and answers rather than how students are thinking about thetask and/or “taking over” the thinking and actually doing the work for the students (Doyle 1983; Henningsen &Stein, 1997; Stein et al., 1996). During the enactment of project-based activities in science classrooms—activities that are often complex and ambiguous (Blumenfeld et al., 1991)— teachers encounter manychallenges that may lead to reducing high-level student thinking such as reluctance to provide autonomy to theirstudents, allocating enough time for in-depth exploration of ideas, and being able to provide appropriate amountof scaffolding (Blumenfeld et al., 1991; Marx, Blumenfeld, Krajcik, & Soloway, 1997; Marx et al., 1994). All ofthese suggest that the way teachers facilitate students’ engagement in cognitively demanding tasks shapes theway students are positioned to think and reason about the disciplinary ideas and engage in the practices of thediscipline in the classroom.Given the critical role teachers play in shaping students’ opportunities for learning, we claim thatteachers should be provided with opportunities that can support them to think about and make sense of the waysin which teachers’ actions could be consequential for the level and type of student thinking that occurs asstudents engage with challenging tasks. It is particularly important to help them realize that selecting high-leveltasks does not always guarantee high-level student thinking in their classrooms. This study focuses on highschool biology teachers’ learning within a video-based professional development (PD) about the role ofteachers’ pedagogical actions in facilitating students’ learning during the enactment of cognitively demandingscience tasks.Video use has increased in studies designed to support teachers’ learning within the last decade (e.g.,Star & Strickland, 2008; van Es & Sherin, 2006). When used as a tool for supporting teachers’ learning, thestructures and tasks designed around the video should be considered carefully to get the most benefit from whatthe video can offer (Le Fevre, 2003; van Es & Sherin, 2009). As part of our PD intervention, we made carefuldesign choices about the activities in which we asked teachers, who participated in PD sessions, to engagesurrounding the video cases. Drawing on prior research about contrasting cases (e.g. Bransford & Schwartz,1999; Garner, 1974), we used contrasting video cases of enactment of the same high-level task to help PDparticipants recognize finer distinctions in teachers’ pedagogical actions between classrooms in which thecognitive demand of high-level tasks was maintained versus declined: One of the contrasting video casesrepresented high-level student thinking, the other one illustrated low-level student thinking during the enactmentof the same cognitively demanding science task in two different high-school biology classrooms.ICLS 2014 Proceedings808© ISLSEven though video cases of instruction have been widely used to support teachers’ learning, no studyhas yet used contrasting video cases to support science teachers’ learning within a professional developmentsetting. We argue that contrasting video cases could be a productive tool in professional development forhelping participants to identify specific details in teacher’s pedagogical actions and the role that these actionsplay in students’ thinking. Thus, in this study we examined the differences in the nature of PD participants’pedagogy related comments between two sequential PD sessions: one involving participants’ discussion about asingle video case and the other one about two contrasting video cases. Our study findings address the followingresearch question: How, if at all, do contrasting video cases in a PD support participants’ learning to identifyteacher’s pedagogical actions and the role they play shaping the level and type of student thinking?Theoretical FrameworkWhy Focus on the Enactment of Cognitively Demanding Tasks?Prior research shows that interactions between the teacher and students play an important role in shapingwhether the cognitive demand of tasks is maintained or declines as students work on the task (Doyle, 1988;Henningsen & Stein, 1997). As underscored by Doyle (1988), teacher’s role is critical in shaping the level andkind of opportunities that students have for thinking in the classroom; he stated, “teachers affect tasks, and thusstudents’ learning, by defining and structuring the work students do” (p.169). Teacher-related factors, whichwere identified in prior research as associated with declining cognitive demand, include teacher’s “taking over”difficult pieces of the task and telling students how to do the task, and shifting focus from understanding tocompleteness or accuracy of answers. Teacher-related factors associated with maintaining high-level studentthinking, on the other hand, includes scaffolding of student thinking, sufficient time for exploration, providingstudents with means of monitoring their own progress, and sustained press for meaning through teacherquestioning and comments (Stein, Smith, Henningsen, & Silver, 2000).Why Video Cases?Using classroom-based artifacts in PD sessions such as copies of students’ work, videotapes of classroomlessons, and curriculum materials helps to situate PD in the context of teaching (Ball & Cohen, 1999; Borko andKoelner, 2008). Prior research indicates that videos are powerful in capturing the richness and complexity ofclassroom instruction; they provide a more realistic picture of the learning environment by capturing the voices,body language, and interactions of classrooms (Borko, Jacobs, Eiteljorg, & Pittman, 2008; Colestock & Sherin,2009; Koc, Peker, and Osmanoglu, 2009; Le Fevre, 2003; Miller & Zhou, 2007). Moreover, viewing videos ofinstruction can help teachers to notice problems in their own teaching and become more willing to accept thatcertain aspects of their teaching need to change (Tripp & Rich, 2012). Given these benefits of videos, we usedcontrasting video cases to support teachers’ learning about the enactment of cognitively demanding tasks.We used Task Analysis Guide in Science (TAGS) (see Figure 1) to identify the cognitively demandingtasks whose enactments were shown in the video cases as well as to determine the level and type of studentthinking in these video cases. The TAGS is a two-dimensional (i.e. cognitive demand and integration)framework involving nine categories each of which represents different levels of student thinking demanded byscience tasks (i.e. cognitive demand) that focus on either science content or scientific practices or the integrationof the two. Science tasks require different cognitive demand levels by making students to reproduce previouslyprovided knowledge or follow scripted procedures meaninglessly to get to a right answer, or by guiding them tomake sense of the scientific ideas and/or practices, or requiring them to think like a scientist (For details, pleasesee Tekkumru Kisa, Stein & Schunn, under review).Figure 1. The Task Analysis Guide in Science (Tekkumru Kisa et al., under review).ICLS 2014 Proceedings809© ISLSWhy Contrasting Video Cases?Prior research suggests that contrasting cases help to make particular aspects and dimensions of cases becomemore salient and differentiated from others. Emphasizing the role of contrasting cases, Garner (1974) claimed:The single stimulus has no meaning except in a context of alternatives. When somebody usesthe term circle, they infer that it could have been some other form, such as square or triangle.When somebody says there are two circles, or that the circle has two lines, they inferred thealternative of fewer or more lines. Each descriptive term used defines what the alternativesare, by defining what the stimulus is not (p. 185).Others have also emphasized the importance of contrasts in allowing people to notice distinctive features thatthey may miss in the absence of a contrast set (Bransford et al.,1989; Bransford & Schwartz, 1999) Drawing onthis body of research, we used contrasting video cases of task enactment. We examine the claim that contrastingvideo cases can be used to surface how different forms of teacher facilitation can be consequential fordifferences in the level and type of student thinking during students’ work on the same high-level task.Research DesignThis study was situated within a larger NSF-funded project that focused on the development and implementationof design-based STEM units that aim to teach big ideas in biology tied to mathematics. It took place during theimplementation of one of these units named, “Modeling Genetics: The Gecko Breeder Challenge”. All the videoclips that were discussed in the PD were selected from the video-records of classrooms during an earlierimplementation of this unit. Teachers who participated in the study agreed to implement the four-week longunit, attend two project-related meetings and seven PD sessions, which were specifically designed for this study.In this paper, we focused on two of these seven PD sessions.Intervention: Video-Based Professional DevelopmentThe PD sessions took place once or twice a week from the first week of February 2012 to the first week ofMarch 2012 for a total of seven sessions (each was about 3 hours in duration), about half of which was allocatedto viewing and discussing the video cases. In the first session, PD participants were introduced to the TAGS. Inthe next two sessions, they analyzed a video case that illustrated low-level student thinking (in session-3) andhigh-level student thinking (in session-4) during the enactment of two different cognitively demanding biologytasks. The fourth and the fifth PD sessions involved the use of contrasting video cases. Finally, in the last twosessions, participants analyzed video cases from their own classrooms.Because the purpose of this article is to understand the role of contrasting video cases, we focused ontwo sequential PD sessions, which involved discussion about a single video case (session-3) and contrastingvideo cases (session-4) (see Table 1 for details about the sessions). Session-3 involved the first video case in theentire PD in which participants viewed high-level student thinking during the enactment of a cognitivelydemanding biology task. In this task, students were provided with the PCR results that showed the variation inDNA for the same gene. PCR results showed two separate crosses of a male and a female gecko and theiroffspring. The task required students to generate the rules of inheritance (i.e. how the genetic information istransferred from parent to offspring) by analyzing the PCR results. In the video case, students in small groupswere sharing their observations and interpretations of the PCR results with the teacher. The level of studentthinking was at level-4, guided integration based on the TAGS.Table 1: PD sessions 3 and 4: Activities and design rationales.PD Session-3 Activities:1. Analyzing a science task (as it appeared in print materials) based on its potential cognitive demand2. Viewing and discussing “set-up” video showing how above task was introduced to students3. Viewing and discussing “enactment” video showing high-level student thinking & identifying the level andtype of student thinking in the video caseDesign Rationale:* Providing opportunity for PD participants to identify the level and type of student thinking in all three phases(print materials, set up, and enactment)PD Session-4 Activities:1. Analyzing print-based tasks based on their potential cognitive demand2. Summarizing participants’ analysis of print-based tasks and video cases in PD sessions 2 and 3Presenting the change in cognitive demand across the phases of print-based materials, set up and enactment3. Viewing the first video case showing low-level student thinking during the enactment of a high-level task4. Viewing the second video case (contrast) showing high-level thinking during the enactment of the same taskICLS 2014 Proceedings810© ISLSDiscussing (a) similarities and differences between the video cases and (b) identifying the level and type ofstudent thinking in the video casesDesign Rationales:* Providing opportunity for PD participants to see that cognitive demand of a task can be maintained or decline* Using contrasting cases to learn to distinguish levels of student thinking as represented in the TAGS* Using contrasting cases to support judgments of maintenance or decline* Using contrasting cases to reveal pedagogical factors associated with maintenance or decline of the cognitivedemand of the taskAs seen in Table 1, in session-4 before viewing the video cases, participants were first introduced tothe key idea that tasks can change in their level of cognitive demand as they pass from print materials to howthey are set up by the teacher in the classroom to how they are actually enacted or carried out by the students(Stein et al., 1996). This presentation helped to frame participants’ viewing of and discussing together thecontrasting video cases. The cognitively demanding task showed in the contrasting cases was about modelinghow genetic information is inherited. In this task, students were guided through designing a paper-basedsimulation of gecko breeding that helped them to understand how the offspring gets one allele per gene fromeach parent and parental alleles are “packaged” inside eggs and sperm. In both video cases, students worked insmall groups with the simulation materials and the teacher walked around and helped students. Video cases weredesigned to show that students were required to engage in scientific practices (e.g. modeling) in both of theclassrooms but only in the second classroom they were required to make sense of the scientific ideas (e.g. howalleles are packaged into gametes) while designing the simulation. Therefore, how students were positioned toengage in this simulation task was very different in these classrooms. In the first video case, student thinkingwas at level-2, scripted integration according to the TAGS. Students followed the procedures of the simulationwithout really understanding the underlying content, and they engaged in a set of actions needed to complete thesimulation because they were told to do so, mostly by the teacher. The opposite was the case in the second videoin which student thinking was at level-4, guided integration based on the TAGS. Students were challenged tomake sense of inheritance patterns explained in the simulation. They were asked to justify the simulationprocedures by using what they learned about Mendelian Inheritance.Participants of the StudyFive high school biology teachers from several different school districts participated in the PD. These teachers,who voluntarily participated in the study, were paid for their participation. Linda and Susan were the two mostexperienced teachers in the PD with 16 and 13 years of teaching experience. Linda was the only teacher in thePD who had prior experience in implementing the Genetics unit mentioned above. Barbara and Nancy werefrom two different schools operating under the same charter school organization, which focused on the use ofproject-based practices in the classroom. They both had three years of teaching experience. Lastly, Carol, withfive years of teaching experience, was from a private school. Like Linda, Carol had experience in working withthe project team, but on a different science unit.Data Sources and AnalysisIn our analysis, we focused on the parts of the PD transcripts during which teachers discussed the video case(s)and interpreted the level and type of student thinking. The unit of analysis was a segment of transcript in whichone or more PD participants commented on a particular pedagogical action in the video. Therefore, each unitwas separated from the next one in terms of the pedagogical action that was discussed. For example, while inone unit participants’ comments were about the nature of questions used by the teacher in the video case, thenext unit involved comments about how the teacher focused students’ attention on the procedures of the task.For each unit, we 1) paraphrased the pedagogical action discussed by the participants, identified: 2) whetherpedagogical action was grounded in students’ thinking about the task, 3) whether any reference was made to thelevel and type of student thinking, and 4) whether the discussion was influenced by the facilitator’s prompting.ResultsOur findings revealed interesting differences in the nature of PD participants’ pedagogy-related commentsbetween session-3 and session-4. Overall, in session-3, unless prompted by the facilitator, participants madegeneral observations about the teacher’s pedagogical actions. Their overall conclusion regarding the level ofstudent thinking was that students were positioned to do the thinking in the classroom. In session-4, in contrast,participants —independent of the facilitator— began to make pedagogical remarks, which, were grounded instudents’ thinking about the task. Their comments involved characterization of how students were positioned tothink and reason at different levels of cognitive demand (as defined in the TAGS) in the two differentclassrooms that used the same biology task.ICLS 2014 Proceedings811© ISLSThese overall differences between the sessions were as we expected because a single video casepresents a particular level of student thinking, which can be categorized based on the TAGS as GuidedIntegration (focusing on the integration of science content and scientific practices and at a cognitive demandlevel-4). Noticing the salient features about the teacher’s pedagogical actions and their association with the leveland kind of student thinking depicted in that single video case depends on the expertise of the PD participantthat analyzes the video case. Contrasting video cases, on the other hand, presents variations in the level and kindof student thinking across two classrooms, which helps participants to notice more easily and precisely thedifferences between how students were positioned to think at different levels in these two classrooms as a resultof the differences in the teachers’ pedagogical actions. In what follows, we will discuss in more detail the natureof participants’ discussions about the teacher’s pedagogical actions and the role that these actions play in howstudents were positioned to think in the two classrooms.The Nature of Discussion in Session-3: A Single Video CaseA little more than half of participants’ pedagogy-related comments in session-3 (57%) were at a general level.With that we mean participants were talking about the teacher’s actions without a clear reference to students’work on the task (e.g. what students think about the concepts covered in the task and how the teacher’spedagogical moves were influenced by what students do or say surrounding the task). For example, thefollowing conversation illustrates describing the nature of teaching at a very general level:Carol: And she [the teacher] didn't tell them anything.…Carol: Everything was a statement.…Nancy: Yeah. She [the teacher] didn't guide them. It was all questions.As demonstrated in this conversation, such general comments were only about what the teacher did (or did notdo) and they were independent of what students seemed to be doing at that time.Some of the pedagogical actions that were discussed by the participants at a general level in session-3include “teacher did not tell what was right or wrong”; “teacher did not transmit knowledge” and “teacher didnot lead students to any conclusion”. For example, the following exchange between Carol and Susan illustratestheir observation about the teacher’s pedagogical actions in the video case:Carol:When they [students] say something, she'll [the teacher] say, “Oh, why?” like [line]121 [in the transcript] “Oh, so why are you saying this band is thick?”Susan: Yeah. But then … she [the teacher] further questions them [students] about whatthey're saying. So like [line] 124 …. “Are you telling me the male has only one genefor this trait?” So she's just trying to get them [students] to clarify what they'resaying.Carol and Susan noticed that the teacher in the video asked the students clarification questions. They providedconcrete examples from the transcript to show that the teacher asked questions to the students to clarify whatthey said. They did not, however, continue and discuss specifically how these clarification questions influencedor got influenced by students’ thinking about the task. For example, the teacher’s question, “Are you telling methe male has only one gene for this trait?” might have made the student to think further and understand that eachorganism has two alleles per gene.The discussion in session-3 about the teacher’s pedagogical actions was not always at a general level.Our analysis revealed that nearly half of the participants’ pedagogy-related comments were grounded instudents’ thinking (43%). In other words, there was a clear reference in participants’ comments to how theteacher’s actions influenced or got influenced by what students said or did while working on the task. In all ofthese types of comments, though, the facilitator’s prompting was influential for grounding participants’comments in students’ thinking about the task. For example, one of the participants pointed out that the teacherin the video suggested that students use another resource (a previous task that they worked on) to scaffold theirwork on the task. Based on this comment, the facilitator asked why the teacher might have suggested students touse this resource at that time but not before. In response to that Linda said:I think she [the teacher] did it because this whole group is focusing on the word dominant,dominant blizzard, dominant traits, … and I think she wants them to maybe look back at thatphenotype and see that the blizzard's not the dominant, because the females are normalcolor… So they're linking that thick band to the word dominant and the dominant to thephenotype blizzard. So rather than telling them that they were wrong … Let's just see if youcan support that with the phenotypes, is where I think she would have been leading them.ICLS 2014 Proceedings812© ISLSAs illustrated in this comment, Linda made an explicit reference to students’ thinking about the task and howthe teacher scaffold students to think differently about the DNA data from the mating of two geckos instead oftelling them that their interpretation of the data was not accurate.In session-3, when participants made comments about the teacher’s pedagogical actions, they often didnot discuss the consequences of these actions for how students were thinking as represented in different levels ofthe TAGS; rather their remarks were more about that students were positioned to think. There was an overallagreement among the participants that students in the video case were doing the thinking. For example, Barbarasaid, “I felt like she [the teacher] really didn’t lead them [students] to any conclusions, which I thought was nice,because they were really coming up with it on their own”. Similarly, Carol said, “She made them think differentand explain or use different words. It was like massaging their brains”. These types of comments by theparticipants generally suggested that the teacher made students “do the “thinking”. Participants seemed toconsider thinking (in a general sense) as a key aspect of higher-level cognition. They did not, however, oftentalk about a certain type and level of student thinking even though they could accurately identify that video caserepresented high-level student thinking.The Nature of Discussion in Session-4: Contrasting Video CasesIn session-4, participants’ comments about the teacher’s pedagogical actions became more grounded instudents’ thinking about the task (1). Participants were often talking about the teacher’s actions in relation towhat students were thinking and saying about the task (57%). In contrast to session-3, about all of suchpedagogy related remarks (except one) were made without the facilitators’ prompting. The following commentby Linda illustrates such pedagogy related comments grounded in students thinking:Linda:The very first group did fertilization and didn’t have alleles in their egg andsperm. She [the teacher] didn’t make them pull them apart. She made themadd the alleles. … It went against that biological concept of the alleles don’tcombine. So she didn’t do the meiosis part. Second piece of evidence wasonce she started doing this and these with all those groups, she just keptsaying, “How many combinations did you get? … It was all about thecombinations for her, how many combinations –Co-Facilitator: Combinations not attached to the meaningLinda:The biologyCo-Facilitator: The biological meaningLinda:The meiosis that made them, the fertilization that’s happening.As seen in the excerpt, Linda’s remark is targeted on how students’ were being encouraged to make sense of thetask (or not). Comments like this were common across other remarks made by the participants; there was a closeattention to what students did or did not understand about the task as a result of the teacher’s facilitation. Forexample, Susan commented on how the teacher in the second video case helped students grapple with theiruncertainty around constructing the simulation of inheritance since they could not apply their prior knowledgeeasily to what they were working on. Susan said:… in the last group that we watched, which is like line 46 there, 48 [in the transcript]: [Thestudent says:] “I know there are two alleles for each gene, so, I mean, is it separate two?”And so she [the teacher] says, “Right, it could be black or white.” But she’s just helpingclarify. But then she lets them [students] go through that whole process of putting two andtwo [alleles to the gametes]. She doesn’t tell them, “Just go ahead and try it.” … [So] they’re[students] still having to work through it and figure out why they were wrong, whereas I feellike the first teacher would have just said, “No”…With this comment, Susan clarifies how the teacher in the second video case facilitated students’ making senseof the inheritance idea that there should be one allele per gene in each gamete as students are working onmodeling how the genetic information is inherited from parent geckos to their offspring.Participants’ comments also revealed some patterns in terms of how students were positioned to thinkabout the task through the teacher’s facilitation in each video case. For example, regarding the first video caseseveral of them said that students were focused on the procedures of the given task (e.g., creating thecombinations) that had no connection to any biological sense making (e.g. fertilization, having alleles in egg andsperm). This observation by the participants reflects an aspect of students thinking at level-2 (scriptedintegration) according to the TAGS. Therefore, in session-4 participants’ comments had implications for thecharacteristics of particular levels and types of student thinking (often as defined in the TAGS framework). Forexample, Carol said, “she [the teacher] removed the biology from it [the simulation about genetics]. At the end,they [students] weren’t even making geckos [the animal used in the simulation task]. They were makingICLS 2014 Proceedings813© ISLScombinations.” As revealed with this example, teacher-related factors that were discussed by the participantsinvolved some reference to the consequences of the teacher’s pedagogical actions in terms of particular kindand level of student thinking, which is more a salient feature of student thinking than only stating that thestudents were thinking.Session-4 ended with a detailed discussion about the level and type of students thinking that was goingon in the video cases as represented in the TAGS. There was not an agreement among the participants in termsof which levels of TAGS each video case represented even though they all agreed that video-1 represented lowlevel student thinking and video-2 represented high-level student thinking. Some of this disagreement wasbecause participants were not clear about the distinction between all different levels in the TAGS framework(e.g. what is the difference between memorized practice at level 1 and scripted integration at level 2). Thediscussion helped to resolve some of these confusions that teachers had.It is important to remember that, in the contrasting video cases, the same high-level task was enacted inthe classrooms. This may have helped PD participants think more deeply about how students’ interaction withthe same task (i.e. how they were positioned to think) could be different in two different classrooms. Eventhough participants were told that the video cases depicted the enactment of the same task in two differentclassrooms, one of them said towards the middle of the discussion, “I think similarities-wise, it seemed like thekids got the same materials. They were working with the same stuff. And I don’t know, but it also seemed likethey had the same handout of directions.” This comment was critical because it reminded them that they werefocusing on how the teacher’s actions shaped students’ thinking about the ideas in the same task. Following upon this comment, the facilitator told participants, “I see like there are three variables … it is the same task….There are students asking the same questions and now the teacher responding back to them in a very differentway, which leads to a different conversation among them,” thereby bringing the participants’ attention to howthe interaction of the teacher with the students surrounding the same task could create different opportunities forstudents’ learning.Discussion and ConclusionsTeacher learning has become a focus in the learning sciences (Fishman & Davis, 2006), and there has been agrowing interest in designing new environments to support teachers’ learning. In this paper, we describedfindings based on one such effort to support teachers’ learning about the role they can play to maintain highcognitive demand levels in their classrooms. Specifically, our paper focused on the role of contrasting videocases of the enactment of cognitively demanding tasks in revealing the distinctive features of teacher’spedagogical actions and the role that these actions plays in students’ thinking. The results are promising becausethey indicated that in comparison to session-3 participants’ talk about the teacher’s pedagogical actions got moregrounded in students’ thinking in session-4 and participants began to see more details regarding the level andkind of student thinking that students were positioned to engage in. This all suggests that contrasting video casesmay be a productive design feature of video-based PD for supporting teachers’ learning about salient features ofclassroom interactions.It’s important to be cautious about the generalizability of the findings regarding the use and study ofcontrasting video cases. Even though we used high-level tasks in both of the sessions, the tasks used in session-3and in session-4 were different from each other. The nature of the task might have created differences in termsof what can be “visible” in the contrasting video cases, which showed the enactment that task in two separateclassrooms. However, if we showed the enactment of the same task with a single video case in session-3 to keepthe task constant across the PD sessions, then exposing teachers to the task in session-3 would be a confoundingvariable while interpreting the nature of participants’ comments in session-4; by knowing the task from theprevious session, participants could attend to more details in the video cases in session-4. As a result, moreresearch is needed to examine the potential of contrasting video cases revealing the salient features of classroominteractions that teachers should notice and make sense of.Endnote(1) The discussion about the contrasting video cases started with participants’ debating whether the cognitive demand wasdeclined in both of the video cases or not. Because their debate was staying at a general level, the facilitator suggestedparticipants to discuss what was happening in the video cases that might have caused maintenance or decline instead oftrying to make a decision about that. The facilitator’s question, then, changed the nature of the discussion.ReferencesBall, D.L., & Cohen, D.K. (1999). Developing practice, developing practitioners: Toward a practice-basedtheory of professional education. In L. Darling-Hammond & G. Sykes (Eds.), Teaching as the learningprofession (pp. 3-32). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Blumenfeld, P. C., & Meece, J. L. (1988). Task factors, teacher behavior, and students' involvement and use oflearning strategies in science. The Elementary School Journal, 235-250.ICLS 2014 Proceedings814© ISLSBlumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivatingproject-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist,26(3&4), 369-398.Borko, H., & Koellner, K. (2008). Situativity: a theoretical lens for designing and studying programs ofprofessional development. Paper presented at the International Commission on MathematicalInstruction Symposium, Rome, March 2-5. Retrieved on April 3, 2012 fromwww.unige.ch/math/EnsMath/Rome2008/WG2/Papers/BORKO.pdfBorko, H., Jacobs, J., Eiteljorg, E., & Pittman, M. E. (2008). Video as a tool for fostering productive discussionsin mathematics professional development. Teaching and Teacher Education, 24(2), 417–436.Bransford, J. D., Franks, J. J., Vye, N. J., & Shenvood, R. D. (1989). New approaches to instruction: Becausewisdom can't be told. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and analogical reasoning (pp.470-497). New York: Cambridge University Press.Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking transfer: A simple proposal with multiple implications.Review of Research in Education, 24, 61–100.Colestock, A. & Sherin, M. G. (2009). Teachers’ sense-making strategies while watching video of mathematicsinstruction. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 17(1), 7-29.Doyle, W. (1983). Academic work. Review of Educational Research, 53(2), 159.Doyle, W. (1988). Work in mathematics classes: The context of students’ thinking during instruction.Educational Psychologist, 23(2), 167–180.Fishman, B., & Davis, E. A. (2006). Teacher learning research and the learning sciences. The Cambridgehandbook of the learning sciences (535-550). New York: Cambridge University Press.Garner, W. R. (1974). The processing of information and structure. Potomac, MD: Erlbaum.Henningsen, M., & Stein, M. K. (1997). Mathematical tasks and student cognition: Classroom based factors thatsupport and inhibit high-level mathematical thinking and reasoning. Journal for Research inMathematics Education, 28(5), 524–549.Koc, Y., Peker, D., & Osmanoglu, A. (2009). Supporting teacher professional development through online videocase study discussions: An assemblage of preservice and inservice teachers and the case teacher.Teaching and Teacher Education, 25(8), 1158-1168.Le Fevre, D. (2003). Designing video-based multimedia curriculum for teacher learning. Paper presented at theAARE Conference. New Zealand: Auckland. Retrieved on March 12, 2013 fromhttp://www.aare.edu.au/03pap/lef03185.pdfMarx, R.W., Blumenfeld, P. C., Krajcik, J., Blunk,M., Crawford, B., Kelly, B., et al. (1994). Enacting projectbased science: Experiences of four middle grade teachers. Elementary School Journal, 94, 499–516.Marx, R. W., Blumenfeld, P. C., Krajcik, J. S., & Soloway, E. (1997). Enacting project-based science. TheElementary School Journal, 97(4), 341-358.Miller, K. & Zhou, X (2007). Learning from classroom video: What makes it compelling and what makes ithard. In R. Goldman, R. Pea, B. Barron, & S. J. Derry (Eds.), Video research in the learning sciences(pp. 321-334). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Sanford, J. P. (1987). Management of science classroom tasks and effects on students’ learning opportunities.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 24(3), 249-265.Star, J. R., & Strickland, S. K. (2008). Learning to observe: Using video to improve preservice mathematicsteachers’ ability to notice. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 11(2), 107.Stein, M.K., Smith, M.S., Henningsen, M.A., & Silver, E.A. (2000). Implementing standards based mathematicsinstruction: A casebook for professional development (First Edition). New York, NY: Teachers CollegePress.Stein, M.K., Grover, B. W., & Henningsen, M. (1996). Building student capacity for mathematical thinking andreasoning: An analysis of mathematical tasks used in reform classroom. American EducationalResearch Journal, 33(2), 455-488.Tripp, T. R., & Rich, P. J. (2012). The influence of video analysis on the process of teacher change. Teachingand Teacher Education, 28(5), 728-739.van Es, E. A., & Sherin, M. G. (2006). How different video club designs support teachers in "Learning toNotice". Journal of Computing in Teacher Education, 22(4), 125.van Es, E. A., & Sherin, M. G. (2009). The influence of video clubs on teachers’ thinking and practice. Journalof Mathematics Teacher Education, 13(2), 155-176.ICLS 2014 Proceedings815© ISLS