Facilitating Design Research by Mapping Design ResearchTrajectoriesGuanzhong Ma, Jan van AalstThe University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, ChinaEmail: gzma@connect.hku.hk, vanaalst@hku.hkAbstract: Design research is an emerging paradigm in the study of learning. It is far from amature methodology, as it faces a variety of difficulties, one of which is the characterizationof the research process. We mapped the design trajectory proposed by Sandoval to capture thecomplex process of design research. The design trajectory map develops Sandoval’sconjecture mapping in two ways, with the capacity to capture movement along the trajectory.We apply the proposed mapping to a well-known design study that described the designhistory of an inquiry-based learning project. The limitations of the proposed mappingapproach are discussed.IntroductionSandoval (2004, 2014) proposed embodied conjecture and developed the technique of conjecture mapping. Anembodied conjecture specifies how theoretically derived conjectures about how learning occurs can be reified asa concrete design in a learning environment. The technique of conjecture mapping involves the visualrepresentation of conjectures about how design elements are predicted to bring about the desired learningoutcomes. Continuous evaluation of the enactment of the design results in the refinement of the conjectures,which serves to develop theories of learning. The evolution of conjectures about learning theories during thevarious iterations in a design-based study constitutes the design research trajectory. In other words, conjecturemaps that represent the evolution of conjectures document the design research trajectory.The goal of this paper is to further develop conjecture mapping in two ways. First, design researchrequires not only the proposing of conjectures about how a design will work, but also the testing of theseconjectures. Sandoval’s conjecture mapping (Sandoval, 2014) acknowledged the need for testing conjectures,but to date has not represented this in a conjecture map. A sequence of conjecture maps along a timelinerepresents the design research trajectory, but does not evaluate the result of the conjectured mechanisms.Nevertheless, the evolution of conjectures results from testing them. We propose that the extent to which thepredicted relationships between design elements and outcomes are observed during testing should also bemapped to provide a more comprehensive documentation of the design research trajectory, and to present howthe conjectured learning theories are empirically supported. We developed a technique with such a capability bymapping the evolving degree to which the conjecture relationship is achieved. We hope that this attemptaddresses Sandoval’s (2014) concern that “the current formulation of conjecture maps does not easily capturemovement along a research trajectory” (p. 34). Second, in the mapping, we addressed the challenges observed ina design’s implementation by taking into account the role of conjectures in informing potential refinements ofthe design, thus further enriching the conceptualization of the design research trajectory.In the next section we describe the components of the design research trajectory to be mapped.Guidelines for the mapping are then provided and applied to a seminal report on design research (Edelson,Gordin, & Pea, 1999), which examined an early attempt to use scientific visualization technologies in highschool earth science courses. Although this is not a recent design study, it remains valuable because of thenumber of iterations involved and the amount of detail reported regarding the design decisions. What can begained from the mapping is then discussed.Mapping the Design Research TrajectoryDocumentation of the Design Research TrajectoryIn the design research trajectory, the design is implemented in a targeted context: researchers monitor how thedesign works in that context and make decisions to revise, modify, and refine the design to achieve the desiredoutcomes. In this trajectory, knowledge relevant to the design, context, and learning is developed.Documentation of the design research trajectory is suggested by researchers to show the “trace of the decisionmaking” (Joseph, Bryk, Bransford, Gomez, & the Information Infrastructure Project, 2003). This practice isintended not only to guide communication and coordination across the contexts of different studies, but also toallow research audiences to evaluate the credibility of design decisions and the quality of lessons learned fromthe research (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004; Joseph, 2004). In addition, documentation of the evolution ofdesign ideas and the underlying rationale may inform the broader community’s understanding of the researchICLS 2014 Proceedings	  78© ISLSprocess, which is essential for distinguishing educational design research from educational design (McKenney,Reeves, & Herrington, 2012).Documentation of the design research trajectory needs to be based on a thorough understanding of thefeatures of design research. Design research involves continuous evaluations (Edelson, 2002) and iterativerefinements (Collins et al., 2004), so a sequence of evolving maps that represent the evaluation results of theconjectured components could be used to document the design research trajectory. Each map represents theevaluation result of a particular phase in the research. The sequence of evolving maps aims to document thelongitudinal process of design, enactment, and refinement, which responds to Sandoval’s (2014) call forcapturing movement along the research trajectory. This documentation of the longitudinal process is required fordesign research, because recent instructional research has illustrated the fluid and non-linear nature ofeducational design processes.As both conjecture development and conjecture testing are involved in design research, mapping theconjectures and the evaluation results is needed to represent the design research trajectory. Sandoval’s (2004,2014) work addressed the mapping of conjectures, whereas our focus is on the mapping of evaluation results.Combining the maps of Sandoval (2014) with those proposed here for the same research would produce a morecomprehensive representation of the design research trajectory.Components in the Trajectory to Be MappedPrevious attempts to document the design research trajectory have addressed different features of the designresearch process (Barab et al., 2002; Collins et al., 2004). These attempts did not adequately link the processesof enactment to outcomes, which may impede the development of theories that explain why a design succeedsor fails in supporting learning (Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer, & Schauble, 2003; Design-Based ResearchCollective, 2003). Sandoval (2004) proposed the idea of embodied conjecture, and argued that developing aconjecture map would facilitate the refinement of the conjectures to develop learning theories that explain how adesign brings about learning outcomes. The conjecture map consists of design elements, intermediate outcomes,and intervention outcomes. Intervention outcomes refer to the “typical sort of outcomes that psychologists lookfor, like whether students learn what they are intended to learn” and intermediate outcomes refer to “observablepatterns of behavior predicted by a model of how an embodied conjecture functions to support learning” (p.215). Observation of intermediate outcomes in the enactment of a design is the basis of the achievement ofintervention outcomes. If an intervention outcome is not observed, then this suggests that some intermediateoutcome may be absent in the enactment.Predicted relationships between design elements and intermediate outcomes, and between intermediateoutcomes and intervention outcomes, are mapped to specify how the conjectures are embodied within thelearning environment to support learning. Sandoval (2014) further developed the technique to capture thelongitudinal progress of design and enactment from his earlier work (Sandoval, 2004), in which the componentsof the conjecture map were represented statically rather than being updated as the enactment proceeded.Sandoval’s conjecture map articulates the links among particular interactions between design elementsand mediating processes (intermediate outcomes), and between mediating processes and intervention outcomes.That is, the conjecture map represents a hypothesized set of causal links specifying all of the intermediateoutcomes that each particular design element is predicted to bring about, and all of the intervention outcomesthat each particular intermediate outcome is predicted to bring about. Moreover, these causal links also specifyall of the predicted causes of each intermediate outcome or intervention outcome. As the design is evaluatedindirectly through its predicted impacts on the intermediate and intervention outcomes, the specification of thecausal links in the conjecture map enables researchers to retrospectively identify the weaknesses of a particulardesign element when a predicted outcome is not observed after implementation. This may facilitate the iterativerefinement of the design.The components addressed in the conjecture map articulate some salient features of the design researchtrajectory. However, considering the features of design research, we argue that challenges relating topreconditions and constraints in terms of realizing desired learning should also be mapped. Design research canbe characterized as a process in which a designed product or artifact is placed in the context of its use to obtainfeedback for further refinement. In the process of enactment, we should not expect that the designedintervention will promote the intended learning behavior and processes without encountering challenges.McKenney et al. (2012) suggest that in design research, constraints such as not being able to change standardsor assessment methods and limited participant time should be taken into account when developing the design. Inaddition, as already mentioned, design research typically introduces an innovative learning environment with theexpectation that students will change how they learn. This change may be even greater if students learn in atechnology-enhanced learning environment that differs substantially from those that they experienced previously.These challenges may, as a result, block the achievement of intermediate and intervention outcomes. For thedocumentation of the design research trajectory to better inform design research, the challenges should not beoverlooked when developing and evaluating conjectures, and thus should be incorporated in the map.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  79© ISLSIn addition, the design research trajectory involves both developing and evaluating conjectures. Theextent to which the design produces the desired learning outcomes, as represented by the conjectures, should bemapped in the interest of refining the conjectures and the design. McKenney et al. (2012) reviewed existingmodels and frameworks depicting the design research process (Jonassen, Cernusca, & Ionas, 2007; Reinking &Bradley, 2008) and found that many consider problem characterization, design or development, and evaluationor empirical testing, as necessary phases. This seems to require documentation of the design researchtrajectory—a series of characterizations of each of the phases. It is not sufficient only to characterize how thedesigned learning environment is expected to support learning; it is also necessary to depict the results of theevaluation of its enactment. Doing this informs subsequent refinement of the design and the problemcharacterization, and results in updated conjectures about how the design would work in the context of use.Sandoval’s conjecture maps specify how such conjectures evolve over the course of design research. However,although informed by evaluation of the enactment, the sequence of conjecture maps does not depict the resultsof that evaluation. Thus, maps representing the results of continuous evaluation complement conjecture maps indocumenting the design research trajectory.In considering the mapping presented here, we found it useful to draw on Sandoval’s (2004, 2014)conjecture maps. This paper uses a series of maps to depict how the components and the links in the designresearch trajectory evolve. We highlight some of the features here to introduce the maps. In the next section, wedemonstrate how the maps were developed, using a design research example for illustration.Mapping the Design Research Trajectory: An ExampleThis section describes an example of mapping the design research trajectory. We briefly explain the selection ofa design research study for analysis, and summarize that study, and then describe the resulting design researchtrajectory maps.Construction of the MappingThe construction of design research trajectory mapping involves identifying the components and determiningwhether and how the predicted relationships between the components as given by the conjecture are empiricallysupported.Several features of the mapping should be highlighted. A sequence of maps is used to represent thelongitudinal process by which the design and insights about it evolve. Each map in the sequence represents theresults of evaluation of the conjectures in the corresponding phase of the design research. We found it useful todraw on Sandoval’s (2004) conjecture maps when considering which components needed to be mapped; thus,each map shows design elements, challenges, intermediate outcomes, and intervention outcomes. The designelements in a map result either from the initial design and the underlying conjecture, or are added as arefinement to the original design. Intervention outcomes represent what students are intended to learn, such asconceptual understanding of subject matter (Sandoval, 2004). We also added the challenges existing betweenthe design elements and the intermediate outcomes to show how the context of use may impede the achievementof intermediate outcomes. Challenges represent preconditions or barriers that make the targeted learningdifficult to realize. They can be identified through teacher-implementers’ comments on the instruction,researchers’ reflection on the design, and students’ reports on their learning and assessment results. Finally, weused different styles of arrows to indicate the extent to which a predicted relationship was achieved, representingthe results of the evaluation of the conjectures. For example, arrows were used to show whether a particulardesign element contributed to address a particular challenge and the extent to which overcoming a particularchallenge contributed to a particular intermediate outcome. In summary, the sequence of maps serves todocument the design research trajectory with a focus on continuous evaluation during each phase of the designresearch for development and validation of the conjectures.There is a lack of consensus on the rubric for determining to what extent a predicted relationshipbetween two components is empirically supported based on the information in the research report. To exemplifythe mapping, we propose the following guidelines. These guidelines are not intended to be universallyapplicable to design research or to fit best with the mapping for this research example. It is also noted thatalthough the research example we analyzed here is one of only a few in design research that details the researchtrajectory, the information reported was still insufficient to determine the extent to which each link in thediagram is empirically supported.To evaluate the extent to which the conjecture is confirmed, we developed four guidelines. (1) Theextent to which a predicted relationship is achieved is determined by how this relationship is empiricallysupported. (2) Three levels are used to indicate the extent to which a predicted relationship is confirmed—“fullysupported,” “partially supported,” and “unsupported”; these are represented in the map by a solid arrow, adashed arrow, and a dash-and-dot arrow, respectively. (3) A relationship is designated as fully supported if it isconsidered to have no significant problems, as partially supported if it could be further improved or animprovement solution is in progress, and as unsupported if it is not observed. (4) The maps are read from left toICLS 2014 Proceedings	  80© ISLSright, such that the achievement of a left-hand component assumes achievement of the successive component toits right. In other words, if a left-hand component is not fully achieved and the component that is predicted to beachieved, this is indicated by an unsupported relationship between them unless specific information is provided.The Study under AnalysisThe literature contains a substantial number of studies purporting to be design research. However, many papersreported single case studies that do not involve iterative improvement of the design and the underlyingconjectures (Krajcik et al., 1998; VanSledright, 2002). In other papers such refinements were reported, but theserefinements were not always based on formative assessments of the design in its iterations (Bell, Hoadley, &Linn, 2004; Kolodner et al., 2003; Zhang, Scardamalia, Reeve, & Messina, 2009). For example, Zhang,Scardamalia, Reeve and Messina (2009) reported a post-hoc analysis of three successive social arrangements instudents’ on-line work with Knowledge Forum, implemented by the same teacher and with the same curriculumin three successive school years. Although this study provides important evidence of the effectiveness of eachdesign, design changes were based on the teacher’s satisfaction with each design, with empirical analyses beingcarried out later. Furthermore, most of the aforementioned papers in fact report on research programs consistingof multiple studies and publications. Findings may be reported in many articles without necessarily clearlydiscussing the relationship of the study to previous studies from the same research program, which makes theresearch trajectory difficult to understand. A succinct way in which to depict these connections thus seemsnecessary.Edelson, Gordin and Pea (1999) did describe the relationships between their evidence, obtained fromformative assessments and refinement-oriented decisions, although they did not report the details of theformative evaluations. We thus selected this study to illustrate the mapping procedures. Edelson et al. (1999)presented a design history of software and a curriculum that aimed to use scientific visualization technologies tosupport students’ inquiry-based learning in geoscience. The researchers aimed to design a learning environmentin which students could conduct authentic scientific inquiry as scientists in a laboratory. The topic of inquiry inthe study was climatology (e.g., weather and global warming). Students worked on this topic by analyzing largecollections of authentic quantitative data that were provided. The data were displayed in the form of rectangulararrays that used colors to represent ranges of numerical or categorical values, designated as scientificvisualization. All of the data and tools for investigation were integrated in a designed software environment.Students were expected to investigate specific problems in this environment, through which process theyachieved objectives such as general inquiry abilities, specific investigation skills, and the understanding ofscience concepts through participation. As the implementation of the design proceeded, challenges wererecognized. The researchers iteratively refined the software and curriculum activities to address these challengesand to promote the desired outcomes. As a result, four versions of the design were developed and implemented,each constituting one phase of the research. Formative evaluation was conducted for each version. Accordingly,we may obtain evidence on the extent to which the design brought about the desired outcomes as conjectured ineach of the four phases of the research.Developing the MapWe highlight some of the features in the first phase of the research example and illustrate how the designtrajectory can be mapped. In describing the mapping, we first introduce the components of the map, comprisingdesign elements, challenges, and intermediate and intervention outcomes, and the predicted relationshipsbetween them. Thereafter, we map how these predicted relationships were achieved, as indicated by evaluatingthe design. As Sandoval (2014) devoted a paper to discussing the mapping of components in the design researchtrajectory, we provide more details here about mapping the evaluation of the predicted relationships.The first version of the design was the Climate Visualizer (Gordin, Polman, & Pea, 1994). Figure 1shows the map for the first phase of the research, read from left to right. Here, we focus on representing how thedesign would lead to the desired outcomes as conjectured. Datasets for inquiry in a data library related toweather information, a topic assumed to interest students, to address the challenge of motivation to engage ininquiry. A supportive user-interface was developed to address the challenge of accessibility of investigationtechniques. Students were expected to understand the techniques available to them well, which would bringabout the acquisition of specific investigation skills and an understanding of the science content. In addition,assuming that the students would have difficulty in planning, organizing, and coordinating the inquiry process,the researchers developed the Collaboratory Notebook to overcome the challenge of managing extendedactivities in inquiry-based learning. This environment was a structured hypermedia environment, in whichstudents could plan and record their investigations, coordinate work efforts among collaborative teams, andreceive feedback from teachers and mentors. Technological effort (e.g., software architecture) was made toaddress the practical constraints in the real classroom, such as available resources and fixed schedules. It wasexpected that by facilitating this, students could do better in recording the process and products of theinvestigation, which contributed to the improvement of their general inquiry abilities.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  81© ISLSDesignElementsChallengesIntermediateOutcomesData SetsMotivationEngagementSupportiveUser-interfaceAccessibilityUnderstandingTechniquesAvailableStructuredHypermediaEnvironmentManagingExtendedActivitiesRecordingProcess andProducts ofInvestigationTechnologyPracticalConstraintsAttention toInquiryInterventionOutcomesensures the achievement ofGeneralInquiry AbilitiesSpecificInvestigation SkillsScience ContentUnderstandingrealizes the learningin authentic contentsFigure1. Design trajectory map for the first version of the design in the research example	  The first version of the design was reported to have “failed to provide teachers and students with anunderstanding of the full range of visualization techniques” (p. 410), and “failed to address student motivation”(p. 411). In addition, the software ran so slowly that it failed to draw students’ attention to the inquiry itself,which was seen as “a practical failure to meet the constraints of the classroom” (p. 412). In other words, the linkbetween the “datasets” as a “design element” and the “motivation” challenge, and the link between the“accessibility” as a “challenge” and the “understanding techniques available” as an “intermediate outcome,”were both unsupported (dash-and-dot arrows).The other relationships in the map were considered unsupported (dash-and-dot arrows) if their lefthand components were not achieved, unless specific information was provided. In general, insufficientinformation was provided in the original text of the research example, so that the map had to be developedliterally according to the text. For example, information about whether the structured hypermedia environmentaddressed the challenge of managing extended activities was not presented in the paper. We thus assumed thatin the first version of the design, all of the links between the components were not supported empirically, as nosufficiently specific information was provided.Evolution of the Design Research TrajectoryThe mapping of the first phase of the research shows that the predicted relationships between the designelements and outcomes were not well supported empirically. To address the potential problems observed,Edelson et al. (1999) made refinements to their conjectures, and developed second and third versions, theRadiation-Budget Visualizer and the Greenhouse Effect Visualizer (Gordin, Edelson, & Pea, 1995). Severaldesign elements were revised, such as changing datasets to focus on more interesting topics, and thedevelopment of curricular activities.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  82© ISLSDesign ElementsChallengesIntermediate	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  OutcomesStaging ActivitiesMotivationEngagementAccessibilityUnderstandingTechniquesAvailableBackgroundKnowledgeAppropriateBackgroundKnowledgeRecord-keepingToolsManagingExtendedActivitiesRecordingProcess andProducts ofInvestigationTechnologyPracticalConstraintsAttention toInquiryInterventionOutcomesensures the achievement ofBridgingActivitiesDatasetsSupportiveUser-interfaceEmbeddedInformationResourcesGeneralInquiry AbilitiesSpecificInvestigation SkillsScience ContentUnderstandingrealizes the learningin authentic contentsFigure 2. Design trajectory map for the fourth version of the design in the research exampleTo illustrate how the mapping represents the evolution of the design research trajectory, we describethe mapping for the fourth phase of the study. The fourth version of the design, WorldWatcher, furtheraddressed the challenges through a series of attempts. The map of this phase is shown in Figure 2. We highlightthe following features. First, the researchers expected that broadening the datasets, improving the user-interface,and introducing staging activities into the curriculum to motivate students to investigate a wider range of topicsof interest could address the challenge of motivation. For example, the database was broadened to includedatasets that supported a much broader range of investigations, which provided meaningful problems forstudents to inquire into. With this challenge addressed it was expected that students would engage in inquiry,which assumed the achievement of the desired learning objectives. Second, the design attempts in the previousphases of the study aimed at addressing the challenge of accessibility included improvement of the userinterface to help interpret the visualizations and the development of staging and bridging curriculum activities toallow the learning and practice of investigation techniques. For example, the staging activities provided acontext within which students practiced using the techniques. The supportive interface, along with the specificoperations in the software environment, provided students with access to powerful investigation techniques suchas performing quantitative analyses of the data and viewing data in other visual representations. These attemptswere expected to equip students with specific investigation skills, through the performance of which they wouldcome to understand science content knowledge. Third, the researchers expected that the embedding ofinformation resources and staging activities would alleviate the challenge of background knowledge for inquiry.Equipping students with appropriate background knowledge would help them to understand the science contentknowledge. Fourth, the researchers provided various forms of record-keeping tools in the software and expectedthese to alleviate the challenge of managing extended activities. This made it possible to record the process andproducts of the investigations, which contributed to the learning of general inquiry abilities. Finally, theresearchers aimed to improve the performance of the software to address the challenge of practical constraints,which would help realize learning in authentic contexts.As reported, the challenges encountered in the enactment, such as motivation, accessibility, backgroundknowledge, managing extended activities, and practical constraints, were not revealed as being as serious asthose encountered in the enactment of the previous design. However, problems still existed, as seen from theresearchers’ observations and reports on the enactment. For example, students were observed to have difficultieswith retaining sight of the overall inquiry context as they became involved in individual activities, whichrequired reestablishing the motivating context. The information reported in the text was not sufficient toICLS 2014 Proceedings	  83© ISLSdetermine how each of the links between components was empirically supported, since “little formal evaluationhas been conducted” (p. 438) on the uses of this version. Given that issues raised by classroom experiencesexisted and that this design was being revised, it seems more appropriate to consider the links in the map aspartially supported (dashed arrows).Looking at the maps of the first and the fourth phases as a sequence, we can observe a progression inthe design and the conjectures. First, the conceptualization of the design research trajectory evolved. Thecomponents and relationships mapped conceptualize the design trajectory by showing the salient features ofeach design. As shown in the sequence of maps, components were added, modified, replaced, and refined, andthe relationships between the components were revised and validated. As a result, these researchers obtained abetter understanding of the interactions between the design and the context of its use. Second, the theoreticalknowledge of why the designs succeeded or failed in promoting learning outcomes also evolved. The maps wereintended to represent the extent to which the predicted relationships between the design and the desiredoutcomes were supported. The processes of enactment were thus linked to the outcomes, which is expected topermit theoretical knowledge to be developed concerning why the design succeeds or fails in supportinglearning. As shown, each map represents the extent to which the conjectured theoretical knowledge wasempirically supported in each phase. Thus the sequence of maps presents the way in which this theoreticalknowledge developed in clarity and was validated. In summary, creating a sequence of maps, each representingthe reality in one phase of the research, was helpful for documenting both the conceptualization of the designresearch trajectory and the development of theoretical knowledge.DiscussionSandoval (2004, 2014) proposed the idea of embodied conjecture and developed the technique of conjecturemapping. His conjecture maps document the evolution of conjectures about how design elements are predictedto work together to support learning over the course of design research. The components in the sequence ofconjecture maps characterize the salient features of the design research trajectory that links the design elementsto the processes of enactment and to the desired learning outcomes. Conjecture maps thus facilitate systematicdesign research and the development of learning theories. This paper draws primarily on the technique ofconjecture mapping, but makes some revisions intended to enhance the role of the mapping in facilitating designresearch.First, we mapped the extent to which the predicted relationships between the design and the desiredoutcomes were supported. This supplements Sandoval’s conjecture maps, as not only were conjectures abouthow the design would work to support learning mapped, but also how these conjectures were empiricallysupported. This revision is expected to provide a more comprehensive representation of the design researchtrajectory. Second, we incorporated a challenge component between the design elements and the intermediateoutcomes. This component reflects the role of constraints in the context of use in impeding the achievement ofintermediate outcomes. We suggest that mapping the challenges would be helpful for informing the design andevaluation stages in design research. We agree with Sandoval (2014) that the conjecture map represents anargument. A sequence of conjecture maps visualizes the hypothesized causal processes that link a design to itsoutcomes. These causal links may enable researchers to “look forward,” by reading from left to right, along thepathways from design elements to desired outcomes. In the maps in the present work, the representation of theextent to which such causal links were validated informed how success or failure in observing some outcomecould be traced back to a particular design element, when read from right to left. This paper contributes to thedevelopment of the technique of conjecture mapping by including the capability of capturing the movement ofthe design along a research trajectory, thus documenting a more comprehensive design research trajectory.We acknowledge that the work reported here needs further improvement. For example, the issue ofdetermining the level of support for the conjectures remains to be addressed. Sandoval (2004) distinguishedbetween design-oriented conjectures and theoretical conjectures. It is reasonable to assume that differentdefinitions and different standards for level of support are required for these two types of conjecture, given thedifference in nature between them. The rubrics for determining the level of support as presented also needfurther clarification. In addition, as the design trajectory maps were constructed based on post-hoc analysis ofpublished work, it remains to be seen how such maps could be useful in guiding new iterative design research.Research on the practice of applying such mapping in new design research projects is necessary for theevaluation and refinement of the technique.ReferencesBarab, S. A., Baek, E.-O., Schatz, S., Moore, J., Sluder, K., & Scheckler, R. (2002). Illuminating the braids ofchange in a web-supported community: A design experiment by any other name. In Proceedings of theAmerican Educational Research Association Conference (Vol. 2). New Orleans, LA.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  84© ISLSBell, P., Hoadley, C. M., & Linn, M. C. (2004). Design-based research in education. Internet Environments forScience Education, 73–85.Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design Experiments in EducationalResearch. Educational Researcher, 32, 9–13.Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design Research: Theoretical and Methodological Issues.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13, 15–42.Design-Based Research Collective (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educationalinquiry. Educational Researcher, 31(1), 5–8.Edelson, D. C. (2002). Design research: What we learn when we engage in design. Journal of the LearningSciences, 11, 105–121.Edelson, D. C., Gordin, D. N., & Pea, R. D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learning throughtechnology and curriculum design. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8, 391–450.Gordin, D. N., Edelson, D. C., & Pea, R. D. (1995). The Greenhouse Effect Visualizer: A tool for the scienceclassroom. Preprints of the Fourth American Meteorological Society Education Symposium, Dallas,Texas.Gordin, D. N., Polman, J. L., & Pea, R. D. (1994). The Climate Visualizer: Sense-making through scientificvisualization. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 3, 203–226.Jonassen, D., Cernusca, D., & Ionas, G. (2007). Constructivism and instructional design: The emergence of thelearning sciences and design research. Trends and Issues in Instructional Design and Technology, 2,45–52.Joseph, D. (2004). The practice of design-based research: Uncovering the interplay between design, research,and the real-world Context. Educational Psychologist, 39, 235–242.Joseph, D., Bryk, A., Bransford, J., Gomez, L., & the Information Infrastructure Project (2003). Informationinfrastructures. Presented at the Annual Meeting of the European Association for Research onLearning and Instruction. Padua, Italy.Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., … & Ryan, M. (2003). Problembased learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom: Putting Learningby Design into practice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 495–547.Krajcik, J., Blumenfeld, P. C., Marx, R. W., Bass, K. M., Fredricks, J., & Soloway, E. (1998). Inquiry inProject-Based Science classrooms: Initial attempts by middle school students. Journal of the LearningSciences, 7, 313–350.McKenney, S. E., Reeves, T. C., & Herrington, J. (2012). Conducting Educational Design Research. London:Routledge.Reinking, D., & Bradley, B. A. (2008). On formative and design experiments: Approaches to language andliteracy research. New York: Teachers College Press.Sandoval, W. A. (2004). Developing learning theory by refining conjectures embodied in educational designs.Educational Psychologist, 39, 213–223.Sandoval, W. A. (2014). Conjecture mapping: An approach to systematic educational design research. Journalof the Learning Sciences, 23, 18–36.The Design-Based Research Collective (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educationalinquiry. Educational Researcher, 31(1), 5–8.VanSledright, B. A. (2002). Fifth graders investigating history in the classroom: Results from a researcherpractitioner design experiment. Elementary School Journal, 103(2), 131–160.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for Collective Cognitive Responsibility inKnowledge-Building Communities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 7–44.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  85© ISLS