Recasting the Textbook: Student Creation of Interactive DigitalHistory Textbooks with Primary Source DocumentsMolly B. Zielezinski and Paul Franz, Stanford UniversityEmail: mbullock@stanford.edu, pefranz@stanford.eduThis research report details phase 1 of an ongoing design based research project. Motivated bythe current context of the emerging participatory youth media ecology and national supportfor digital textbooks in the hands of all students, we set out to determine the feasibility ofstudents creating their own interactive digital textbooks using primary source documents. Incollaboration with a history teacher, the research team designed a theory driven curriculumsupplement and implemented this with four 10th grade history classes. The process andpreliminary findings are presented and discussed.Today’s youth commonly engage with social media, media distribution, and digital media production as part ofa new kind of shared culture (Ito, 2009). Engagement in these friendship driven practices and interest drivenpractices are associated with the development of new forms of media literacy skills and informal peer learningenvironments (Ito 2009). While teens are coming of age in this new media ecology, their high school historyteachers sit on the opposite end of the digital native/digital immigrant spectrum often lacking technologicalfluency or technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPCK) to introduce technology into the curriculum.Complicating the situation further is the proliferation of digital technologies in U.S. classrooms; since 1991, thenumber of Internet connected devices available per student in schools has risen steadily (Warschauer, 2010) andthe end is not in sight. Most states are gearing up for digital administration of common core aligned tests, a featthat all but requires a nationwide increase in student to device ratio. Furthermore, U.S. Secretary of EducationArne Duncan has set the national goal to have digital textbooks in the hands of all U.S. students within the nextfive years. So the stage is set: youth computer access and use is higher than ever, access to technology inschools is increasing, and technological skills are integral for those entering the labor force in the next twentyyears (Warschauer, 2010). How will the story unfold? Well, if we continue on our current trajectory technologywill be “oversold and underused” (Cuban 2001) and as a result curriculum and practice will remain mostlyunchanged by this perfect storm. Alternatively, students may continue to experience school-as-usual but withmodifications in method of delivery. As current analogue practices are being furiously digitized. In this versionof the future, tests and textbooks, worksheets and essays, will be delivered and completed digitally butotherwise remain largely unchanged. A third possible outcome entails students engaging with technology forlearning in new, authentic, and innovative ways that simultaneously aid in the development of technologicalfluency, content specific practices and content knowledge. How will this perfect storm of competing contexts inU.S. unfold in American Education? How might textbooks be used in innovative ways as tools for learning?The research presented in this report is specifically interested in education’s digital future in the highschool history class. We consider historical thinking and the ways in which technology can be used indevelopment of this skill. Wineburg (2001) introduces the notion that “Historical thinking, in its deepest forms,is neither a natural process nor something that springs automatically from psychological development”. Studentsin high school history classes are unlikely to develop mature historical thought through instruction that relies onmemorization of facts and dates. Despite this, many history teachers emphasize student learning of exhaustivelists of historical facts (Barton & Levstik, 2003). Monologic instruction is characterized by authoritative voice(Bhaktin 1981) and tacitly demands that students accept one true history without actually engaging with theinformation. In contrast, the development of true historical thinking requires a learner to linger in the ambiguity,navigating an underlying tension between the strangeness of history and its familiarity (Wineburg 2001).Historians achieve a necessary balance between understanding historical moments in their true context(strangeness) and determining their relevance and application to our world (familiarity). This work ischaracterized by evaluation of evidence, argumentation, and the application of historical knowledge (Beyondthe Bubble 2013) and it is often conducted by reasoning alongside primary source documents that represent amultiplicity of perspectives. As such the adoption of document based teaching and learning in the high schoolhistory class is germane to the development of historical thinking.Although many history classrooms engage in document based instruction, there is a gap between theabundant digital resources available though archives, museums, and libraries and the dearth of resources that arereadily available in high school history class. Motivated by the current context of educational technology, thisresearch project explores what might happen if we bridged that gap, connecting students to available resourcesand asking them to engage in the work of historians. Given the rise in digital media production and distributionin youth culture, we explore the feasibility of digital authoring tools as a means to move students beyonduncritical content consumption and build their capacity for historical thinking. This report is a presentation ofICLS 2014 Proceedings1137© ISLSthe methods and preliminary findings from the first phase an ongoing design based research agenda. This initialphase of the project was motivated by the following research questions. RQ 1) To what extent is it feasible forhigh school students to craft their own digital interactive history textbooks using primary source documents?RQ 2) To what degree did students engage in the practices of authoring history in crafting their textbook (i.e.,sourcing, contextualizing, multiple perspective taking, choosing relevant primary sources)? RQ 3) To whatdegree did students utilize the affordances of the technology specifically in service of historical thinking? Towhat degree did students utilize the affordances to share multiple perspectives on historical events?Conceptual FrameworkThis study has two key constructs. The first construct of interest in this work is historical knowledge. Thedevelopment of historical knowledge is a by-product of historical thinking. As such, we treat the process ofauthoring an interactive digital history textbook as a potential act for historical thinking and treat the studentcreated artifacts as a demonstration of historical knowledge. We acknowledge that this a conceptual leap andrecognize the underlying assumption that to demonstrate historical knowledge one must engage in some degreeof historical thinking. As this was a preliminary study in an ongoing project, we chose to focus on the feasibilityof the medium for the presentation of historical knowledge and planned for phase 2 to collect data moreexplicitly tied to historical thinking. We draw on 3 main components from the framework of van Drie and vanBoxtel (2004) in our operationalization of historical knowledge, and as such conceptualize historical knowledgewith regards to use of historical questions, use of primary sources, and contextualization. Additionally, weconsider multiple perspective taking, to be a specifically relevant in this research given potential of the mediumfor displaying a multiplicity of historical voices. Multiple perspective taking is the presentation and explorationof different ways of thinking about moments in history as they were thought of at the time and is demonstratedthrough a combination of sourcing and contextualizing. Future research will examine the remaining componentsof the van Drie and van Boxtel (2004) framework: argumentation, use of substantive concepts, and use ofmetaconcepts. The second construct of interest is the affordances of technology. We operationalize thisexplicitly in connection with the iBooks author, the tool chosen for digital authoring. Each of the interactivewidgets afforded by iBooks author is has a unique set of affordances that can be utilized during authorship. Weseek to answer our research questions by taking up these constructs first separately and then together throughexamination of specific affordances of the technology as the co-occur with demonstration of historicalknowledge.Research DesignAt the onset of the project, we set out to utilize design based research methods to find out if it was feasible forhigh school students to craft their own digital interactive history textbooks using primary source documents. Inthe early stages of the project, the research team engaged in the selection, purchase, organization, anddeployment of the hardware and software identified as having the greatest potential value for history learningwith primary sources. Concurrently, we conceptualized and created a two-week curriculum supplementintegrating best practices in history instruction grounded in existing scholarship. After selecting a site forimplementation, we began a partnership with the teacher chosen to collaborate in the study. We conductedmultiple observations of his history class and documented via field notes and memos. We worked with theteacher to identify the most conducive conditions for students’ collaborative construction of multimodalinteractive digital history textbook chapters. We identified alignment between affordances of our chosen digitalauthoring software (such as callouts, galleries, interactive quizzes, and 3D models) and use cases for sharingmultiple perspectives and designed curricular components intended to support the students and teacher inexploring and exploiting these tools specifically for the purposes of authoring history with a thick narrative. Onestrategy for this included the design and deployment of templates to scaffold student groups in the task ofauthoring a historical narrative that integrates multiple perspectives, with each perspective introduced via one ormore primary source documents. Another tool developed to support students in this task was a model orexemplar chapter. Support tools and curriculum were refined over multiple iterations.To address the gap in availability of digital resources, the research team liaised between thecollaborating history teacher in our study and a local archive. This resulted in a visit by the archivist to each ofthe four tenth-grade classes. A university student (with expertise in this area) conducted a follow-up lessoncovering important considerations for working with primary source materials. Finally, the research teamcompiled a well-curated database of primary source documents that was organized to meet the needs of thelearning environment (as identified in multiple interviews and correspondences with four tenth-grade historyteachers). These resources were introduced as part of our curriculum.95 10th grade students from a northern California charter school participated in a 14-day our curricularintervention. 3 members of the research team and the collaborating teacher implemented the curriculumsupplement. During the intervention, the research team collected a plethora of data (over 3 terabytes) includingbut not limited video files of each lesson, audio files of students working in small groups, screen capture andICLS 2014 Proceedings1138© ISLSkeystroke data captured as students worked on computers, field notes, research memos, student surveys,summative transfer task, and the final artifacts. Findings in this research report were generated via a contentanalysis using the student created digital history textbook chapters as the message source. Concurrent analysesof a transfer task, multiple student surveys, and in depth qualitative look at a subset of textbook chapters are inprogress and the results of all will be used to inform the next iteration and implementation of our curriculumsupplement.Preliminary FindingsHistory as Usual: Pre-Implementation ObservationsA comparison of field notes from observations during the normal history class to field notes taken during projectimplementation indicate that our intervention allowed for a higher frequency of technology use, content creationand creativity. During five observations of the normal history class the only use of technology observed waslaptop and projector use by the teacher. Content creation by students observed prior to the intervention consistedprimarily of completion of lecture-aligned worksheets. While we did not observe specific instances of creativityduring these observations, student work hung on the walls indicates this to be an occasional part of the normalhistory class. Student generated maps; propaganda posters and research projects were prominent in theclassroom. Finally, pre-observations revealed an aspect of classroom culture related to communication. Studentsfrequently engaged in turn and talk activities and we observed a consistently high on task dialogue and rate ofparticipation in whole group discussion.History Recast: Digital Media ProductionOne unexpected outcome of our implementation was the adoption of our curated database of standards alignedprimary source documents. Even before we began the intervention, we received requests for access from othermembers of the history department. This was followed by requests by other teachers in the later school network.Figure 1 presents a summary of the formal characteristics of the interactive digital textbook chaptersauthored by the students who participated in our intervention. The students were extremely generative duringthe two-week implementation writing nearly 14,000 words distributed across 73 chapters. During class wideproject debriefs held after implementation, students lamented the time constraints that limited furtherproductivity. They also expressed what we perceive to be a high degree of enthusiasm and engagement boththroughout the intervention and during the final debrief.Chapters/GroupWords/Chapter6811985700032353752361151091338320142416288332701131.51.21.81.5Total9849138833425157433731901.5Chapters5759464516751804PagesParagraph13121311# Groups25262522# StudentsClass 1Class 2Class 3Class 4GroupWordsMedia (video)Media (images)Figure 1: Summary of student-generated content during phase 1 implementationOur content analysis of student artifacts includes coding for 15 different instantiations of historicalknowledge and 16 variables related to technological affordances. Currently the research team is in the process ofcoder training in order to establish inter-rater reliability for each of the 31 variables in our theory drivencodebook. A complete recoding of the data set by multiple coders is scheduled to follow. As such, the subset offindings presented below is centered on trends identified by the authors related to the perspective takingvariable. Specific counts and relative frequencies have been temporarily omitted (pending the establishment andcalculation of group coding reliabilities) but will be included upon presentation of the paper.RQ 1) To what extent is it feasible for high school students to craft their own digital interactive historytextbooks using primary source documents? Having completed phase 1 of this work in four high school classesit is determined that it is definitely feasible for students to create interactive digital history texts utilizingprimary source documents.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1139© ISLSRQ 2) To what degree did students engage in the practices of authoring history (and thereforehistorical thinking) in crafting their textbook (i.e., sourcing, contextualizing, multiple perspective taking,choosing relevant primary sources)? Preliminary coding of student created artifacts indicated that students’demonstration of historical knowledge varied widely within the sample. This was less so for the key variable ofinterest- perspective taking. A vast majority of the digital textbook chapters limited their portrayal of historicalevents to two perspectives. Furthermore, while presentation of two voices is technically multiple perspectivetaking, it is the most shallow form. Presentation of two perspectives is not in itself necessarily lacking depth,thus we describe artifacts as shallow when they mirror the traditional monologic treatment of history that iscommon in high school history textbooks. Shallow artifacts authoritatively present typical binary classificationsof historical events (pro ally vs pro enemy). This was at the expense of a more dialogic approach to constructionof deep historical knowledge through exploring a multiplicity of voices and/or a introducing the notion of whois left out of their analyses. Although this deep historical thinking was the primary design goal of the researchersfor this preliminary study, a very small subset of the sample achieved this goal. One possible explanation forthis is insufficient instruction related to this skill or insufficient time for skill development. The students hadbeen introduced to the concept of perspective taking prior several times during the year prior to implementationof our study but these instances were demonstrated by the teacher rather than opportunities to do so themselves.Another possible explanation for this is a misalignment between the goal of the researchers and the evaluationof the student work by the teacher. During whole post project debriefs, students from two of the four classesindependently reported a tension between their eagerness to use the tools to present a multiplicity of historicalvoices and am urge to focus on what they were being graded on. Grades were assigned based on thepresentation of two perspectives. Each of these interpretations has considerable implications for the nextiteration and implementation of our intervention.RQ 3) To what degree did students utilize the affordances of the technology specifically in service ofhistorical thinking? To what degree did students utilize the affordances to share multiple perspectives onhistorical events? Instances of multiple perspective taking co-occurred with affordances of the software in amajority of the student artifacts. Provision of templates, models and coaching supported students’ use ofinteractive widgets as resources for displaying multiple perspectives. This was evidenced by the fact that studentauthors only occasionally demonstrated multiple perspectives in forms that varied from one of the numeroustemplates provided. This raises the question of whether the templates were a factor limiting the innovative useof the affordances in demonstration of historical knowledge. Prior to our next implementation, we intend todevelop some insights as to whether this was the case through a comprehensive interrogation of our data andanalysis of interactions between the variables from each of our constructs.SummaryWe set out to investigate the feasibility and outcomes of digital textbook authorship by high school students.Preliminary findings from phase 1 implementation indicate that while feasible, the intervention requiresconsiderable redesign prior to phase 2. While this is true, our rich multimedia data set of student generatedcontent using primary and secondary sources when taken in conjunction with anecdotal evidence of theenthusiasm of the students, teacher, and extended school network provide a warrant for the continuation of ourresearch. It is noteworthy although not unexpected that small contextual factors have huge implications for theutility and uptake of technological affordances for document based historical thinking and demonstration ofhistorical knowledge. Some of the major contextual factors shaping these outcomes include time to completetask, establishing and setting norms for technology mediated learning, modeling desired outcomes withexemplars, and use of templates designed to promote interrogation of a multiplicity of historical voices. Finally,alignment between tools, tasks, and how the students are being evaluated is essential for success in the adoptionof digital authoring tools as means to support document based reasoning. Our next phase of analysis haspromise for contributing to theory and scholarship regarding the ways in which specific technologicalaffordances support and/or limit specific aspects of the construction and demonstration of historical knowledge.This information has potential for informing history teaching practice and technology design for historylearning.ReferencesBarton, K. C., & Levstik, L. S. (2003). Why don't more history teachers engage students ininterpretation?. Social Education, 67(6), 358-358.Beyond the Bubble: A New Generation of History Assessment- Our Approach. (n.d.). Beyond the Bubble.Retrieved November 1, 2013, from http://beyondthebubble.stanford.edu/our-approachItō, M. (2009). Living and learning with new media: Summary of findings from the Digital Youth Project. MITPress.Larry, Cuban. (2001). Oversold and underused: Computers in the classroom.van Drie, J., & Van Boxtel, C. (2004). Historical reasoning: A comparison of how experts and novicesICLS 2014 Proceedings1140© ISLScontextualise historical sources. International Journal of Historical Learning, Teaching and Research,4(2), 84-91.Warschauer, M., & Matuchniak, T. (2010). New technology and digital worlds: Analyzing evidence of equity inaccess, use, and outcomes. Review of Research in Education, 34(1), 179-225.Wineburg, S. (2001). Historical thinking and other unnatural acts: Charting the future of teaching the past.Temple University Press.AcknowledgementsThank you to our advisors: Sam Wineburg and Roy Pea; our funder- MediaX, especially Martha Russel; ourcooperating teacher: Bobby Cupp and his amazing history students, members of the Digital History ResearchGroup: Max Alexander, Tanner Vea, Jeremy Jiminez, and Laura Moorhead; and others who have advised usalong the way including Rob Lucas, Joel Breakstone, and the members of the SHEG group.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1141© ISLS