“Are You ‘In’ or Are You ‘Out’?” Investigating the Factors AffectingImmersion in a Location-Based AR Game for IBSEYiannis Georgiou and Eleni A. Kyza,Department of Communication and Internet Studies, Cyprus University of Technology, CYPRUSIoannis.Georgiou@cut.ac.cy, Eleni.Kyza@cut.ac.cyAbstract: It is argued that augmented reality games can promote immersion and feelings ofpresence, which could support students’ engagement with the learning process. Sustainingpresence is crucial but challenging, since immersion is a transient state. As part of a broaderdesign-based research, in this study, we employed a focus group methodology to investigatethe perceptions of eighteen 11th graders regarding the factors which affected their immersionduring an augmented reality game for inquiry-based science learning.Introduction and Theoretical FramingThere is a wide-spread assumption according to which immersive Augmented Reality (AR) games could resultto feelings of presence within the game, as a sense of being there. Dede (2009), who defined immersion “as theparticipant’s suspension of disbelief that she or he is ‘inside’ a digitally enhanced setting” (p.66), argued thatimmersive games could increase students’ engagement with the learning process. In recent years, we havewitnessed a rapid increase in the number of location-based AR games for inquiry-based science education(IBSE). These games respond to the gamer’s position and augment physical landscapes with digitalinformation, thus allowing students to explore the natural environment around them by using mobiletechnologies (Cheng &Tsai, 2013). However, despite the potential of these games, student immersion and senseof presence should not always be taken for granted. McCall, Wetzel, Löschner and Braun (2011) concluded thatsustaining the players’ sense of presence at high-levels is challenging, since presence requires that students arefully immersed in the experience during the full AR experience. According to Reid, Geelhoed, Hull, Cater andClayton (2005), this challenge could be attributed to immersion being a transient state, since players in ARgames move constantly between immersive and non-immersive states, highlighting the need for furtherinvestigation of the factors that may affect or sustain immersion. Considering that there is a lack of studiesinvestigating this issue explicitly, the present study focuses on the AR gaming experience of high schoolstudents who participated in an intervention involving a location-based AR game for IBSE.MethodologyA total of eighteen 11th graders played the “Trace Readers”, a location-based AR game we designed for thepurpose of this study. The AR experience lasted approximately 2 hours; according to the scenario, students wereasked to work in pairs sharing a tablet, in order to investigate an authentic environmental science problemregarding the decline of the mallard duck population at the lake. In order to accomplish their mission, studentshad to visit several stations by the lake and gather information from several game-based characters on differentaspects of the problem. As part of a broader design-based study seeking to investigate what immersion is andhow it is related to students’ learning, we collected data on students’ perceptions of immersion through twosemi-structured focus groups, each of which lasting for 1.5 hours. Questions aimed at prompting the studentsabout issues of immersion, asking them, for example, to express whether they were feeling as being more in thegame world or in the real world while playing the game. The data were qualitatively analyzed, using the AttrideStirling's (2001) thematic network analysis to identify perceived factors of immersion. In other analyses, whichare still under way, we are also examining videotapes of students’ discourse during the AR game to investigatestudent engagement and triangulate findings.ResultsThe qualitative analysis employed resulted in the categorization of the factors discussed in four different aspectsinfluencing students’ immersion: (a) the user interface, (b) the narrative employed, (c) the gaming space and (d)unforeseen distractions (see Table 1). Relating to the user interface factor, students positively evaluated the useof an application with a user friendly interface, in order to augment the real world. Τhey negatively evaluatedthe cartoonish graphics and game-based characters, as well as the text-based information provided, indicatingthe need for more realistic graphics and characters as well as for the replacement of text-based information withmore multimedia content. Moving to the narrative factor, students expressed that since the narrative wasstructured around a problem-based investigation and included a diversity of data this contributed to theirimmersion, as they had to investigate and to connect several pieces of data in order to solve the mystery. Inaddition, students mentioned that they felt a sense of competition, explaining that this made the game moreICLS 2014 Proceedings1577© ISLSchallenging. As students also indicated, some of the gaming challenges in this narrative were not demandingenough and on occasions the plot lacked surprises; in these cases, students reported that their immersion wasdecreased. Another point made was that since informational data were provided by the game-based characters,there was a lack of agency, which hindered students’ immersion. Where the gaming space factor was concerned,students emphasized the location-aware nature of the game that allowed them to be immersed in and enjoy thenatural environment. Nonetheless, the students emphasized the need for a greater coupling between the physicaland the virtual world, through the combination of both digital and real artifacts, for the creation of a moreimmersive augmented reality space. In addition, students disliked the hotspots’ circular arrangement by the lake,explaining that they would like to follow a more challenging and complex path of inquiry. Finally, studentsreported on a number of unforeseen distractions that interrupted their immersion such as the hot weather, screenglaring due to the sunlight, environmental distractions, external noises or technical problems.Table 1: Categorization and evaluation of factors discussed as affecting immersion.ThemeUser InterfaceNarrativeGaming spaceUnforeseendistractionsBasic themesUser-friendliness of interfaceRealism, animation and interactivity of graphicsRealism and fidelity of game-based charactersText-based informationProblem-based investigationDiversity of dataCompetitive natureLevel of challengeAgency and first-person perspectiveGaming plotNature-based locationMobility and location aware nature of the gameBalance between the physical and virtual worldHotspots’ arrangementWeatherTechnical bugsExternal noisesEnvironmental distractionsScreen GlaringEvaluation++++++-Frequency422232373444102517183382324721918148ConclusionsThere is a wide-held assumption that location-based AR games may afford immersive experiences as well as asense of presence in the game, which are related to desirable learning behaviors (Cheng & Tsai, 2013).However, immersion is a transient state, provoking a fluctuation in the sense of presence (e.g. McCall et al.,2011; Reid et al., 2005). The present study investigated the factors which high school students reported aspromoting or hindering their immersion with a location-based AR game for IBSE. Several factors relating to theuser interface, the narrative, the gaming space or unforeseen distractions have emerged as affecting students’immersion. Our future work will attempt to triangulate these findings by analyzing students’ AR actions anddiscourse in an attempt to understand students’ feelings of presence and how to sustain students’ engagementwith the learning process.ReferencesAttride-Stirling, J. (2001). Thematic networks: An analytic tool for qualitative research. Qualitative Research,1(3), 385-405.Cheng, K.-H., & Tsai, C.C. (2013). Affordances of augmented reality in science learning: Suggestions for futureresearch. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 22(4), 449-462.Dede, C. (2009). Immersive interfaces for engagement and learning. Science , 323(5910), 66-69.McCall, R., Wetzel, R., Löschner, J., & Braun, A.K. (2011). Using presence to evaluate an augmented realitylocation aware game. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 15(1), 25-35.Reid, J., Geelhoed, E., Hull, R., Cater, K., & Clayton, B. (2005). Parallel Worlds: Immersion in location-basedexperiences. In G. vad der Veer and C. Gale (Eds.) Proceeding of the SIGCHI conference on Humanfactors in computing systems (pp. 1733–1736). New York: ACM Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1578© ISLS