Design Principles for Motivating Learning with Digital Badges:Consideration of Contextual Factors ofRecognition and AssessmentCathy Tran, University of California, Irvine, ctran27@gmail.comKaterina Schenke, University of California, Irvine, kschenke@uci.eduDaniel T. Hickey, Indiana University, dthickey@indiana.eduAbstract: There is broad interest in the use of open digital badges to enhance learners’motivation. These web-enabled tokens of learning and accomplishment have the potential toinduce excitement and elicit powerful forms of engagement and learning. Researchers anddevelopers, however, appear divided on the role of digital badges in motivating learners. Ourpaper addresses the skepticism and promise that surrounds badges and presents the designprinciples for motivating learning found among 30 digital badge projects and aligns them withresearch. In doing so, we consider how contextual factors—such as how badges are usedrecognize learning and how that learning is assessed—may play out to influence learnermotivation in badge-oriented learning ecosystems.Project PurposeTraditional physical badges have been used for many years by organizations such as the Boy Scouts of Americato acknowledge skills from archery to first aid. Now, so called “open digital badges” have has become popularin a variety of learning environments. The MacArthur and Gates Foundations recently invested more than $4million to fund projects to design and implement digital badge systems. These newer badges are web-enabledtokens of accomplishment, skill, quality, or interest (Casilli & Knight, 2012). Unlike, grades, transcripts, orcertificates, they can contain specific claims, detailed evidence supporting those claims, and links to additionalclaims and evidence; they can also be readily shared over social media & email and annotated & accumulated instandalone “backpacks.” While these features have obvious motivational potential, they are quite new. Little isknown about how these features are being used individually or as part of larger educational ecosystems, andthere has been little systematic consideration of actual or potential implications for motivation. We tackle onepiece of the puzzle by focusing on how contextual factors such as the way badges are used to recognize andassess learning might influence motivation. We investigated the following research questions: (1) Whichmotivational design principles emerged from the specific practices we extracted from 30 projects? (2) Whatimplications do recognition and assessment practices have on those motivation principles? (3) What is the likelymotivational impact of recognition and assessment practices in a typical badges project?Theoretical FrameworkResearchers and developers appear divided on the role of digital badges in motivating learners. Reflectinglongstanding concerns over extrinsic rewards, skeptics of badges “worry that students will focus onaccumulating badges rather than making connections with the ideas and material associated with the badges”(Resnick, 2012). Badge evangelists find promise in having a new way to assess learners apart from the “currentmultiple-choice form of testing (that) doesn’t measure all that is being learned and de-motivates true curiosity”(Davidson, 2012). Our search for appropriate practices for motivating learning with badges is informed by wellknown motivational theories (Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Eccles, 1983; Ryan & Deci, 2002). Our search is furtherinformed by sociocultural views that consider motivation in the context in which it operates (Goodenow, 1992;Hickey, 1997, 2003). Sociocultural views consider motivation primarily in terms of the larger social andtechnological context and only secondarily in terms of individual differences that learners are presumed to bringto those contexts. Rather than embracing one side or the other on the enduring debate over incentives andlearning, we instead documented the emerging practices for using badges to recognize and assess learning, aswell as the deliberate ways projects were using badges in attempt to motivate. We then considered the potentialpositive and negative consequences of those practices and their interactions for the engagement (and potentialdisengagement).Data Sources and Analytic MethodsData came from awardees in the 2012 Badges for Lifelong Learning initiative. Thirty educational programswere funded to develop digital badge systems using the Open Badges Infrastructure developed by the MozillaFoundation. Awardees range from after-school programs aligned with the Common Core State Standards(Pathways for Lifelong Learning) to teacher professional development programs (Who Built America?) andskill-based digital practice apps (BuzzMath). The research project set out to document the practices for usingICLS 2014 Proceedings1027© ISLSdigital badges for assessing, recognizing, motivating, and studying learning that emerged across these 30projects. It did so by capturing “practical wisdom” as projects moved from intended practices (in their originalproposal) to enacted practices (enacted in the actual badge system).The research project organized the practical wisdom across programs as general design principles andproject specific practices (The Design-Based Research Collective, 2003). The project assumed that localtheories are built in the context in which they are intended to be used where insights can then be transferred tosimilar situations (Cobb et al., 2003). To identify the motivational practices in each project, we analyzed projectproposals to identify the intended practices that system designers expected to motivate learning. In doing so, wedocumented and interpreted key design decisions related to learner motivation and design rationales for thesedecisions. A design rationale framework provides an account of the decisions teams make and the reasons fortheir decisions (Jarczyk, Loeffler, & Shipman, 1992; Lee & Lai, 1991). Employing this, our team asked projectstaff, through phone and in-person interviews, about design decisions they made to motivate learners to generatea list of intended practices. In addition, based on their grant proposals, we flagged other practices that may haveunintended motivational consequences based on motivation research. After identifying the intended practices ineach project, we categorized practices into larger design principles by dynamically sorting and re-sorting thepractices into different groups of principles. These principles were vetted for feedback and revised both byrepresentatives from the badge projects as well as attendees at the Digital Media and Learning and the Games,Learning, and Society conferences.ResultsRQ 1: Which Motivational Design Principles Emerged from Practices We Extractedfrom the 30 Projects?Eleven overarching design principles with examples of practices for motivating learning are in Table 1. Theseprinciples aren't meant to be prescriptive—the process of designing a learning environment is not an exactscience. Our goal is to provide perspectives and resources for educators and badge system developers toconsider as they design badge ecosystems and figure out which badge design elements work best within theircontext to motivate learners.RQ 2: What Implications Do Assessment and Recognition Practices Have on thoseMotivation Principles?To illustrate the implications of assessment and recognition practices on motivation, we will focus on therecognition practice “Providing Privileges,” which was particularly prevalent across the projects. Privilegesranged from internship opportunities for youth who had earned particular badges to the receipt of a physicalprize such as robots or entrance to a museum. The categories of providing privileges that emerged from ouranalyses were: 1) tangible prizes unrelated to the subject domain; 2) peer mentorship positions; 3) new relatedactivities inside the program; and 4) access to outside internships.The contingencies for receiving the badges as well as the types of reward the badges provide reflectdifferent patterns of assessment and recognition that impact the motivational implications of providingprivileges. The ways in which students receive those badges are assessment practices. The four categories ofprivileges constitute recognition practices because they illustrate ways in which badge achievements areacknowledged. By analyzing the different ways that privileges are associated with badges, we show howassessment and recognition practices have implications for motivation design principles. Below, we first outlinethe motivational principles and then discuss assessment and recognition principles.Tangible prizes unrelated to subject domain. In some projects, learners are awarded physical prizeswhen they earn a badge. Students are recognized for their achievements by the receipt of these prizes. In such anenvironment, the assessment can therefore be viewed as accomplishing any means to receive those prizes. Ifrote memorization and repeating the easy activities is what boost points to attain badges for prizes, those may bethe strategies that are likely to be employed by the learners.Peer mentorship positions. As a privilege of collecting specific badges, some projects allow learners tobe peer mentors. Research has suggested that teaching is motivating for learners because students feel in chargeand are eager to help their tutees improve and as a byproduct put forth more effort and learn more themselves(Chase, Chin, Oppezzo, & Schwartz, 2009). This recognition of being a peer mentor is dependent on meetingassessment requirements such as collecting a series of leveled badges to demonstrate expertise in a domain to beallowed to assist peers at lower levels. Inherent in this recognition practice of providing peer mentorshipprivileges is also peer assessment which have different implications from computer and human expert (e.g.,teacher) assessment.New related activities inside the program. Giving learners access to new activities within the programis a prize awarded in several badge projects. In one example, learners are able to gain access to math contestsICLS 2014 Proceedings1028© ISLSwithin the community and get exclusive access to “problem solving” missions. The recognized privilege and theassessment criteria are therefore linked to the same learning objectives, building on one another.Table 1: Design principles for motivating learningPrinciple nameRecognizingidentitiesExplanationBadges can recognize a learner’s role withinthe badging system such as recognizing theirspecialization in journalism, engineering, orpeer mentoring. Badges can also recognizelearner’s identities by being incorporated intoprojects that themselves target specificgroups.ExampleS2R Medals awards learnersbadges for their journalism andlive reporting skills.Engaging withcommunitiesSome learners are able to earn badges for theirinvolvement in their communities both at thephysical and digital level.Planet Stewards awards learnersbadges for engaging with theironline community and acting asscience communicator andcollaborator.Display badges to thepublicSome projects give earners the option ofdisplaying badges themselves, while otherprojects automatically display badges.Mouse Wins! automaticallydisplays learner's badges on theirwebsite.Outside value ofbadgesSome projects integrate practices to givebadges value outside of the badge system.These include having badges count asacademic or course credit, showing badges tooutside agencies, and/or documenting the linkbetween the badges and real life applications.Earners of 4H-USDA Roboticsbadges have the opportunity toearn internships with partnerinstitutions such as NASA.Setting goalsBadges allow for learners to set goals andvisualize the previous goals that they’veaccomplished. Badge systems can use goalsetting in many different ways.BuzzMath provides learners withclear learning pathways of thebadges they have earned.CollaborationSome projects award group badges for groupaccomplishments as well as personal badgesfor having a role in a collaboration.Robotics and STEM Badges usingNASA Content awards badges togroups of learners.CompetitionScarcity of badges and use of a point systemare two ways that we have seen projectscontribute to competition among badgeearners.S2R Medals limits the number ofbadges awarded to learners.Recognizing differentoutcomesThe type of learning that a badge recognizesand the way that recognition is managed hasprofound implications for motivation.Design for America awardslearners badges for roles such as"peer mentor" and "project leader".Utilizing differenttypes of assessmentsProjects utilize different types of assessmentsfor learning such as computer, peer, expert, orself assessment.Sweet Water Aquapons allowspeers to award badges.Providing privilegesLearners are awarded a variety of privileges in Earning badges with Designresponse to earning a badge such as prizes, the Exchange allows learners access toopportunity to take part in new activities, andinternships.access to internships.Note. These principles will continue to evolve as projects move from intended to enacted practices.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1029© ISLSAccess to outside opportunities. Badge earners have the opportunity to serve as interns for someprograms. Evidence from studies using an expectancy-value theory (Eccles, 1983) to understand learner choiceswould say that if the privileges that badges provided are interesting or exhibit high utility for learners, relative tocost, learners are more likely to initiate and sustain engagement with the subject matter. The assessment istherefore linked to the skills that these outside employers value and recognize so that they are willing to providethese internships.One of the most salient points of these examples is the difficulty of making assumptions about theoutcomes of providing privileges without understanding the context in which these privileges are used. Thecontingency of the privilege (assessment) and the privilege itself (recognition) are both contexts that matter.Some may undermine motivation while others may support the motivational impact of providing privileges.Incentives in themselves do not necessarily have positive or negative motivational influences; rather, it isstudying them in the contexts in which they operate that provide valuable insight about their impact.RQ3: What Is the Likely Motivational Impact of Assessment and Recognition Practicesin a Typical Badges Project?To answer our third research question, we turn to a case study of the Supporter to Reporter (S2R) Medalsproject. S2R Medals gives youths a glimpse at what it is like to be a journalist in the sports reporting world.More than 2,000 individuals have developed their reporting skills through S2R and reported at more than 1,000events including the 2012 Olympic Games.Assessment practices used by S2R Medals include leveled badges from bronze to gold that are alignedto standards that teachers are using in school. Leveled badges allowing learners to set goals for themselves andvisualize those goals is an important strategy for self-regulated learning in which learners plan and monitor theirlearning (Zimmerman, 2000). S2R employs different types of assessments including computer scoring systems,peers, and experts. While computer assessment may benefit from being more efficient and free of socialjudgment, peer or expert assessment may be more meaningful and therefore increase the quality of work putinto earning the badge. Relationships with peers are also implicated in the designer’s intention of the badges toguide students along the path from novice to mentor, enabling advanced students to become a source of peerassessment for newer students. Such relationships within a learning community can help learners feel moreconnected and therefore persist within that learning environment (for an example, see Summers, Svinicki,Gorin, & Sullivan, 2002).Recognition practices in S2R include allowing students to report at real sports events once they reachan appropriate level of expertise based on their accumulation of badges. Allowing students to report at realsports events illustrates the motivation design principle of providing privileges of access to outsideopportunities. Privileges that badges provide that are interesting or exhibit high utility for learners, relative tocost, are more likely to initiate and sustain learner engagement with the subject matter (Eccles, 1983). As such,for those who are interested in journalism and find the project to be highly relevant for their goals are morelikely to be positively influenced by these recognition practices. This case study illustrates the importance ofacknowledging the interactive influences among assessment, recognition, and motivation within specificlearning contexts.Looking beyond the individual, the S2R case study also revealed ways that badges can help motivateconnected learning (Ito et al., 2013). Much of the impetus behind the MacArthur Foundation’s focus on digitalbadges follows from the assumption that they can help bring together and integrate spheres of knowledge,culture, and social practice that are normally very disconnected for most young people. Specifically, the casestudy of S2R medals uncovered the various ways that badges were used to recognize learning helped motivateconnections between knowledge and abilities that were interest-driven, related to academic pursuits, and relatedto peer-culture and social networking. For example, examining one participant’s S2R Medals home pagedisplays the badges that individual earned, the number of peers who have “friended” him, and the variousartifacts the he has produced (1). Clicking on those badge reveals academic and professional competencies thatthe earner had to develop to earn the badge and the specific evidence of those competencies. Finally, the actualinterest-driven (i.e., sports-related) artifact that the earner developed included familiar social networkingfeatures to make it easy for the earners’ peers to “like” and post comments upon the artifact. Arguably, thedigital badges motivated the kind of self-directed activity that Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi (1976) said wasseldom possible in highly organized school activities but that was necessary for developing problem-findingskills and creativity.Theoretical and Developmental SignificanceEducational technologies are advancing at a much faster rate than research around those technologies; the recentsurge of digital badges is no exception. As projects develop badge ecosystems, research on the development ofthese systems becomes increasingly important. In this paper we have outlined badge design principle that badgedevelopers consider for motivating learners. Design principles need to be considered in the context of theICLS 2014 Proceedings1030© ISLSlearning environment and individual differences among learners as well as in connection with the otherprinciples that we have derived.For developers of educational environments, we have offered badge design principles that theyconsider in educational settings. For motivation researchers, we have provided an analysis of the motivationalimpact of different badge designs. Our analysis illustrates how the same badge design may be motivationallyadaptive in one situation but not the other. Understanding how badges look in practice as well as badgedevelopers’ initial instincts in designing badge systems is the next step in evaluating badging practices onlearner motivation as well as in gaining insight on ways in which motivation theories extend to or are limited bynew contexts in educational technology.Endnotes(1) An example S2R homepage is at https://www.makewav.es/r/glennwheeler; one of the badges located on that home pagecan be viewed at https://www.makewav.es/story/565038 and the story associated with that badges is athttps://www.makewav.es/story/569437/title/interviewwithhannahcockroftmbeReferencesCasilli, C. & E Knight, E. (2012, June 11). 7 things you should know about badges [Web log post]. Retrievedfrom http://www.educause.edu/library/resources/7-things-you-should-know-about-badgesChase, C. C., Chin, D. B., Oppezzo, M. A., & Schwartz, D. L. (2009). Teachable agents and the protégé effect:Increasing the effort towards learning. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 18(4), 334-352.Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educationalresearch. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.Davidson, C. (2012, February 21). Can badging be the zipcar of testing and assessment? [Web log post].Retrievedfromhttp://dmlcentral.net/blog/cathy-davidson/can-badging-be-zipcar-testing-andassessmentDweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation andpersonality. Psychological Review, 95(2), 256.Eccles, J. (1983). Expectancies, values, and academic behaviors. In J. T. Spence (Ed.), Achievement andachievement motivation (pp. 75–146). San Francisco, CA: Freeman.Getzels, J. W., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1976). The creative vision: A longitudinal study of problem finding inart. New York: Wiley.Goodenow, C. (1992). Strengthening the links between educational psychology and the study of socialcontexts. Educational Psychologist, 27,177–196.Hickey, D. T. (1997). Motivation and contemporary socio-constructivist instructional perspectives. EducationalPsychologist, 32(3), 175-193.Hickey, D. T. (2003). Engaged participation versus marginal nonparticipation: A stridently socioculturalapproach to achievement motivation. The Elementary School Journal, 401-429.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K.,.. & Watkins, S. C. (2013). Connectedlearning: An agenda for research and design. University of California Digital Media and LearningResearch Hub. http://dmlhub.net/sites/default/files/ConnectedLearning_report.pdfJarczyk, A., Loeffler, P., & Shipman, F. (1992). Design rationale for software engineering: A survey. 25thHawaii International Conference on System Sciences Proceedings (pp. 577-586).Lee, J., & Lai, K. Y. (1991). What's in design rationale? Human–Computer Interaction, 6(3-4), 251-280.Lepper, M. R., Greene, D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1973). Undermining children's intrinsic interest with extrinsicreward: A test of the "overjustification" hypothesis. Journal of Personality and SocialPsychology, 28(1), 129.The Design-Based Research Collective (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educationalinquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.Resnick, M. (2012, February 27). Still a badge skeptic [Web log post]. Retrieved fromhttp://hastac.org/blogs/mres/2012/02/27/still-badge-skepticRyan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2002). Overview of self-determination theory: An organismic dialecticalperspective. In E. L. Deci & R. M. Ryan (Eds.), Handbook of self-determination research (pp. 33).Rochester, NY: University of Rochester.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1031© ISLS