Mediated Action and Mediated Discourse Analysis: StudyingLearning and Becoming at the Nexus of PracticeIngrid de Saint-Georges, University of Luxembourg, Ingrid.desaintgeorges@uni.luKevin O’Connor, University of Colorado Boulder, kevin.oconnor@colorado.eduAbstract: The purpose of the workshop is to explore the closely related frameworks ofmediated action (MA) (Wertsch, 1998) and mediated discourse analysis (MDA) (Scollon &Scollon, 2004). In the spirit of a study group, participants will 1) engage in a dialogue aroundwhat these frameworks can bring to the learning sciences, 2) get hands-on experienceanalysing empirical material from these two perspectives, 3) discuss their own researchpractices within these frames. One anticipated outcome of the workshop is the development ofa research agenda and an international network in the learning sciences with a particular focuson MA/MDA.Workshop Description and GoalsThe goal of this workshop is to explore how learning science research might be informed by the closely relatedframeworks of mediated action (Wertsch, 1991, 1998) and mediated discourse analysis (Scollon & Scollon,2004). In line with the conference theme, both perspectives focus on processes of becoming throughengagement in practice, and how these processes of becoming are realized through communication andparticipation in value-laden settings of action.MA theory explores how mind is realized in and through action, and how forms and processes ofrealization are mediated by semiotic and material “cultural tools.” This approach takes action, as opposed toeither individuals or sociocultural environments, as the fundamental unit of analysis for studying learning andpsychological development in general. MDA builds directly on the MA framework, adding specific emphaseson, first, the role of discourse as a form of action through which mind, identity, positionality, and socialcollectives are realized; and, second, an ethnographic understanding of the “sites of engagement” in whichaction takes place, including the range of semiotic and material tools that intersect in action.Both frameworks seek analytically to adopt a focus not exclusively on individual actors, nor on socialgroups or institutions, nor on mediational means, but rather on the “nexus of practice” at which these intersectand are brought concretely into engagement (Scollon, 2005, p. 20). This focus keeps alive the complexity ofmeanings and practices that bind communities together and make up individuals’ identities over time. Bothapproaches aim at deepening our understanding of how sociocultural processes shape and mold people’s livesand identities, and both are interested in better understanding how discourses, practices and mediationssometimes constitute opportunities for actions, but sometimes also contribute to limiting action and imagination.Each of these interests has also been a key focus of recent work in the learning sciences.Despite these commonalities, and despite the international and interdisciplinary reach of bothperspectives, researchers in the two fields have seldom had formal opportunities to meet together to exchangeideas and mutually develop the perspectives. One of the major goals of the workshop, then, is to bring togetherscholars influenced by these two traditions for dialogue and exchange on a central question of this year’sconference: How does engagement in practice bring individuals to become certain kinds of persons over time.More specifically, the workshop would like to take up questions such as: How does learning contribute to newindividual and social trajectories? How does it help people to imagine or make connections to different possiblefutures (de Saint-Georges, 2012; O’Connor & Allen, 2010)?A second goal of the workshop is to give attendees hands-on experience using MA/MDA as analyticaland methodological perspectives. In small groups, participants will be invited to unpack and discuss empiricalmaterial thematizing different aspects of “learning and becoming” from these perspectives. Finally, attendeeswill also be asked to discuss their own research agendas and practices as they are developing them within theframeworks under discussion or within related approaches.By the end of the workshop, we hope to foster the creation of an international network in the learningsciences around MA/MDA. To make this network concrete, an academic blog will be launched onHypotheses.org, a platform aimed at enhancing visibility of research in the humanities and social sciences.Attendees will be free to disseminate their work through this platform, which can also become a space fororganizing future encounters and events beyond ICLS2014.Why an International Network in the Learning Sciences around MA/MDA?It might be timely to reflect about the rationale behind developing an international network in the learningsciences around MA/MDA now. Wertsch’s sociocultural theory has developed over the last thirty years. Scollonand Scollon’s mediated discourse analysis is a bit more recent dating back only to the late 90s (Norris & Jones,ICLS 2014 Proceedings1692© ISLS2005; Scollon & de Saint-Georges, 2011). Over the last decades, both frameworks have attracted the attention ofa growing body of researchers who have found in these approaches ways of responding to thornyepistemological and methodological questions. For example, MA has attracted researchers by offering concretetools to approach in a more principled way the relationship between processes across multiple timescales,focusing as it does not just on the moment-by-moment unfolding of actions but also on the multiple social,historical, and cultural processes that traverse these actions through the cultural tools used to perform them. Tothe interested researcher, MA has designed a way to overcome the traditional dichotomy between the mind andthe social. It has also helped in theorizing the role of cultural experiences and material and symbolic resources indevelopmental processes (Zittoun, 2006).As for MDA, researchers attracted to this framework often highlight two important reasons for turningto this approach. The first reason is the interest MDA has in beginning investigations not so much fromtheoretical or methodological questions but from real-life ‘problem’ or ‘social issue’ and then considering whichactions, practices and discourses might be constitutive of these issues (Scollon, 2005). It makes this frameworkparticularly adapted to design research with an impact, as well as to reflect about the position of researchers asproducers of discourses and actions which might affect the very nexus they study. A second dimension that isoften highlighted as a reason for adopting MDA is its commitment to interdisciplinarity. As Hult (2010) puts it,MDA is a form of ‘meta-methodology’ which aggregates the findings and tools from diverse disciplinaryorientations (e.g. interactional sociolinguistics, linguistic anthropology, critical discourse analysis, socialsemiotics, mediated action, cultural psychology, etc.) to put them in the service of addressing the problems ofinterest. In that, MDA thus also offer a framework for overcoming traditional disciplinary boundaries.Interested in the affordances these frameworks offer, an increasing number of researchers are engagingin using ‘mediated action’ in their investigation or in doing ‘mediated discourse analysis’ or ‘nexus analysis’ invarious fields and geographical areas. In the field of ‘mediated discourse analysis’, for example, the JyväskyläDiscourse Research hub (University of Jyväskylä) and the Peripheral Multilingualism (Academy of Finland)have recently launched a joint ‘reading group’ on nexus analysis (the methodological arm of MDA) which isbringing together scholars from eight different countries across the US and Europe to discuss their work invirtual space in relation to this framework (http://www.discoursehub.fi/events/jyvaskyla-discourse-researchhub/). Internationally, there has been research done in the field of multilingualism and language policy (Hult ,2014; Compton 2014), political discourse (Dunne, 2003; Shroyer, 2004), disability studies (Al Zidjali, 2006),risk communication and management (Jones, 2013), digital literacies (Jones & Hafner, 2012), workplacepractices (Serwe & de Saint-Georges, 2014; de Saint-Georges, forthcoming a, b), identity (Lane, 2010, 2011) toname but a few areas. There is also today a clear strand of research which, following the seminal work ofScollon on the learning of intercultural practices by a one-year old (Scollon, 2001), has taken on MDA in thefield of learning and education with, for example, studies on the nexus of literacies, play and technologies inearly childhood (Wohlwend, 2009a, b, c, 2011, 2013; Wohlwend & Handsfield, 2012), learning in vocationaleducation (de Saint-Georges, forthcoming a, b), writing practices in secondary English Education (Rish, 2011),learning in various informal contexts (Norris, 2011; Jocuns 2007, 2009), international supervision (Soukup &Kordon, 2012), etc.The field of mediated action, with its interest in how mediational means become appropriated andmastered and serve developmental processes, has long resonated with the learning sciences. Here the focus hasbeen not only on learning (Herrenkohl & Mertl, 2011; Herrenkohl & Wertsch, 1999; Polman, 2006), but also ondomains such as transitions (Zittoun 2006), moral functioning (Tappan 2006), identity (Wertsch & Penuel,1995a, 1995b), and historical identity and representation (Wertsch, 2002; Wertsch & O’Connor, 1994).Throughout this body of work, attention has been paid to processes of learning and becoming, and to thecontingency of the appropriation of cultural tools in the production of trajectories (O’Connor & Allen, 2010;Penuel & O’Connor, 2010).As we can see from this short account, MA and MDA are lively, dynamic and growing fields ofinquiry. Despite this growth however, there are no journals or conferences dedicated specifically to theseapproaches, nor real forums to exchange and debate about them. The benefits of such exchanges betweenresearchers are, however, clear. They would allow to debate about epistemological, methodological andtheoretical perspectives in deeper ways. For this, the creation of an international network seemed suited to thetask, and ICLS seems a perfect venue to lay the ground for such a network.Practical OrganizationAudienceWe conceive of the workshop as kind of study group where participants read, listen, analyse, comment, learntogether and build an agenda for research collectively. We welcome scholars at any level (masters and doctoralstudents, post-docs and established researchers) including those who are beginning to explore how an MA/MDAframework can enrich their own understanding of ‘learning and becoming in practice’ as well as those whoICLS 2014 Proceedings1693© ISLSalready have a longer history of research in the learning sciences with one of these frameworks as their startingpoint (or related approaches such as, e.g. cultural-historical activity theory, discourse analysis, actor-networktheory).Pre-conference PreparationTo ensure lively discussions, a few preparation steps are required from prospective attendees.1) Prior to the event, prospective participants are invited to send to Ingrid de Saint-Georges(Ingrid.desaintgeorges@uni.lu) and Kevin O’Connor (kevin.oconnor@Boulder.EDU), a half-pagesummary of their research interests as they relate to the theme of the workshop, including specificationof research focus and level of familiarity with the related frameworks of MA and MDA. Whilepreference will be given to participants who are already working at the interface between MA/MDA (orrelated approaches such as, e.g., cultural-historical activity theory, discourse analysis, actor-networktheory) and the learning sciences, other participants who can show how their research would benefitfrom exploring these two frameworks or who are just curious about it are most welcome too. Thesummary will also enable the organizers to group participants according to their interests for some ofthe workshop activities.2) In addition to this half-page summary, prospective participants will also be sent a short readingpackage as well as a general bibliography to prepare for work together. It will be expected that allattendees have prepared themselves for participation in the workshop through reading these documents.3) If participants so wish, there will be also the possibility to take on a more active role in the workshop,for example, by bringing some data for exploration by the group, or by bringing up some issues andtopics for discussion. In this case, the participants should contact the organizers prior to the workshop(ingrid.desaintgeorges@uni.lu and Kevin.Oconnor@Colorado.EDU) so that we can communicate moreinformation about the specific format this intervention could take.Facilitators and Worskhop OrganizersThe workshop organizers as well as the facilitators who will lead the workshop have all long-term expertise inthe field of Mediated Action and Mediated Discourse Analysis and come from various geographical areas.Andrew Jocuns is a Research Lecturer at Thammasat University in Bangkok, Thailand. His research hasfocused on learning in a variety of contexts including: Balinese Gamelan in the US, engineering students, STEMprofessionals, homebrewers, and sociolinguistics in Indonesian Borneo. Presently he is conducting research onSTEM students in Southeast Asia. His research has used mediated discourse analysis and related theories (e.g.distributed cognition) to identify patterns of informal learning such as the use of participation structures bystudents. Jocuns’ articles have appeared in Semiotica, Mind, Culture, Activity or the Encyclopedia of AppliedLinguistics, among others.Sigrid Norris is Associate-Professor of Communication Studies at Auckland University of Technology in NewZealand. Her current research is in the field of multimodality in everyday life, identity, and learning. She hasbeen active in the field of Mediated Discourse Analysis for the last ten years, developing it further theoreticallyand methodologically, to for example, study the learning of how to smell perfume or the learning of tacitclassroom participation in an art school. She is the author of Multimodality in practice: Investigating theory-inpractice-through-Methodology (2012), Identity in (Inter)action: Introducing Multimodal (Inter)action Analysis(2011), Discourse in Action: Introducing Mediated Discourse Analysis (2005, with R. Jones), AnalyzingMultimodal Interaction: A methodological Framework (2004).Kevin O’Connor is currently Assistant Professor in Educational Psychology and Learning Sciences at theUniversity of Colorado Boulder. His research focuses on communication and learning in a variety of contexts,including engineering education and community organizing. His publications have long drawn on the MediatedAction framework (e.g., Wertsch & O’Connor, 1994) and have used this and closely related approaches to framehis ethnographic and discourse analytic research on learning. He is co-editor of a volume of the Yearbook of theNational Society for the Study of Education on “Learning research as a human science,” and his work has alsobeen published in Mind, Culture, & Activity; Linguistics & Education; Anthropology & Education Quarterly,and the Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science, among others.Ingrid de Saint-Georges is an Associate-Professor in the field of Education and Learning at the University ofLuxembourg. She studies communication, professional development, and learning in different contexts,including work and vocational education. She is an early contributor to the development of Mediated DiscourseAnalysis (see e.g. Scollon & de saint-Georges, 2013), a framework she uses to examine learning in situations ofincreased mobility and diversity. She is the co-author and editor of several books, including (in English):ICLS 2014 Proceedings1694© ISLSMultilingualism and Multimodality: Current Challenges for Educational Studies (2013, with J-J Weber),Multilingualism and Mobility in Europe: Policies and practices (forthcoming 2014, with J.J Weber & K.Horner), Multilingualism: Opportunities and Challenges (forthcoming 2014, with N. Morys, G. Gretsch & C.Kirsch).ReferencesAl Zidjaly, N. (2006). Disability and anticipatory discourse: The interconnectedness of local and global aspectsof talk. Communication & Medicine, 3(2), 101-112.Compton, S. E. (2014). American Sign Language as a heritage language. In T. G. Wiley, J. K. Peyton, D.Christian, S. C. K. Moore, & N. Liu (Eds.), Handbook of heritage, community, and Native Americanlanguages in the United States (pp. 272-286). New York: Routledge and Center for AppliedLinguistics.de Saint-Georges, I. (forthcoming a). Mediated discourse analysis, ‘embodied learning’ and emerging social andprofessional identities. In S. Norris & C. D. Maier. (Eds), Texts, Images, and Interactions: A reader inMultimodality. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.de Saint-Georges (forthcoming b) Language Dynamics in Professional Transition Support. Langage et société.de Saint-Georges, I. (2012) Anticipatory discourse. In C. A. Chappelle (Ed.). The Encyclopedia of AppliedLinguistics (pp 118-124). Malden, Massachusetts: Wiley-Blackwell.Dunne, M. D. (2003) Democracy in Contemporary Egyptian Political Discourse, Amsterdam/Philadelphia: JohnBenjamins.Herrenkohl, L.R., & Mertl, V. (2011). How students come to be, know, and do: A case for a broad view oflearning. Cambridge UK, New York City: Cambridge University Press.Herrenkohl, L. R., & Wertsch, J. V. (1999). The use of cultural tools: Mastery and appropriation. In I. Sigel(Ed.), Development of mental representation: Theories and applications (pp. 415-435). Hillsdale, NJ:Erlbaum.Hult, F. M. (2010). Analysis of language policy discourses across the scales of space and time. InternationalJournal of the Sociology of Language, 202(Mar. 2010), 7-24.Hult, F. M. (2014). Covert bilingualism and symbolic competence: Analytical reflections on negotiatinginsider/outsider positionality in Swedish speech situations. Applied Linguistics, 35(1), 63-81.Jocuns, A. (2007) Semiotics and classroom interaction: Mediated discourse, distributed cognition, and themultimodal semiotics of Maguru Panggul pedagogy in two Balinese Gamelan classrooms in the UnitedStates. Semiotica 164(1/4): 123-151.Jocuns, A. (2009) Participation structures as mediational means: learning Balinese Gamelan in the United Statesthrough Intent Participation, Mediated Discourse, and Distributed Cognition. Mind, Culture andActivity 16(1): 48--63.Jones, R. (2013). Health and risk communication: An applied linguistic perspective. London: Routledge.Jones, R. & Hafner, C. (2012) Understanding digital literacies: A practical approach. London: Routledge.Lane, P. (2009). Identities in action: A nexus analysis of identity construction and language shift. VisualCommunication, 8(4), 449-468.Lane, P. (2010). “We did what we thought was best for our children”: A nexus analysis of language shift in aKven community. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 202(Mar. 2010), 63-78.Norris, S. (2011). Identity in (Inter)action: Introducing Multimodal (Inter)action Analysis. Berlin, Boston: DeGruyter Mouton.Norris, S. (2012). The creation of a community artist in everyday life: Long-duration process and creativeactions. In Jones, R. H. (Ed.) Discourse and creativity (143-164). Harlow, UK: Pearson Education.Norris, S., & Jones, R. (2005). Discourse in action: Introducing mediated discourse analysis. London:Routledge.O’Connor, K., & Allen, A. (2010). Learning as the organizing of social futures. In W.R. Penuel & K.O’Connor (Eds.), Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, 108, 1: Learningresearch as a human science (pp. 160-175).Penuel, W.R., & O’Connor, K. (2010). Learning research as a human science: Old wine in new bottles? W.R.Penuel & K. O’Connor (Eds.), Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, 108, 1:Learning research as a human science (pp. 268-283).Penuel, W. R. & Wertsch, J. V. (1995). Dynamics of negation in the identity politics of cultural Other andcultural self. Culture and Psychology, 1(3), 343-359.Penuel, W. R. & Wertsch, J. V. (1995). Vygotsky and identity formation: A sociocultural approach. EducationalPsychologist, 30(2), 83-92.Polman, J. L. (2006). Mastery and appropriation as means to understand theinterplay of history learning and identity trajectories. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15 (2),221-259ICLS 2014 Proceedings1695© ISLSRish, R. (2011). Engaging adolescents’ interests, literacy practices, and identities: Digital collaborative writingof fantasy fiction in a high school English elective class. Doctoral thesis, The Ohio State University,Columbus, OH.Scollon, R. (2001). Mediated Discourse: The Nexus of Practice, London: Routledge.Scollon, R. (2005). The rhythmic integration of action and discourse: work, the body and the earth. In S. Norris& R. H. Jones (Eds.), Discourse in action: Introduction to mediated discourse analysis (pp. 20-31).London: Routledge.Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. W. (2004). Nexus Analysis: Discourse and the Emerging Internet. New York:Routledge.Scollon, S., & de Saint-Georges, I. (2011). Mediated Discourse Analysis. In J.P Gee & M. Hartford (Eds.), TheRoutledge Handbook of Discourse Analysis (pp. 66-78) London: Routledge.Serwe, S., & I. de Saint-Georges (forthcoming, 2014). “Ohne Glutamat/Without MSG”: Shelf label design in aThai supermarket. In K. Horner, I. de Saint-Georges & J.J Weber (Eds.), Multilingualism and Mobilityin Europe: Policies and Practices (pp. 221-246). Frankfurt: Peter Lang.Shroyer, G. (2004). The presence of the past: enacting time, the nation, and the social self. Essays in Arts andSciences 33(2), 67-84.Soukup, B., & Kordon, K. (2012). ELF in international supervision: a nexus analysis approach. Journal ofEnglish as a Lingua Franca, 1(2), 315-335.Tappan, M. B. (2006). Moral functioning as mediated action. Journal of moral education, 35(1), 1-18.Wertsch, J. W. (1991). Voices of the Mind: A Sociocultural Approach to Mediated Action. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Wertsch, J. W. (1998). Mind as Action. London: Oxford.Wertsch, J. W. (2002). Voices of Collective Remembering. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Wertsch, J.V. & O’Connor, K. (1994). Multivoicedness in historical representation: American college students'accounts of the origins of the U.S. Journal of Narrative and Life History, 4, 295-309.Wohlwend, K. E. (2009a). Early adopters: Playing new literacies and pretending new technologies in printcentric classrooms. Journal of Early Childhood Literacy, 9(2), 119-143.Wohlwend, K. E. (2009b). Damsels in discourse: girls consuming and producing identity texts through DisneyPrincess play. Reading Research Quarterly, 44 (1) 57-83.Wohlwend, K. E. (2009c). Dilemmas and discourses of learning to write: Assessment as a contested site.Language Arts, 86, 341-351.Wohlwend, K. E. (2011). Playing their way into literacies: Reading, writing, and belonging in the earlychildhood classroom. New York: Teachers College Press.Wohlwend, K. E. (2013). Mediated Discourse Analysis: Tracking discourse in action. In P. Albers, T. Holbrook& A. Flint (Eds.). New Methods in Literacy Research (pp. 56-69) London: Routledge.Wohlwend, K. E., & Handsfield, L. (2012). Twinkle, twitter little stars: Tensions and flows in interpreting socialconstructions of the technotoddler. Digital Culture & Education.Available Http:http://www.digitalcultureandeducation.com/uncategorized/dce_1058_wohlwendZittoun, T. (2006). Transitions. Development through symbolic resources. Greenwich (CT): InfoAge.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1696© ISLS