Learning from Self-Explaining Emergent PhenomenaKasia Muldner1, Winslow Burleson1, Michelene T. H. Chi2Arizona State University1Computing, Informatics & Decision Systems Engineering1Learning Sciences Institute, Mary Lou Fulton Teachers College{katarzyna.muldner, winslow.burleson, mtchi}@asu.eduAbstract: To date, relatively little work has explored how students learn about a particularclass of processes, namely emergent ones. The research that has investigated these processeshas primarily employed a case-study methodology. Here, we report on a controlled experiment comparing how students learn about the emergent topic of diffusion from self-explainingvs. from reading. In contrast to a prior study that found self-explanation was not associatedwith learning about emergence, students learned significantly more in the self-explaining condition. To shed light on how different types of self-explanations are related to learning, weanalyze the content of students’ explanations and their association to learning outcomes; wealso present qualitative analysis of students’ misconceptions and how these relate to existingtheories of emergent attributes.IntroductionMany science processes can be classified as being emergent, including diffusion (Chi, Roscoe, Slotta, Roy, &Chase, 2012), crystal growth (Blikstein & Wilensky, 2009), and natural selection (Dickes & Sengupta, 2013).Briefly, in an emergent process many micro-level agents behave according to simple rules to produce a morecomplex, macro-level outcome or pattern (Levy & Wilensky, 2008). In contrast to other “sequential” processeslike the circulatory system, emergent processes correspond to a decentralized system, in that there is no controlling agent directing the behavior of the micro agents (Resnick, 1996). Moreover, in an emergent process, visiblepatterns at a given level (e.g., micro) do not necessarily correspond to patterns at another level (e.g., macro) –for a detailed comparison of emergent and sequential processes, see (Chi et al., 2012). To illustrate emergenceusing diffusion, suppose some blue dye is added to water. The micro-level agents correspond to the dye andwater molecules, and these follow the simple rule of continuous, random motion. The macro-level outcome thatarises from the molecular motion is a flow of the dye into water prior to equilibrium or a stable, unchanginglight blue solution at equilibrium.Given its prevalence in various phenomena, it is paramount that students understand emergent processes (Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006). Unfortunately, emergent concepts are very challenging (Asterhan &Schwarz, 2009; Chi et al., 2012; Meir, Perry, Stal, & Klopfer, 2005). For instance, some students, even at theuniversity level, believe that during diffusion, molecules stop moving at equilibrium because the solution appears to be a uniform, unchanging color (Meir et al., 2005). This misconception suggests that students think thepattern at the micro-level must correspond to the pattern at the macro level, when in fact it can be disjoint foremergent processes. Reasoning connecting the micro and macro levels is also called inter-level reasoning(Blikstein & Wilensky, 2009; Chi et al., 2012), and some propose it is especially challenging for students in thecontext of emergence (Chi et al., 2012).As we describe below, the majority of work exploring learning of emergence has focused on the utilityof computer simulations depicting emergent phenomena, and a methodology corresponding to case studies(Blikstein & Wilensky, 2009; Levy & Wilensky, 2009b). While our work also involves simulations, our focus isinstead on the role of student self-explanations about diffusion and their association with learning outcomes.In general, self-explanation, i.e., the process of explaining and clarifying instructional material to oneself, is highly beneficial for learning (Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989; Fonseca & Chi, 2011;Muldner & Conati, 2010; Nokes, Hausmann, VanLehn, & Gershman, 2011; Renkl, 1997). Since the seminal Chiet al. (1989) study, there has been a great deal of research on self-explanation, for instance to investigate individual differences in self-explanation behaviors (Renkl, 1997), instructional manipulations such as the effect ofintroducing gaps into examples (Atkinson, Renkl, & Merrill, 2003), and the relationship of various types of selfexplanation prompts (Nokes et al., 2011). Moreover, the self-explanation effect has been shown to exist in various kinds of domains, including procedural ones like probability (Atkinson et al., 2003) and physics (Chi et al.,1989) as well as conceptual domains like biology (Gadgil, Nokes-Malach, & Chi, 2012).To date, however, very little work has explored how students learn from self explaining about emergentprocesses, which as we mention above correspond to a specific class of phenomena that students may find especially challenging. To the best of our knowledge, there is only one study that investigated whether selfexplanation helped learning of emergent topics. Specifically, Asterhan and Schwarz (2009) analyzed explanations produced by pairs of students collaboratively learning about natural selection. The results from a correlational analysis showed that self-explanations were not associated with learning in this domain. This finding isICLS 2014 Proceedings847© ISLSsomewhat surprising, since one would expect at least some benefit of self-explanation, and so we believe furtherinvestigation and replication are needed.Thus, the goals of the present study are to investigate the impact of self-explanation for an emergenttopic, as well as to explore (1) the relationship of different types of self-explanations and learning, and (2) theparticular misconceptions students have about emergence as evidenced by their self-explanations.Related WorkThe majority of research exploring student understanding of emergent phenomena has involved qualitative case studies. Levy & Wilensky (2008) present analysis from interviews with 10 students that probe theirunderstanding of emergent features of everyday phenomena, such as a crowd scattering. The focus of the analysis was on student reasoning related to the inter-level processes and how different types of reasoning (e.g., bottom up vs. top down) fostered understanding of the mid-level attributes.Penner (2000) performed a series of case studies to investigate students’ emergent reasoning. Thesecase studies involved groups of students as they engaged in model building activities centered around representing and investigating emergent processes. The analysis includes excerpts of students’ micro- and macro-leveldescriptions. Others have also explored the use of model building exercises, i.e., through simulations, for emergent processes. Typically, these exercises involve having students model the micro-agents using a set of rules(e.g., atoms move randomly), for instance in the NetLogo environment, which allows them to observe the resulting macro-level pattern emerge. Wilensky and Reisman (2006) describe two simulations of biological systemsinvolving the impact of predator-prey on population dynamics and the coordinated behavior of fireflies and howthey can be used to learn about emergence. Blikstein and Wilenski (2009) present case studies of students’ experience with several simulations showing emergent phenomena related to materials science. The paper presentsqualitative description of students’ models and their high level reasoning related to these.Other work on supporting learning about emergent processes with simulated environments has focusedon the design of activities and guided prompts to guide students (Levy & Wilensky, 2009a, 2009b). Theseprompts targeted the macro, micro and inter-level aspects of emergence. The strongest effects in terms of learning outcomes were found for prompts that targeted the micro and inter-level concepts. While informative, thiswork did not gather data on students’ self-explanations.Chi et al. (2012) provided students with micro and macro simulations of emergent processes andprompts for emergent concepts during related activities. No correlation was found between learning and responses to prompts related to the macro simulation, but there was a high correlation between learning and responses to prompts related to the micro simulation – thus, the conjecture was made that students already knewthe macro concepts. As was the case with the Levy and Wilenski work cited above, in this study students werenot prompted to provide verbal explanations, instead being asked to type answers to questions in the learningmaterials at fixed intervals. Written explanations generated in response to text-embedded questions can be considered different from ones verbally produced, since the focus for self-explanations is to try and understand theinstructional materials rather than to generate a coherent answer to a question (e.g., Chi 2000). Moreover, thisstudy did not analyze how self-explanations in general, and specific explanations in particular, did (or did not)enhance learning of emergent concepts.Study: Student Self-Explanations in Emergent DomainsThe goals of the present study were to investigate the following three key aspects:(1) the utility of self-explanation for learning about an emergent domain, compared to reading(2) the nature of students’ self-explanations and which types of explanations are beneficial for learningabout emergence(3) student misconceptions as highlighted by their self-explanationsMaterialsThe study involved the following materials related to diffusion:- two diffusion simulations- a diffusion text- a diffusion pre-test and post-testTo help students understand inter-level concepts, the two simulations showed diffusion occurring on the visiblelevel (macro simulation) and at the molecular level (micro simulation); see the left and right panel of Figure 1for the macro and micro simulation, respectively. The simulations were interactive (for instance, clicking the“start” button in the micro simulation resulted in molecules bouncing and colliding).ICLS 2014 Proceedings848© ISLSFigure 1: Macro level (left) and micro-level (right) simulations of diffusionThe diffusion text was printed on 8 by 11 sheets and was based on text used in earlier studies (Chi etal., 2012). The text described the diffusion process and also included information on emergent features and attributes, but without directly referring to emergence. The first two pages of the text were intended as a warm up,and so discussed non-emergent aspects of diffusion related to the properties of gases, liquids and solids. Wefollowed the procedure used in (Chi, de Leeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher, 1994) to design two versions of the text:one with prompts reminding students to self-explain (prompted text) and one without prompts (unpromptedtext); otherwise, the content of the text was identical between the two conditions. The prompted text included atotal of 52 generic prompts to self-explain (corresponding to “EXPLAIN” prompts, see Tables 2 and 3, top, forexamples; 9 of these prompts were in the warm-up text). These prompts were embedded throughout the text(typically after each sentence or several sentences; whitespace was inserted between a given prompt and thenext batch of text to clearly highlight what needed to be explained). Both versions of the text (prompted, unprompted) concluded with a description of the diffusion simulations and suggestions to use the simulations. Inthe prompted text these suggestions corresponded to 11 specific self-explanation prompts (e.g., “What are themolecules doing during equilibrium?”), while in the unprompted text, the suggestion was an invitation to use thesimulation in free exploration mode.The pre- and post-tests assessed students’ diffusion knowledge and were based on tests used in priorstudies (Chi et al., 2012; Muldner, Lam, & Chi, 2013). The tests included questions that probed understandingof emergent aspects of diffusion at the micro, macro, and inter levels, but without explicitly mentioning emergence. For instance, to assess the inter-level disjoint attribute, one question asked “As the dye diffuses away fromwhere it was originally dropped into the water, can some dye molecules bounce back towards this originalplace?” The pre-test included 25 multiple-choice questions, while the post-test included the same 25 questionsand six additional questions for a total of 29 questions (10 inter-level, 8 micro, 2 macro, and 9 other).ParticipantsThe participants were 42 college students, who participated in the study to fulfill a psychology credit.DesignThe study included one independent variable with two conditions: reading and self-explaining. We used a stratified random sampling procedure based on pre-test performance to equalize prior knowledge between the twoconditions.ProcedureEach session was conducted individually in a private room that included a table and a desktop computer. Students signed the consent form (5 min.), filled in the pre-test (15 min.), and then read the diffusion text (readingcondition) or read and self-explained the diffusion text (self-explaining condition). Students in both conditionswere told to read out loud at their normal pace. Students in the self-explanation condition were also told tofollow the “explain” prompts to explain what the information means to you. For instance, youcan explain what new information does each line provide for you, how does it relate to whatyou’ve already read, does it give you a new insight into your understanding of how diffusionworks, or does it raise a question in your mind. Tell us whatever is going through your mind even if it seems unimportant.ICLS 2014 Proceedings849© ISLSTable 1: Pre-test and post-test mean student performance (N = 42)self-explaining condition (n = 23)reading condition (n = 19)pre-test %47.0%47.4%ANCOVA-adjusted post-test %76.4%68.9%To ensure students in the self-explaining condition followed instructions to explain, they were prompted ifneeded by an experimenter, who sat behind them to avoid interfering with the task. It turned out that as in priorwork (Chi et al., 1994), students rarely needed reminders to self-explain because they spontaneously followedthe prompts that appeared in the text. To control time on task, students in the reading condition were asked toread the text twice, following the procedure in (Chi et al., 1994).For both conditions, the diffusion text was provided on paper, while the diffusion simulations that thelatter part of the text referred to were presented on the desktop computer; students could interact with thesesimulations (e.g.,. pressing the “start” button began the simulation of the diffusion process on the macro or micro scale in the macro and micro simulations, respectively). All sessions were video recorded, and student utterances following the warm-up session in the self-explaining condition were transcribed.Does Self-Explanation Foster Learning of Emergent Topics?To determine if self-explanation fostered learning of emergence over reading, we used an ANCOVA with thepre-test % as the covariate and post-test % as the dependent variable. This analysis showed that overall, studentsperformed significantly better on the post-test in the self-explaining condition as compared to the reading condition (F(1, 39) = 4.98, p = .03, η2 = .086; see Table 1 for details). Thus, in contrast to Asterhan & Schwarz(2009), in our study self-explanation was beneficial for learning of emergent topics.Since one of our primary goals was to gain insight into the relationship between the content of students’self-explanations and learning of emergent topics, for the remainder of the paper we focus on the self-explaininggroup.What Types of Self-Explanations are Associated with Learning?To investigate whether what students explained was associated with learning, we labeled each student selfexplanation in the transcribed protocols as follows (see Table 2 for examples):- macro-level self explanations expressed ideas about the “big picture” visible level of diffusion that onecould see with the naked eye- micro-level self-explanations referred to molecules and/or their interactions- inter-level self-explanations connected micro-level concepts to the visible macro level- other self-explanations related to concentration and miscellaneous topicsTable 2: Excerpt of the diffusion text (top) and examples of corresponding self-explanations (left) and selfexplanation type (right)[Text]: Eventually, the ink molecules are spread evenly throughout the beaker, and the diffusion process appears to have come to an end. [EXPLAIN]Um eventually the whole thing of water will be one colormacro levelIt appears that it's .. it's stopped because it the entire beaker is like the same color there isno more mixing I guessmacro levelSo this is when the dye molecules of eventually collided in every area possible in thecontainer which causes the ink molecules to dispersemicro levelthe molecules are always moving and they are always gonna be sliding past each otherand colliding so I don’t know if diffusion ever comes to an end per semicro levelSo it's all done equilibrium is reached and then they [the molecules] are still moving butyou cant really tell cause it's all the same colorinter levelPretty much spread out the whole thing and once you see the beaker a certain color because the molecules from the ink has evenly divided with the waterinter levelICLS 2014 Proceedings850© ISLSTable 3: Excerpt of the diffusion text (top) and examples of corresponding of paraphrase (left) and paraphrasetype (right)The macro level pattern of diffusion is fairly clear: The initial dark concentration of ink in one area of thebeaker gradually spreads out until the whole beaker becomes evenly – but not as darkly – colored.[EXPLAIN]Um that when you drop the beaker in that’s where the flow of dye starts to goMacro ParaphraseSo from the direction where the dye was dropped or where they dropped the dyeinto the water that is the starting point from where it moves on and then it swirlsaroundMacro ParaphraseAs far as the grain size of the coding, following an explain prompt in the text, students tended to express anexplanation that encapsulated a single, high-level idea. Thus, for the vast majority of cases, the grain size for thecoding was the entire explanation a student provided following such a prompt. If the content of a student’s explanation involved a given level (e.g., micro), then it was coded as such even if the text included a macro-levelidea (e.g., see micro level rows in Table 2). The rationale behind this choice was that unless students made explicit the link between levels, there was no way to objectively identify when they were reasoning in an interlevel fashion.As a starting point, we relied on the definition in (Chi, 2000) and did not differentiate between selfexplanations that were paraphrases vs. ones that included inferences beyond information in the text snippet students read prior to generating the explanation (the latter are referred to self-explanation inferences, SEI (Chi,2000)). Instances not considered self-explanations corresponded to cases where students merely re-read thepassage verbatim, or expressed a fragment that did not include sufficient information to determine a code.If we consider all four categories of explanations (including the other category), there were a total of1087 explanations, or 47.2 on average per student. Since there were a total of 54 prompts after the warm up (43generic and 11 specific prompts), this analysis shows that on average, students responded to the prompts withsome type of self-explanation in the majority of cases.For the reminder of the paper, we focus on the macro/micro/inter-level explanations. Note that thesethree levels are not unique to emergent processes – in fact, Chi et al. (2012) describes how other types of processes also can be characterized by these levels. However, the characterization of emergent processes at eachlevel as well as across levels is unique, as compared to, for instance, sequential processes (for a full description,see Chi et al. (2012)).Students expressed a total of 993 self-explanations related to macro, micro and inter-level concepts,with each student producing on average 43.1 total such explanations. On average per student, inter-level explanations were least common (M = 8.5, SD = 4.5), followed by macro-level explanations (M = 12.9, SD = 4.4),and micro-level explanations (M = 21.7, SD = 3.5). Students generated significantly fewer inter-level explanations than macro-level explanations (paired test t(22) = 2.6, p = 0.01, d = .6) or micro-level explanations (pairedtest t(22) = 12.9, p < 0.01, d = 2.7); students also generated fewer macro-level explanations than micro (pairedtest t(22) = 5.9, p < 0.01, d = 1.2).How were different types of self-explanation (macro, micro, inter-level) associated with learning outcomes? To address this question, we conducted a correlational analysis between each type of explanation andpre- to post-test gains (calculated using the difference between pre-test and post-test, i.e., post-test % - pre-test%). Macro-level explanations were negatively associated with pre- to post-test gains (r = -.46, p = .029), whileboth micro- and inter-level explanations were positively associated with pre- to post-test gains (r = .43, p = .04and r = .44, p = .04, respectively).As we reported above, the post-test did not include many purely macro level questions, and so onepossibility is that we are simply not measuring learning related to these concepts. This conjecture doesn’t explain, however, why macro-explanations may have interfered with learning as suggested by the negative correlation. We propose an alternative interpretation, namely that macro-level self-explanations are straightforward forstudents to generate (as was also found, for instance, by Levy and Wilensky (2009b). This is because macrolevel concepts relate to visible phenomena that students are exposed to in daily activities (e.g., dye swirling in aliquid after it is dropped in), and so likely know about already. This conjecture can be strengthened by investigating the number of correct vs. incorrect explanations generated. This coding confirmed that macro-level explanations are clear-cut compared to the other types of explanations, in that students expressed significantlyfewer incorrect macro-level explanations, as compared to the number of incorrect micro-level explanations(t(22) = 2.6, p = 0.02, d = .6) or incorrect inter-level incorrect explanations (t(22) = 2.8, p = 0.01, d = .6). Thus,by generating explanations about macro-level concepts that they for the most part likely already knew, studentsICLS 2014 Proceedings851© ISLSwere missing opportunities to explain about aspects that they did not know related to micro and inter-level phenomena.Self-Explanation Inferences (SEIs) versus Paraphrase ExplanationsWhile in general there is evidence that self-explanations foster learning, this should be particularly true for explanations that include content that goes over and beyond the text the student read previously to generating theexplanation, i.e., that SEI > SE as far as learning of diffusion is concerned. To address this question in the context of an emergent domain, we labeled each macro/micro/inter-level explanation as follows:- SEI if the explanation contained domain-relevant material over and beyond what was provided inthe text associated with the explanation, and- paraphrase otherwiseTable 2 provides examples of SEIs (content over and beyond what was provided in the text underlined), whileTable 3 provides examples of paraphrase explanations. On average, students expressed the following number ofeach type of SEI explanations: macro (M = 10.2; SD = 4.1); micro (M = 17.1; SD = 4.6), inter-level (M = 8.3;SD = 4.6); for paraphrases explanations, students expressed the following number of each type: macro (M = 2.7;SD = 2.7), micro (M = 4.6; SD = 2.8), inter-level (M = .2; SD = .4). Overall per student, a large proportion ofexplanations were SEIs (on average 81.5%), highlighting that students were constructive in the self-explainingcondition. To see how SEIs vs. paraphrases influenced learning outcomes, we re-ran the correlational analysisfrom the previous section for each type of explanation. As far as the SEIs are concerned, this analysis confirmedour above results related to micro and inter-level explanations: micro and inter-level SEIs were positively associated with pre- to post-test gains (r = .46, p = .03 and r = .42, p = .049, respectively). The macro SEIs were notsignificantly associated with learning (p = .23). As far as the paraphrase explanations are concerned, none werereliably associated with learning, although there was a trend for the macro-level paraphrases being negativelyassociated with pre- to post-test gains (r = -.35, p = .105).Thus, as reported in the above section, while in general micro and inter-level self-explanations were associated with learning, only when students provide additional inferences in their explanation (i.e., an SEI) wasthis association reliable.Do Low and High Gainers Differ in their Self-explanation Patterns?Another way to examine the association between self-explanation and learning is to divide students into low andhigh learners based on pre- to post-test gains, and examine their explanation behaviors. To do so, we took thelow and high tails of the gain distribution, ignoring the middle group of students. The latter was done since thegains were normally distributed and so doing a straight median split did not correspond to a true low/high gainpopulation, i.e., the students around the middle were not truly low or high gainers.When we analyzed self-explanations as a whole, without distinguishing SEIs from paraphrases, wefound that the high-gainers (n = 7) had significantly more inter-level self-explanations than the low gainers (n =6; 12.0 vs. 5.2, respectively, t(11) = 3.1, p = 0.02, d = 1.9) and marginally more micro-level explanations (22.3vs. 18.6, respectively, t(11) = 1.8, p = 0.098, d = 1.1). In contrast, the high gainers had significantly fewermacro-level explanations (10.4 vs. 15.8, t(11) = 2.5, p = .03, d = 1.5). As far as the SEIs, this pattern for themost part held, in that the high gainers had significantly more inter-level SEIs (11.7 vs. 5.0, respectively, t(11) =2.8, p = 0.02, d = 1.7) and more micro-level explanations (18.7 vs. 12.6, respectively, t(11) = 2.2 p = 0.048, d =1.3, respectively); there was a trend that high gainers also had fewer macro SEIs but this did not reach significance. Thus, these results support the correlational analysis above that micro and inter-level explanations areassociated with learning but macro-level explanations may interfere with it.What Kinds of Misconceptions Are Present in Students’ Self Explanations?Prior work has indicated that emergence is a challenging domain. Thus, to gain insight into student misconceptions as expressed by their self-explanations, we checked students’ macro/ micro/ inter-level explanations for thepresence of misconceptions. Students generated a total of 96 incorrect ideas in their explanations; on average perstudent, 0.68 incorrect macro-level ideas, 1.95 incorrect micro-level ideas and 1.59 incorrect inter-level ideas.However, if we look at the proportion of misconceptions, on average per student, there was a similar proportionof micro and inter-level misconceptions (on average, 39.6% vs. 40.1%), while the proportion of macro misconceptions was lower (on average, 20.3%).Some of misconceptions pertained to students’ incorrect belief that molecular motion is not random(randomness is one of the characterizing features of the agents corresponding to an emergent process (Chi et al.,2012)). For instance, after reading that a water molecule goes to the right side, a student expressed that “I’mguessing a water molecule goes to the other side”, i.e., that the molecules exchange places to maintain equilibrium. Along a similar vein, another student expressed that “as one is crossing over, the other ones start shootingICLS 2014 Proceedings852© ISLSover too because there is not enough space for them in that same spot” - this was said despite the fact he waslooking at the micro simulation, which clearly portrayed random motion of the molecules.Another feature of emergent processes is that the agents at the micro level do not intend to cause themacro level pattern (Chi et al., 2012), and that in general, none of the agents embody “intention”. As expected,some students expressed explanations contradicting this fact, related to all three levels. For instance, one studentexplained that “at micro level again molecules are just - water molecules are just trying to grab the ink molecules and …. ink molecules are trying to grab the water molecules”. Other students explained that the “dyemolecules just go to the other side trying to find space” or that a molecule “crosses to the other side becausethere is a lower concentration of dye molecules on that side”. As another example, a student also generated aninter-level explanation that “once equilibrium has been reached the visible changes at the macro level don’tseem to change but suggesting that um at the micro level the molecules are constantly in motion which I'mguessing is to maintain that equilibrium”.Yet another feature of emergence is that the micro and macro patterns can be disjoint (Chi et al., 2012).However, some students explained that the molecules followed the macro pattern, e.g., “it shows how the dyemolecules are slowly moving to the left side where the water was an the water molecules are slowly moving tothe right side where the dye was”, and that at equilibrium, “they are still moving but they don’t really move thatmuch any more cause the color is equally distributed”. Another student echoed this sentiment explaining that“after a while it makes equilibrium and they don’t move that much”.Other students thought that only one type of agent was responsible for the macro pattern when in factall agents are (Chi et al., 2012), e.g., “it seems that the dye molecules are responsible for the flow pattern because they are the ones diffusion to the left side which contains the water molecules”. We also saw evidence ofso-called inter-level slippage (Blikstein & Wilensky, 2009), when students expressed explanations inappropriately attributing features of a given level to another. For instance, during diffusion, the molecules move randomly, but at the visible macro level, there is a predictable pattern where the dye spreads from high to low concentration. However, students would attribute the random attribute to the macro level, e.g., “it's a liquid so it'sgoing in random directions”. Another student reasoned in the opposite direction, by saying that “in the microlevel the elements moving from the high concentration to the low concentrated part”. Yet another explanationconcluded that the molecules “are gonna diffuse as it says and it becomes one particle instead of two”, whichmay be an indication of attributing the uniform color of the water at equilibrium to the molecules somehowcombining into one type of molecule. Along a similar vein, another student explained that “eventually … all themolecules are the same color”.Discussion and Future WorkIn this study, we focused on students’ verbally-expressed self-explanations in an emergent domain. In contrastto prior work (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2009), we found that self-explaining was beneficial, more so than reading.One possible explanation for this difference in results between our and prior work may relate to the context, inthat in our study, students worked alone, as opposed to the Asterhan and Schwarz study where students workedcollaboratively (and so other constructs that were analyzed, like argumentation moves, may have overshadowedexplanation effects). We do acknowledge that only the students in the self-explaining condition had specificprompts (related to the simulation), which may have had an especially beneficial effect. However, these types ofprompts corresponded to about one quarter of the total prompts (i.e., the majority of the prompts were generic inthe self-explaining condition), and so were unlikely to account for the majority of the explaining benefit.Having determined that self-explanation is more beneficial than reading, we then focused on analyzinghow the content of students’ explanations related to their learning outcomes. We found that only micro and inter-level explanations were associated with learning. Differences between low and high gaining students mirrored this pattern, in that the high gainers preferred to generate explanations related to micro and inter-levelconcepts, while low gainers preferred generating macro-level explanations. This highlights that the types ofexplanations students generated were driven by individual differences instead of merely by the text studentswere reading. In a sense, the low gainers may have preferred to invest less effort and so deferred to explanationsthat were easier to produce (as is suggested by the lower error rate for the macro explanations, as compared tothe micro and inter-level ones). Other work in non-emergent domains has also shown that low gaining studentsprefer to engage in unproductive behaviors, such as guessing and checking (Baker, Corbett, Koedinger, &Wagner, 2004), since these require less cognitive effort than trying to understanding the underlying domain.Our work suggests that a fruitful future avenue for supporting emergent learning from self-explanationcorresponds to encouraging students to generate micro and inter-level explanations, for instance via promptsembedded in digital environments. An open question, however, is whether in order to fully understand emergence, students need to acquire the necessary emergent schemas, and so require schema training, as proposed in(Chi et al., 2012). Others propose that students’ exposure to emergent concepts through guided interventionsmay be sufficient (Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006). These avenues await future research.ICLS 2014 Proceedings853© ISLSReferencesAsterhan, C. S. C., & Schwarz, B. B. (2009). The role of argumentation and explanation in conceptual change:Indications from protocol analyses of peer-to-peer dialogue. Cognitive Science, 33, 373-399.Atkinson, R. K., Renkl, A., & Merrill, M. M. (2003). Transitioning from studying examples to solvingproblems: Effects of self-explanation prompts and fading worked-out steps. Journal of EducationalPsychology, 95(4), 774-783.Baker, R., Corbett, A., Koedinger, K., & Wagner, A. (2004). Off-task behavior in the cognitive tutor classroom:when students “game the system”. In Proc. of SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in ComputingSystems (CHI’04), 383–390.Blikstein, P., & Wilensky, U. (2009). An Atom is Known by the Company it Keeps: A Constructionist LearningEnvironment for Materials Science Using Agent-Based Modeling. International Journal of Computersfor Mathematical Learning, 14(2), 81-119.Chi, M. T. H. (2000). Self-explaining expository texts: The dual processes of generating inferences andrepairing mental models. In R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in Instructional Psychology (pp. 161-238).Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How studentsstudy and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive science, 13(2), 145-182.Chi, M. T. H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M. H., & LaVancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improvesunderstanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.Chi, M. T. H., Roscoe, R., Slotta, J., Roy, M., & Chase, C. (2012). Misconceived Causal Explanations forEmergent Processes. Cognitive science, 36(1), 1-61.Dickes, A., & Sengupta, P. (2013). Learning Natural Selection in 4th Grade with Multi-Agent-BasedComputational Models. Research in Science Education, 43(3), 921-953.Fonseca, B., & Chi, M. T. H. (2011). The self-explanation effect: A constructive learning activity. In R. Mayer& P. Alexander (Eds.), The Handbook of Research on Learning and Instruction: Routledge Press.Gadgil, S., Nokes-Malach, T. J., & Chi, M. T. H. (2012). Effectiveness of holistic mental model confrontation indriving conceptual change. Learning and Instruction, 22(1), 47-61.Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importanceand implications for the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 11-34.Levy, S., & Wilensky, U. (2009a). Crossing Levels and Representations: The Connected Chemistry (CC1)Curriculum. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 18(3), 224-242.Levy, S., & Wilensky, U. (2009b). Students' Learning with the Connected Chemistry (CC1) Curriculum:Navigating the Complexities of the Particulate World. Journal of Science Education and Technology,18(3), 243-254.Levy, S. T., & Wilensky, U. (2008). Inventing a “Mid-level” to make ends meet: Reasoning between the levelsof complexity. Cognition and Instruction, 26(1), 1-47.Meir, E., Perry, J., Stal, D., & Klopfer, E. (2005). How effective are simulated molecular-level experiments forteaching diffusion and osmosis? Cell Biology Education, 4, 235–248.Muldner, K., & Conati, C. (2010). Scaffolding Meta-Cognitive Skills for Effective Analogical Problem Solvingvia Tailored Example Selection. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Education, 20(2),99-136.Muldner, K., Lam, R., & Chi, M. T. H. (2013). Comparing Learning from Human Tutoring and from Observing.Journal of Educational Psychology, Advanced online publication. 18 pages.Nokes, T., Hausmann, R. M., VanLehn, K., & Gershman, S. (2011). Testing the instructional fit hypothesis: thecase of self-explanation prompts. Instructional Science, 39(5), 645-666.Penner, D. E. (2000). Explaining systems: Investigating middle school students' understanding of emergentphenomena. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 37(8), 784-806.Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from Worked-Out Examples: A Study on Individual Differences. Cognitive science,21(1), 1-29.Resnick, M. (1996). Beyond the centralized mindset. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(1), 22.Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a Wolf, a Sheep or a Firefly: Learning Biology throughConstructing and Testing Computational Theories -- an Embodied Modeling Approach. Cognition andInstruction, 24(2), 171-209.AcknowledgementsThe authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful suggestions. This research was supported by agrant from the Spencer Foundation (200800196).ICLS 2014 Proceedings854© ISLS