“Case n’ Point”:Discovering Learning in the NonceTimothy Koschmann, Southern Illinois University, Dept. of Medical Education, tkoschmann@siumed.eduAlan Zemel, University at Albany, Dept. of Communication, azemel@albany.eduMichael Neumeister, Southern Illinois University, Dept. of Surgery, mneumeister@siumed.eduAbstract: We present a single-case analysis of the taking of a stitch within a surgicalprocedure. All work carried out in the OR of a teaching hospital is held to exacting standardsand scrutinized at all points regarding its adequacy. We examine how this kind of assessmentis carried out with respect to a particular stitch taken by a surgeon-in-training in the course ofa long and complex surgery. Our analysis offers an alternate way of talking about learning,treating it as an occasioned and interactional phenomenon. Learning, by this view, representsa special kind of performance done [1] publicly [2] for assessment and [3] with a displayedorientation to the next-time through. Implications for research in the learning sciences aredeveloped.Ways of Considering LearningA father assists his daughter who is attempting to ride a bicycle on a playground. He encourages her saying,“It’s okay, honey, you’re learning.” In another setting, an adult who is in the process of acquiring a secondlanguage engages in an exchange with a native speaker and says to himself, “I’m really learning this language!”Our interests are in ways that the term learning gets employed in these situations. What about the child’sbehavior in the first instance makes it recognizably learning? In the second, what is the adult doing when hesays that he is learning? Is it just, in both cases, that they seem to be getting better at X or are they actuallydoing something when they say they are learning?Psychologists talk about learning in terms of change over time. A classic definition was provided byHilgard and Bower (1966) who stipulated:Learning is the process by which an activity originates or is changed through reacting to anencountered situation, provided that the characteristics of the change in activity cannot beexplained on the basis of native response tendencies, maturation, or temporary states of theorganism (e.g., fatigue, drugs, etc.) (p. 2)Though much has been written since about how learning might be theorized (see Koschmann [2011]for a more detailed discussion of contemporary theories of learning), most current formulations conform to thisdefinition at least to the extent they require the detection of change across situations. They may differregarding how to characterize the changes, but some sort of change across situations appears to be criterial.Detection requires a “same-but-different analysis” (Koschmann, 2013) on the part of the observer, in that, inorder to register as learning, the activity can't be so radically changed that it is no longer recognizable as what itis (i.e., maze running, doing maths, speaking French). Given this orientation to recognizable change,measurement becomes a preeminent concern. Educational psychologists, from Thorndike on forward, havedesigned their experiments such that different instructional regimens serve as treatment variables andperformance measures serve as the dependent variable. But, operating under this paradigm, learning becomesdoubly “occult” (Koschmann, 2002)"it cannot be seen on any particular occasion and it can never be observeddirectly. It is only known through its effects and it is only observable through the test instrument.The question we would like to raise here is whether or not it might be feasible to treat learning as aconcrete matter, as something available in the moment. Is it, in other words, investigatable as an occasionedmatter? Is the little girl on the bike doing something that is recognizably and accountably learning? Can we, asin the example of the adult L2 learner, recognize learning when we are doing it? If we can answer thesequestions in the affirmative, it would suggest that psychology's formal definition of learning may not be the onlyway in which the phenomenon can be understood, that there are ways of recognizing learning as it is beingproduced. But this then opens into a larger question of just how this gets done and that is the question thatmotivates the current study. When complete, we would like to be able to say something about our commonsense methods for recognizing and displaying learning. At the same time, we would like to be able to saysomething about how learning, so understood, is related to instruction. We see these inquiries as closelyintertwined with the conference theme of “Learning and Becoming in Practice.”ICLS 2014 Proceedings551© ISLSAnalysisOne might expect the operating room (OR) of a teaching hospital to be a “perspicuous” (Garfinkel, 2002, p.181) setting for exploring how learning and instruction are done in situ. Here, a continuous supply ofnewcomers cycle through, leaving the program as certified practitioners. All work carried out in the OR is heldto exacting standards and is carefully scrutinized regarding its adequacy. But, it is essential, for the purposes oftraining, to provide opportunities for trainees (i.e., surgical residents) to attempt technical elements of theprocedure. These two, sometimes conflicting, agendas must somehow both be satisfied, but in a way thatensures that the patient receives the best possible care. Opportunities for practice can only be afforded if theelements fall within the present capabilities of the trainee and responsibility for making this determination restswith the supervising surgeon, the attending. Displaying and recognizing developing capacities, as a result, areorganizational necessities within this environment.PreliminariesThe study utilizes recordings from the SIU Surgical Education Video Corpus, a collection of recordingsgathered over a dozen years at several surgical training sites. (1) We will present here a single-case analysisfocusing on a fragment of interaction that occurred within a particular surgical procedure. The procedure was aMastectomy and Free-Flap Breast Reconstruction. It required over nine hours to complete and involved threesurgical teams. We will focus specifically on a single exchange during a critical part of the breast reconstructionbetween ATT, a highly-experienced plastic surgeon, and RES, an upper-level surgeon-in-training.Figure 1. RES inserts the needle in the proximal vessel.ICLS 2014 Proceedings552© ISLSFigure 2. Curved needle grasped in a needle-holder.In a free-flap procedure, the missing breast is reconstructed from tissue harvested from some other partof the patient’s body, in this case the patient’s belly. The transplanted tissue is referred to as the “flap” and itsvascular bundle is referred to as the “flap pedicle.” The most technically difficult part of a free-flap procedure isto re-connect the blood supply to and from the transplanted flap. The joining of two vessels is referred to as a‘vascular anastomosis’. Two anastomoses are required in a TRAM Free-Flap procedure, one to re-connect theprimary artery and the other to re-connect the vein, known respectively as the arterio-arterial (A-A) and theveno-venous (V-V) anastomoses. An anastomosis of two vessels is formed by making a series of stitches,enough to ensure that there are no visible gaps and that a tight seal is established. In the surgery observed, adozen sutures were required to complete the A-A anastomosis. Our analysis will focus on the production of thefirst.“Case ‘n Point”As we join the scene, ATT and RES stand on opposite sides of the operating table. A two-person, stereomicroscope is suspended over the table between them. Some vascular surgery can be done with minimalmagnification, but the vessels involved in a free-flap anastomosis are relatively small and microsurgicaltechnique must be employed. Because of the diminutive size of the structures with which they are working,everything under the microscope is manipulated using specialized instruments. A common tool is a kind offorceps resembling a long-handled tweezers referred to colloquially as “pick-ups.” The surgeons must steadytheir hands by bracing them and resting them on the patient’s body. As shown in Figure 1, both surgeons workwith a tool in each hand. Appendix A represents the talk and some of the visible action that took place duringthe production of the first and second sutures of the A-A anastomosis. It was prepared using the standardtranscription conventions of Conversation Analysis (CA). (2) The transcribed segment occurs shortly after thecompletion of the V-V anastomosis which was constructed by ATT with RES assisting.Producing serviceable sutures is one of the first skills acquired by a surgeon. There are many kinds, thesimplest being the interrupted suture. The procedure for making one involves hooking a curved needle throughthe respective edges of the two sections of tissue to be joined or “approximated.” For an instrument tie, theneedle is held using a special-purpose needle holder (see Figure 1). “Taking a bite” with a needle holder is atwo-step process (Anderson & Romfh, 1980). The needle-holder is commonly clamped to the middle of theneedle, so when the needle is inserted, it can only be pushed to this point. It must then be released and pulledthrough from the opposite side. This is repeated for the second piece of tissue, the one to be approximated to thefirst. Having pulled the needle through both sections, the trailing segment of suture becomes the working end forknot-tying purposes, while the thread attached to the needle becomes the standing end. They are joined using a“surgeon’s knot”, basically a modified square knot. It consists of a loop of fixed perimeter and two or more“throws” or wrappings of the loose ends (Edlich, 2008). The suture is completed by snipping off the free ends or“ears” of the joining strand.As the fragment begins, we find RES issuing a directive to the scrub nurse to provide a needle-holderloaded with a needle and 9-0 suture. Unless otherwise specified, when an instrument is requested, the personICLS 2014 Proceedings553© ISLSissuing the request is the expected recipient and that is the case here. By calling for the needle-holder, RESpositions himself as the party responsible for performing the next item of business, the joining of the patient’struncated internal mammary artery to the dissected artery within the flap pedicle. The two surgeons individuallyprepare for the joint task ahead of them—ATT readying the vessel ends and RES organizing the needle withsuture attached. The vessels must be lifted and supported while the stitches are being taken. Also, tosuccessfully and precisely place the needle, the artery wall must be supported from the other side. As assistant,all of this work falls to ATT. As they begin, he inserts and expands a pick-up inside the distal (i.e., on the flapside of the finished anastomosis) vessel (lines 6-7), giving RES better control of the needle placement. RESpushes the needle halfway through the arterial wall (lines 8-9), releases the needle-holder, and then re-uses it todraw the needle the rest of the way through (lines 10-11).Next, a decision must be made about where to have the suture pass through the other, the proximal,vessel. This planning work takes the form of an insertion sequence embedded within the unfolding project toproduce the first stitch. Misalignment of the two segments could lead to twisting of the anastomosis that mightproduce problems later. RES consults ATT before proceeding (l. 13). His query comes with a candidate answerembedded, displaying his ability to independently make the necessary judgment. It is accompanied by a swipinggesture performed with the needle (lines 14-15). The gesture, passing over the lower lip of the artery, isprecisely coordinated with his enunciation of “that’s” (cf., Hindmarsh & Heath, 2000). ATT first stretches thedistal segment to line it up with the proximal. The movement serves both as a visual test of alignment and as amediated point (lines 18-19). RES then proceeds to insert the needle at the identified position.Having come to concordance on where the needle insertion should be made, RES proceeds, but there is anotherquestion about placement and this one pertains to how far back from the tissue edge the needle should be set.This judgment RES makes without consultation (l. 21). Immediately after RES sets the needle in the second(proximal) vessel, ATT issues a double directive pertaining to [1] the next stitch (“Take the next one biggerbites”) and [2] the needle set or “bite” just accomplished (“take tha’ one (0.6) j’s a little bit bigger”). (3) Thelatter is produced without an accompanying gesture.The attending’s turn begins with “Take the next one.” Though what follows pertains to the current bite(“tha’ one”), RES may only be attending to the first part. Before ATT’s turn is complete, RES proceeds to pullthe needle through the proximal segment (l. 23) before issuing a receipt token (l. 27) to ATT’s eventuallycompleted turn.His receipt is ambiguous—is he responding to the first directive, the second or both? Rather thanimmediately withdrawing the needle and repositioning it, he draws up on the suture, tugging the two arterysegments together (lines 29-30). This constitutes a practical test of the suture in progress — both with regard toits strength and the alignment of the two segments. Unfortunately, when tension is placed on the suture thesecond bite fails (l. 31). ATT registers the problem using a non-lexical expression of dismay (l. 32). RES’s reply(l. 34) relates the problem to the issue previously raised by ATT.Instructing and Learning in InteractionWhat is it about this brief fragment that offers an impression of instruction going on? What about it suggests thepossibility of learning? In a now classic paper on the nature of instructional talk, Mehan (1979) offered twohypothetical exchanges, one that went like this:Speaker A: What time is it, Denise?Speaker B: 2:30Speaker A: Thank you, Denise.and another that went like this:Speaker A: What time is it, Denise?Speaker B: 2:30Speaker A: Very good, Denise.The two sequences differ only in their third turns. In the first, we have a receipt and acknowledgement of theinformation offered, in the second, an evaluation of the information provided, suggesting in Mehan’s terms thatthe question had a “known answer.” The third turn in this way produces what came before it as an assessable(and potentially correctable) performance. But it does more—it serves to establish what will count asaccountably correct performance. (4) This, then, becomes, what we have referred to elsewhere (Zemel &Koschmann, in press) as, a “learnable.” At the same time, it assigns different epistemic roles to the parties,establishing one as knowledgeable with respect to the matter in question (the instructor), the other as standing inneed of instruction (the instructee). These things are the earmarks of an instructional organization.ICLS 2014 Proceedings554© ISLSWe can see a semblance of this in the analyzed fragment. The functional equivalent of the instructor’sthird turn can be found in ATT’s double directive begun in l. 22 and completed in l. 25. Coming directly afterthe insertion of the needle in the proximal vessel, the attending’s second directive calls for a correction to beimplemented by RES. Other-correction is usually dispreferred in non-instructional talk (Schegloff, Jefferson, &Sacks, 1977) and the presence of correction here is part of what gives this an instructional character. Thiscorrection-initiation in this particular position accomplishes exactly the things we described with respect toMehan’s “What time is it, Denise?” example— it positions the parties in certain epistemic roles and produces,for current purposes, a normative order for bite setting. (5) Strictly speaking, it has some differences from theMehan example, as well. Mehan’s example involves positive assessment in the third turn, where here we have anegative assessment. In the classroom, we might find direct correction in the third turn rather than correctioninitiation (but see McHoul, 1990). Nonetheless, we have no trouble recognizing this sequence as instructional.Indeed, it is more than instructional, it can be heard as a form of caution, though what it is cautioning against isleft to the recipient to work out.But if we see instruction here, do we also see learning? By ‘learning’, of course, we are referring not tothe operationalized construct employed by educational psychologists, nor are we talking about some kind ofhypothesized mental event. We are orienting instead to something that can be seen and heard within theparticipants’ unfolding interaction. The instructional sequence consists of an elaborated performance begun at l.8 and continued to l. 21 carried out with considerable assistance from ATT. After ATT’s appraisal at lines 22and 25, RES supplies a nominal uptake token (l. 27), but this, at best, represents an avowal of understanding, nota demonstration. Indeed, he does not make an immediate move to correct the faulty needle placement in theproximal segment. The subsequent failure of the stitch, in effect, serves as its own practical assessment. We seethe sequence produced as learning with RES’s “Case n’ point” (l. 34). In accounting for their unfolding work injust this way, he links the failure of the stitch to ATT’s prior caution. He formulates their current situation as acase of a stitch production in which one of the bites allowed too little cuff and, as a consequence, failed. In away that his earlier receipt token (l. 27) did not, this formulation concretely demonstrates his understanding ofthe ATT’s warning and “witnessably” (Rawls, 2002, p. 51FN) produces this as a learning sequence. Like theinstances of instruction produced earlier, learning also entails assessment, but in this case it is self-appraisal bythe learner that is critical, rather than other-assessment (and correction initiation) by the instructor. It is RES’streatment of the local occurrence as documentary evidence of a general principle, i.e. as a “case,” thataccomplishes an orientation to ‘a next time through’. In this way, our analysis reveals a different way ofthinking about learning as an occasioned and interactional phenomenon. It represents a special form ofperformance done [1] publically [2] for assessment and [3] with a displayed orientation to the next-time through.Discovering Learning in the NonceJust as Wittgenstein (1958a, 1958b) used posed examples as vehicles for exploring particular philosophicalquestions, we can utilize the analyzed episode as a “propaedeutic case” (Garfinkel, 2002, p. 75) for thinkingthrough what we take learning to be. Our analysis makes two important contributions in this regard. First, theThorndikean tradition in educational psychology rests on the presumption that learning cannot be seen, that it isan “occult” phenomenon (Koschmann, 2002). With this analysis we demonstrate that it can in fact be observedin the course of its production, at least within this attested example. This is a significant finding.Second, we saw in this analyzed example something interesting about the relationship betweeninstruction and learning. While it is often assumed that one brings about the other, we see in this episode that thepractices whereby learning is produced can, in at least some cases, be displaced from the practices wherebyinstruction is produced. This is not to suggest that the two forms of action are independent. Indeed, in the caseanalyzed, RES’s ‘learning’ displayed his appreciation of the matter that he and ATT had jointly produced as‘learnable’ within the instructional sequence. So the learning was sequentially tied to the instruction that camebefore, though the practices through which the instruction was produced were analyzably distinct from thosethat constituted the learning. That the two can be examined separately is a special feature of instances ofinstruction and learning like the one presented here.Though our findings call into question a basic presupposition of the Thorndikean program, we wouldnot like to suggest that the program itself is thereby rendered invalid or dismiss its accomplishments out-ofhand. Thorndike sought to put the study of learning on a scientific footing and, to do so, he imposed certainrequirements on how the phenomenon could be approached. He believed that learning was inherently tied toassessment. He was, in this way, appealing to a common sense understanding of what it means to learnsomething, that we often impose checks or tests on ourselves and others to see whether learning has occurred. Inour analysis we too found that appraisal and assessment are integral to both learning and instruction when theyare studied in unfolding interaction. So assessment in some sense appears to be key to how we understandlearning in all cases, but we may differ in terms of where we proceed from there. One part of the belief structurethat produces learning as occult, is the belief that learning is only appreciable as change over time. Again, thisappeals to our everyday sense of what it means to learn, but at the cost of making it impossible to locate theICLS 2014 Proceedings555© ISLSphenomenon within actual unfolding conduct. In the surgical procedure from which the analyzed excerpt came,it would have been possible to examine RES’s subsequent stitches for evidence that he had ‘learned’ from the“Bigger bites” lesson. Such an analysis would not necessarily differ from the ways in which we sometimesapply the term ‘learning’ in everyday circumstances. Both approaches require a “same-but-different analysis”(Koschmann, 2013). But we clearly need more empirical research into how these different conceptualizations,learning-as-change-over-time and learning-as-occasioned, are related.Historically, educational research has advanced by axiomatizing learning, by stipulating from the outsetwhat learning might be. We are not taking issue specifically with any of these formulations, but are insteadcalling into question this general way of doing business. If we are to achieve an empirical science of learning,ought that not engender some foundational inquiry into its central phenomenon, into the nature of learningitself? It is essential within any scientific enterprise to strike agreements pertaining to what it is that we areundertaking to study. But when it comes to learning, we seem to be locked into endless cycles of definitionalpropagation. Worse, we have, at least in some cases, adopted definitions that render the phenomenon of interestoff limits to direct study. The current paper represents an effort to depart from this tradition. It could becharacterized as an inquiry into what people do when they describe themselves as learning. Rather thanstipulating a priori what it might be for the purposes of our investigation, we have sought to locate it within ourempirical materials. We have taken it up as an endogenous matter and have sought to return it to the site of itsproduction. In so doing, a whole new world has opened before us, one ripe for further exploration.Endnotes(1) Signed consent to record a surgical procedure is sought from the patient upon admission to the hospital. Advanceconsent is secured from all other participants (i.e., attendings, fellows, residents, medical students, staff) prior torecording in the OR. The consent forms for the participants and patients are associated with a collection protocolapproved by the institutional review board (IRB). For purposes of confidentiality, recording is only begun after thepatient has been completely draped. Also, all proper references (e.g., patient names, names of practitioners andinstitutions) appearing on the recording are redacted prior to study. To actually do research with the materials in thecorpus, investigators must submit a second protocol, a use protocol, with the local IRB.(2) The full set of conventions is described in Jefferson (2004). In brief, special brackets are used to mark the onset ofoverlap between transcribed elements (i.e., turns at talk or other transcribed conduct). Numbers enclosed in singleparentheses represent periods of silence measured to a tenth of a second. Standard punctuation marks such as periodsand question marks are used to denote delivery with falling (or rising) intonation. Colons are used to display soundstretching. Text enclosed between degree signs represents talk delivered at diminished volume. Annotations supplied bythe transcriber are enclosed in double parentheses. These are most often used to describe visible conduct occurring inconjunction with the talk. The column appearing on the left side of the transcript presents the times, measured in hours,minutes, seconds, and frames, at which the actions, either talk or embodied conduct, were initiated. Line numbers areadded on the far left to simplify reference in the text.(3) Anderson and Romfh (1980) write:A minor well-conceived expansion of vocabulary will allow a surgeon to communicate with his helperswith less misunderstanding. It is an ambiguous instruction, for example, to tell an assistant placing a stitchto “take a bigger bite.” Such a request could mean: make more progress between stitches; make a widercuff; or take a thicker cuff of tissue. Planning a vocabulary that will allow you to communicate by nonambiguous, specific instructions will greatly facilitate coordination between surgeons and assistants. (pp.178-179)It would appear that surgeons must struggle, just as we as analysts do, to find the right words to describe these practicalmatters.(4) “What these direct instructional sequences yield, and what they are posed to yield, is something like accountably correctanswers, and, by implication, knowledge and competence” (Macbeth, 2004, p. 704).(5) It is important to note that it is not simple assessment that marks an exchange as recognizably instructional, but ratherassessment coming on the heels of an assessable performance, the assessment and the assessable performance beingreflexively related. It should also be noted that we are not claiming that this is only way in which instruction can beenacted. There may be and likely are any number of other organizations yet to be uncovered and documented.ReferencesAnderson, R. M., & Romfh, R. F. (1980). Technique in the use of surgical tools. New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts.Edlich, R. F. (2008). Surgical knot tying manual (3rd ed.). Norwalk, CT: Covidien AG.Garfinkel, H. (2002). Ethnomethodology's program: Working out Durkheim's aphorism. Lanham, MD: Rowman& Littlefield.Hilgard, E. R., & Bower, G. (1966). Theories of learning (3rd ed.). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.Hindmarsh, J., & Heath, C. (2000). Embodied reference: A study of deixis in workplace interaction. Journal ofPragmatics, 32, 1855-1878.ICLS 2014 Proceedings556© ISLSJefferson, G. (2004). Glossary of transcript symbols with an introduction. In G. Lerner (Ed.), Conversationanalysis: Studies from the first generation (pp. 13-31). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John BenjaminsPublishing.Koschmann, T. (2002). Dewey's critique of Thorndike's behaviorism. Paper presented at the AmericanEducational Research Association, New Orleans, LA.Koschmann, T. (2011). Theorizing practice. In T. Koschmann (Ed.), Theories of learning and studies ofinstructional practice (pp. 3-17). New York: Springer.Koschmann, T. (2013). Conversation analysis and learning in interaction. In C. A. Chapelle (Ed.), Theencyclopedia of applied linguistics (pp. 1038–1043). Oxford, U.K.: Wiley-Blackwell.Macbeth, D. (2004). The relevance of repair for classroom correction. Language and Society, 33, 703-736.McHoul, A. (1990). The organization of repair in classroom talk. Language and Society, 19, 349-377.Mehan, H. (1979). "What time is it, Denise?" Asking known information questions in classroom discourse.Theory into Practice, 18, 285-294.Rawls, A. W. (2002). Editor's introduction to Harold Garfinkel's Ethnomethology's program: Working outDurkheim's aphorism (pp. 1-64). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.Schegloff, E., Jefferson, G., & Sacks, H. (1977). The preference for self-correction in the organization of repairin conversation. Language, 53, 361-382.Wittgenstein, L. (1958a). The Blue and Brown Books. New York: Harper & Row.Wittgenstein, L. (1958b). Philosophical investigations (G. E. M. Anscombe, Trans. 2nd ed.). Malden, MA:Blackwell.Zemel, A., & Koschmann, T. (forth.). “Put your fingers in there”: Learnability and instructed experience.Discourse Studies.ICLS 2014 Proceedings557© ISLSAppendix AExcerpt 1: First stitch (#04-010)12345678910111213141516171819202122232425262728293031323334353608:06:27;07 RES:08:06:28;1808:06:53;0408:07:13;21 ATT:08:07:31;2408:07:32;2508:07:41;1008:07:48;2608:07:54;07 RES:08:07:54:1208:07:55;26 ATT:08:07:57;1008:07:59;0908:08:07;1508:08:11;28 ATT:08:08:12;2108:08:14:00 ATT:08:08:15;1108:08:15;23 RES:08:08:16;0008:08:16;1408:08:16;2708:08:17;17 ATT:08:08:17;2408:08:18;19 RES:08:08:19;1508:08:20;26ICLS 2014 ProceedingsI’ll take the nine oh(45.1)((ATT organizes the distal artery segment using pickups in his r. and l. hand))°°u:::h°°((ATT inserts pick-up into distal segment opening itin preparation for receiving the needle))((RES inserts needle through distal segment usingneedle-holder in r. hand))((RES pulls needle through distal segment withneedle-holder))((RES loads needle in needle-holder))I’think ⎡that’s about the bottom don’t you?⎣((RES swipes needle along lower lip ofproximal segment))I think that’s pretty close to being yea::h right(0.6) ⎡right (0.2) ther::e⎣ ((ATT gestures with stretched end of thedistal segment))(13.0)((RES inserts needle into the proximal vessel))Take the next one ⎡bigger bites and take tha’one =⎣ ((RES pulls needle through withpick-up))= (0.6) j’s a little bit bigger(0.4)Kay.(1.6)((RES tightens suture, drawing the two artery endstogether))((suture tears out of the proximal vessel))°nyeh°(0.8)Case ‘n point(7.3)((RES re-loads needle into needle-holder))558© ISLS