“Teach Me How to Facebook!” Design-Based Research about RiskPrevention on Social Network SitesEllen Vanderhoven, Tammy Schellens, Martin ValckeGhent University, Department of Education, Henri Dunantlaan 2, BE9000 Ghent, BelgiumEmail: Ellen.Vanderhoven@Ugent.be, Tammy.Schellens@Ugent.be, Martin.Valcke@Ugent.beAbstract: Because of the increasing popularity of social network sites, the meaning ofmedia literacy education has evolved. Indeed, in the 21st century, one of the importantaspects of media literacy became to know how to behave safe online. However, mosteducational packages on the topic of e-safety have been developed without muchtheoretical consideration, and they have not been evaluated. Design-based research hasbeen put forth as a good methodology to considerately develop effective educationalmaterials. Therefore, in this study, a design-based research approach was used to developeducational materials about the risks on social network sites. By developing solutionsbased on existing knowledge and improving these solutions in 5 iterative cycles ofimplementation, evaluation and revision, this research results not only in effectivepractical solutions, but also in context-specific design guidelines that can be used byfuture researchers, practitioners and educational developers.IntroductionWith the rise of web 2.0, the meaning of media literacy has evolved. While traditionally, it referred to the abilityto analyze and appreciate literature, the focus has been enlarged a few decades ago, thereby also including skillswith regard to computers (Brown, 1998). Recently, this covers not only interactive exploration of the internet,but also the critical use of social media and social network sites (SNS) such as Facebook and Twitter. Sincesocial media gives an excellent opportunity to create online content, the development of new skills is necessary.Livingstone (2004a) therefore describes media literacy in terms of four skills, this is as the ability to access,analyse, evaluate and create messages across a variety of contexts. It has been found that while children aregood at accessing and finding things on the internet, they are not as good in avoiding some of the risks posed tothem by the internet (Livingstone, 2004b).In this respect media literacy education in schools has been put forth to empower teenagers(Livingstone & Haddon, 2009; Marwick, Murgia-Diaz, & Palfrey, 2010; Patchin & Hinduja, 2010). Toencounter the increasing concerns about children’s safety when using SNS, caused by for example privacy risks,sexual solicitation and cyberbullying, several prevention campaigns and awareness raising interventions havebeen developed (e.g., Insafe, 2014). However, most packages are developed without any theoretical base and asystematic review demonstrated that only few packages have been empirically evaluated (Mishna, Cook, Saini,Wu, & MacFadden, 2010). These scarce evaluation studies give evidence that a raise in internet safetyknowledge is often achieved, but that evolutions in actual behaviour are much more difficult to obtain (Mishnaet al., 2010). This is in line with the results of intervention studies in the more general field of media literacyeducation, that demonstrate that these interventions increase the knowledge about the specific topic of thecourse but have no impact on attitudes nor behaviour (Cantor & Wilson, 2003; Duran, Yousman, Walsh, &Longshore, 2008; Steinke et al., 2007).As a reaction to the lack of theoretical base in interventions, the lack of theoretical implications of thisintervention research, and the lack of evaluation studies in authentic settings, the design-based researchmethodology has been described (Phillips, McNaught, & Kennedy, 2012; The Design-based ResearchCollective, 2003). This methodology connects theoretical research with educational practice, and has beendefined by Wang and Hannafin (2005) asa systematic but flexible methodology aimed to improve educational practices throughiterative analysis, design, development, and implementation, based on collaboration amongresearchers and practioners in real world settings, and leading to contextually-sensitive designprinciples and theories. (Wang & Hannafin, 2005, p. 6-7).The output of design-based research contains both an increase of theoretical knowledge and a contribution tosociety, such as school programs (Reeves, 2006).In the current research the design-based research approach lead us to develop effective educationalmaterials to teach teenagers in secondary education how to use SNS safely (i.e., to increase awareness of risksand to change unsafe attitudes and behaviour) and to describe critical design guidelines for the development ofICLS 2014 Proceedings166© ISLSsuch materials. By developing solutions based on existing knowledge and improving these solutions in fiveiterative cycles of implementation, evaluation and revision, this research results not only in effectivepractical solutions, but also in a prototheory, describing context-specific design guidelines. The output ofthis research is therefore interesting for both researchers, developers and practioners (i.e., teachers).The Initial Development of SolutionsAs is typical for design-based research, design guidelines based on previous literature and theories were takeninto account during the development of the initial materials. In this research, we took into account both generalprinciples that are shown to be important in prevention campaigns (Nation et al., 2003) and more specificinstructional design principles that follow out of the leading theory in education: constructivism (Duffy &Cunningham, 1996). This way, initial educational materials were developed for use in secondary education(Vanderhoven, Schellens, & Valcke, 2014a). The package consisted of a syllabus for the students and aninstruction manual for the teacher. Every course could be carried out in one hour, thereby taking into accountthe request of teachers to minimize the duration of the lessons and the work load (Vanderhoven, Schellens, &Valcke, 2014b). The package aimed at both a raise in awareness about the contact risks on SNS, that is privacyrisks, cyberbullying and sexual solicitation (DeMoor et al., 2008), and a decrease of unsafe behaviour on SNSafter following the course. The different learning goals are described extensively in the teacher manual. Allcourses followed the same structure, as can be seen in table 1.Table 1: The structure and content of the initial interventionStructure of the course1. IntroductionContentThe teacher introduces the topic, using the summary of risks (De Moor et al., 2008).2.Two-by-twoexercisePupils answer questions about a simulated SNS-profile on paper, together with a peer. Thesequestions scaffold them towards different risks (cyberbullying, sexual solicitation and privacyrisks).3.Class discussionBased on the answers of the pupils to the scaffolding questions and the answers given in theteacher manual, the teacher leads the discussion in class.4.Voting cardsPupils raise green or red cards, to show whether they agree or disagree with five givenstatements. Answers are discussed guided by the teacher.5.Examples andtheorySome real-life examples are discussed. All the necessary information is summarized.MethodThe materials that were developed were put into practice in authentic secondary classrooms, while the impact onawareness, attitudes and behaviour of the pupils were measured using a pretest-posttest design. Based on theresults of these measurements, the materials were refined. The revised materials were then implemented again inother classrooms. In total, five iterations of development, evaluation and refinement were conducted. Themethodology was similar in the five intervention studies. However, some small changes have occurred. This is atypical characteristic of design-based research, where integrative research with varying methods is necessary tomeet new needs and issues that emerge during the process (Wang & Hannafin, 2005).ParticipantsThe materials have been implemented in classes in secondary schools. In the first intervention study 1035 pupilsparticipated, with a mean age of 15,14 (SD=1.88). In the second intervention study, 1487 pupils were involved,with a mean age of 14.9 (SD=1.11). In the third intervention study, 156 pupils followed a course, with a meanage of 15.39 (SD=0.61). The mean age of the 146 pupils that were involved in the fourth intervention is 12.92(SD=0.61), and of the 80 pupils in the fifth intervention 15.64 (SD=1.23). In all studies, pupils were randomlydivided over conditions, and no pupil participated in more than one study.Procedure and DesignA pretest-posttest design was used in all intervention studies. This means that in all conditions, in all studies,pupils had to fill in an online pretest survey before the intervention took place. Afterwards, they followed theintervention, which was different in all studies. Finally, they filled in a posttest survey. In all interventionstudies, a specific experimental intervention was compared with a control group. In the first two studies, nointervention took place in this control group, and pupils only had to fill in the surveys. In the last three studies,the intervention out of a previous phase was given to the control group, so that comparisons with theexperimental group indicated the added value of the revised materials. The procedure is depicted in figure 1.ICLS 2014 Proceedings167© ISLSPOSTTESTPRETESTOnline surveymeasuring- Awareness- Attitudes- BehaviourINTERVENTION- control group: no intervention/previousintervention- experimental group: revised interventionOnline Surveymeasuring- Awareness- Attitudes- BehaviourFigure 1. Procedure of the 5 evaluation studies.MeasuresBefore and after the intervention, an online questionnaire was given to the pupils, measuring their awareness,attitudes and behaviour towards contact risks on SNS. This questionnaire was developed based on the contactrisks as described by DeMoor et al. (2008). In the first two studies, three different scales were developed, onefor awareness, one for attitudes and one for behaviour, all built on the base of the means of six or more items.They all had a satisfactory reliability as measured by Cronbach’s alpha.In the last three studies, the questionnaire was shortened, because pupils and teachers reported that itwas too long and time consuming. Therefore, a new and shorter questionnaire was developed with less items onthe awareness scale and with attitudes and behaviour measured based on the theory of planned behaviourfollowing the manual of Fishbein & Ajzen (2009).In all studies, an open question asked pupils about what they had learned during the intervention, tohave a direct measure of increased awareness. Moreover, a direct binary measure of behavioural change wasconducted by the question ‘Did you change anything on your profile since the first questionnaire?’. If the latterwas answered affirmatively, an open question about what they changed exactly gave us more qualitative insightin the type of behavioural change.AnalysisSince our data clearly have a hierarchical structure, i.e. pupils in classes, the obtained data from pupils out of thesame class might be dependent, and might so break the assumptions of simple regression analysis. In thisrespect Multilevel Modeling (MLM) is suggested as an alternative and adequate statistical approach.Consequently, since a significantly between-class variance could be observed indeed in the first two studies, atwo-level structure is used: pupils (level 1) are nested within classes (level 2). The impact of the intervention ondifferent posttest-scores -when controlling for the pretestscores- is evaluated by comparing the control-conditionwith the experimental conditions (i.e., adding the condition as a predictor in the model). Bonferroni correctionswere used to control for multiple testing.However, in the last three studies, no significant between-class variance could be observed, so therewas no need to use MLM. Therefore, MANOVA’s and multivariate repeated measures approaches have beenused.ResultsStudy 1: Implementation and Evaluation of the First Version of MaterialsThe initially developed materials were implemented and evaluated in authentic secondary classrooms. Apositive impact of the given course on awareness could be observed, as pupils in the intervention group had anincreased awareness about contact risks on SNS compared to the control group where pupils only filled in thepre- and post questionnaire. Yet, no impact of the courses on pupils’ attitudes nor on their behaviour could befound analyzing the quantitative data. Still, if we analyze the qualitative data, some differences could be found.In the experimental group, significantly more pupils changed something on their profile than in the controlgroup (χ²(1)=15.60, p<.001). As could be expected, pupils involved in the intervention about contact risks onSNS often changed their privacy-settings and their personal information such as their contact information.While these results indicate an impact of the course on the behaviour of a significant amount of teenagers, a lotof teenagers involved in the intervention reported not to have changed anything (i.e., 83%). Therefore, this firstevaluation study demonstrated that the developed course had a significant impact on the awareness about thecontact risks on SNS, but only limited impact on behaviour (Vanderhoven et al., 2014a).First Revision of MaterialsFollowing the results of the first study, several aspects of the intervention were inspected more closely. Basedon observations made during the courses and comments of teachers about the intervention, possible holdbacksICLS 2014 Proceedings168© ISLSwere identified. For example, it was striking that during the class discussions and the voting game, well-likedpupils claimed that posting risky information “is not that bad at all”. Following the theory of planned behaviour(Ajzen, 1991) -which states that behaviour is partly determined by the social norm, that is the social pressurepeople experience- and evidence that teenagers especially are sensitive to peer pressure (Sumter, Bokhorst,Steinberg, & Westenberg, 2009), it could be assumed that the well-liked peers described above had an importantimpact on other pupils’ behaviour. Because of advantages of sharing information on SNS, such ascommunicating (Pruulmann-Vengerfeldt & Runnel, 2012) and creating an online identity (Hum et al., 2011;Madden & Smith, 2010), risky behaviour might be encouraged between peers and peer pressure might haveprevented behavioural change.Following this assumption, the educational materials have been modified. The possibilities forindividual reflection were increased during the intervention by decreasing the ‘peer time’ that allowed pupils tobe influenced by their classmates. This way, a larger impact on behaviour was aimed. Concretely, the two-bytwo exercise was replaced by an individual task, forcing pupils to answer the questions about the simulatedprofile on their own. Subsequently, answers were discussed in class. The same revision was applied to thevoting game. Pupils now had to reflect about the statements individually, instead of publicly raising green andred cardsStudy 2: Implementation and Evaluation of the Revised MaterialsAgain, the materials were put into practice in an authentic classroom setting. In this study, there were twoexperimental conditions: in 43 classes the previous intervention was given (with collaborative learning), and in25 classes the revised intervention was given (with individual reflection). Both groups were compared with thecontrol condition where no intervention was given (43 classes). Both the original and the revised course had apositive impact on awareness as compared to the control condition (χ²(1)=8.91, p<.02 and χ²(1)=7.24, p<.02respectively). However, only the revised course had an impact on attitudes and behaviour as compared to thecontrol group (χ²(1)=9.91, p<.02 for attitudes, and χ²(1)=5.67, p<.02. for behaviour).If we analyze the qualitative data, it could be found that while 7% of the control group changedsomething on their profile after the intervention, more pupils changed something in both the condition ofindividual reflection (13%, χ²(1)=6.70, p<.01) as in the condition of collaborative learning (17%, χ²(1)=15.60,p<.001). Pupils who changed something, often modified their privacy-settings, or adapted the personalinformation on their profile page.The second evaluation study therefore showed that more time for individual reflection is valuable as adecrease of unsafe attitudes and behaviour could be observed compared to the control condition (Vanderhoven,Schellens, & Valcke, 2012).Second Revision of MaterialsAfter this second iteration, there was still room for improvement. Again, we took a closer look at theintervention and the remarks of teachers, pupils and observers. It was noted that the simulated profile in thecourse (the profile of “Sexy_Julie”) contained so many risks that it was not experienced as realistic. Pupilsmight therefore feel like the risks are not relevant with regard to their own profiles. Therefore the materials havebeen revised. Where previously, students needed to complete an exercise with the simulated profile, now theyhad to make the same exercise with their own profile on a computer. This way, the authentic setting, that isdescribed as an important instructional guideline out of constructivism (Snowman, McCown, & Biehler, 2008),was emphasized. Because computers were not always available at school, and because teachers reported that thecourse was already narrowly timed, the exercise was given as a homework task.Study 3: Implementation and Evaluation of the Revised MaterialsIn this third study, there were two conditions. The control group (40 pupils) was involved in the interventionwhere the homework task was completed with the simulated SNS-profile of Sexy_Julie, while the experimentalgroup (40 pupils) followed the course where the homework task was completed with the own profile. It wasverified whether there was an added value of the revised materials concerning their impact on the awareness,attitudes, and behaviour with regard to contact risks on SNS. Three ANCOVA’s have been performed with theposttest scores of respectively awareness, attitudes and behavior as dependent variables. There was nodifference in impact between the two conditions when controlled for pretestscores, neither for awareness(F(1,77)=.12, p=.73), nor for attitudes (F(1,72)=.001, p=.97) or behavior (F(1,72)=.38, p=.54). On the contrary,qualitative data showed that the awareness of more different risks increased in the control condition where theprofile of Sexy_Julie was used. Since there was no added value of using the own profile it was opted to keep theprofile of Sexy_Julie in the package (Vanderhoven, Schellens, & Valcke, 2013).ICLS 2014 Proceedings169© ISLSThird Revision of MaterialsFor further improvement of the materials, we leaned back on the Theory of planned behaviour (Ajzen, 1991),because in our second study it has proven to be an interesting source of information to increase the impact of theintervention. Indeed, the social norm seemed to have an important impact on pupils’ behaviour, as demonstratedby the larger impact of the intervention when the potential of peer pressure was decreased. Taking intoconsideration these results, it is notable that not only peers, but also parents have an important impact on the lifeof teenagers. Parents are often considered to be primary responsible for the moral socialization of the child(Maccoby, 2007) and play an important role in the education about online risks (Marwick et al., 2010; Pasquieret al., 2012; Safer Internet Programme, 2009). Moreover, Nation et al. (2003) emphasized that encouragingpositive relationships, such as the relationship between parents and children, is a typical characteristic ofeffective prevention campaigns. Therefore, although peer pressure showed to have a negative influence on theimpact of the intervention, parental involvement in school interventions might have a positive influence.For this reason, the materials have been adapted, so that parental involvement is increased. Berkowitzand Bier (2005) described several strategies for schools to engage parents. One of the possibilities is to involveparents as clients, by organizing trainings in the topics of interest. Because of the rapid growth of SNS, manyparents lack the expertise to guide and support their children’s internet use (Livingstone & Bober, 2004).Therefore, training in internet related skills is necessary for parents as well. Following this assumption, parentswere involved in the revised materials as clients by extending it with a parental information evening.Study 4: Implementation and Evaluation of the Revised MaterialsThe revised intervention was again put into practice (Vanderhoven, Schellens, & Valcke, 2014c). However,since only 15% of the invited parents attended these parental information evenings, and only 19 of their childrenfilled in both pre-and posttest, it was difficult to interpret results. Still, the qualitative results of this study showthat the parental information session was useful to increase skills and literacy with parents. Moreover, most ofthe attending parents informed their children after the session about the risks on SNS and how to behave moresafely. Therefore, it can be concluded that involving parents is effective at least to some extent. However, sinceonly a limited amount of parents showed up at the information evening, organizing information evenings mightnot be sufficient to involve all parents. Although the attending parents were pleased with the information, andindicated that they learned a lot, there is no knowledge about the awareness, the internet literacy and skills of thenon-attending parents. Analyzing the characteristics of the attending parents points to one of the mainchallenges of increasing parental involvement, this is involving all the parents and not only those parents whoare already involved (Reynolds, 2005).Fourth Revision of the MaterialsTrying to encounter this challenge, new methods to involve parents were considered. Following Berkowitz &Bier (2005), the approach of actively involving parents as partners of the school was considered. This approachmight be more appropriate to get in touch with all parents, and might so have a more positive influence onteenagers’ behaviour. Therefore, the materials were revised, changing the homework task from an individualtask into a task that needed to be completed in collaboration with the parents. Next to the questions that neededto be answered individually by both pupils and their parents, there were also a few questions that needed to beanswered in communication, such as: on which questions did you have the same answer? Where did you/didyou not agree? This way, all parents were actively involved in the intervention.Study 5: Implementation and Evaluation of the Revised MaterialsIn this fifth study, an experimental group (9 classes) that followed the revised intervention was compared with acontrol group (7 classes) where the previous intervention was given. Both interventions had a significant impacton awareness about contact risks (F(1,199) = 27.33, p < 0.001), but especially boys benefited from thehomework task with the parents when it came to a change in behaviour. While girls of both conditions postedless personal information and had less intentions to post personal or sexual information in the future, only theintervention with parental involvement showed this beneficial impact on boys.Discussion and ConclusionThe last step of design-based research includes a reflection of the total research procedure and all findings,resulting in both practical solutions and improved theoretical understandings (Reeves, 2006). Therefore, we startthis discussion with a conclusion and reflection on the findings. In a first phase of the research, educationalmaterials have been developed based on different theoretical guidelines. Subsequently, important characteristicsof effective educational materials were revealed in five iterative cycles of implementation, evaluation andrevision. The final materials are therefore effective, as they increase awareness about risks on SNS, anddecrease unsafe behaviour on SNS. Summarized it can be concluded that time for individual reflection and theinvolvement of parents in an intervention about risks on SNS is beneficial, especially for boys. However,ICLS 2014 Proceedings170© ISLSinvolving parents by organizing a parental information evening is not sufficient to engage all parents. Involvingparents as partners, using a homework task, is put forward as a good alternative. Moreover, exercises withsimulated profiles are just as good as real online profiles to obtain the objectives. Considering all these findings,a final effective and evidence-based practical solution was developed, that has an impact on both awareness andunsafe behaviour.It is important that design-based research goes beyond designing and testing certain interventions. Itmust produce sharable prototheories, that help to communicate relevant implications to practitioners andeducational developers (The Design-based Research Collective, 2003). Based on the results of this design-basedresearch, context-sensitive design principles and theories are suggested. First of all, the initial design guidelinesused to develop the materials need to be reconsidered. For example, in contradiction with the findings of Nationet al. (2003) that prevention campaigns need to be sufficiently dosed, it seems that an impact can be obtainedalready after a short-term intervention about risks on SNS. Second, collaborative learning, which was proposedas a central instructional strategy (Duffy & Cunningham, 1996), appears to be less successful in the case ofreputation related behaviour like unsafe behaviour on SNS. Also, the value of an authentic learning context isput into perspective: while it seems to be valuable to include a SNS profile in the intervention, a simulatedprofile is sufficient to obtain results. There is no added value of making the context even more authentic, byincluding a real online SNS profile. Finally, the significance of positive relationships (Nation et al., 2003) isconfirmed in the results of our studies: by including parents in the intervention, the impact on unsafe behaviouris enlarged. Combined with the finding that collaborative learning with peers is less effective because of thenegative impact of well-liked peers, these results confirm the value of the impact of the social norm onbehaviour, as stated by the theory of planned behaviour (Ajzen, 1991).As a conclusion, it can be stated that this research resulted in both usable and evidence-based,educational materials about the risks on SNS and some contextually-sensitive design principles. The output ofthis research is therefore interesting for researchers, future developers and practioners. Moreover, this researchis relevant to the theme of ICLS 2014 “Learning and becoming in practice” for several reasons. First of all, byfocusing on changes in attitudes and behaviour, next to an increase in knowledge and awareness, weacknowledge that learning entails becoming a certain kind of person. We aim to influence pupils in a way thatgoes further than only increasing knowledge. By trying to make them critical citizens in this 21st digital century,and by teaching them to reflect about the different new risks that pop up with the rise of web 2.0, our materialsaim to have a sustainable outcome. Second, by choosing for a design-based research approach, it was tried togain insights by studying learning in real authentic settings, in this case the secondary classroom. By working inclose collaboration with practitioners, materials have been developed that offer an opportunity for teenagers tolearn, and become in practice.ReferencesAjzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,50(2), 179–211. doi:10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-TBerkowitz, M. W., & Bier, M. C. (2005). Character Education Parents as Partners. Educational Leadership,63(1), 64–69.Brown, J. (1998). Media literacy perspectives. Journal of Communication, 48(1), 44–57. doi:10.1111/j.14602466.1998.tb02736.xCantor, J., & Wilson, B. J. (2003). Media and Violence: Intervention Strategies for Reducing Aggression. MediaPsychology, 5(4), 363–403. doi:10.1207/S1532785XMEP0504_03De Moor, S., Dock, M., Gallez, S., Lenaerts, S., Scholler, C., & Vleugels, C. (2008). Teens and ICT: Risks andOpportunities.Belgium:TIRO.Retrievedfromhttp://www.belspo.be/belspo/fedra/TA/synTA08_en.pdfDuffy, T., & Cunningham, D. (1996). Constructivism: Implications for the design and delivery of instruction. InD. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of Research for Educational Communications and Technology (pp. 170–198). Simon and Schuster.Duran, R. L., Yousman, B., Walsh, K. M., & Longshore, M. A. (2008). Holistic Media Education: AnAssessment of the Effectiveness of a College Course in Media Literacy. Communication Quarterly,56(1), 49–68. doi:10.1080/01463370701839198Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (2009). Predicting and Changing Behavior: The Reasoned Action Approach (1st ed.).Psychology Press.Hum, N. J., Chamberlin, P. E., Hambright, B. L., Portwood, A. C., Schat, A. C., & Bevan, J. L. (2011). Apicture is worth a thousand words: A content analysis of Facebook profile photographs. Computers inHuman Behavior, 27(5), 1828–1833. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2011.04.003Insafe. (2014). Educational resources for teachers. Retrieved from http://lreforschools.eun.org/web/guest/insafeLivingstone, S. (2004a). Media Literacy and the Challenge of New Information and CommunicationTechnologies. The Communication Review, 7(1), 3–14. doi:10.1080/10714420490280152ICLS 2014 Proceedings171© ISLSLivingstone, S. (2004b). What is media literacy? Intermedia, 32(3), 18–20.Livingstone, S., & Bober, M. (2004). UK children go online: surveying the experiences of young people andtheir parents. London: LSE Research Online. Retrieved from http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/395/Livingstone, S., & Haddon, L. (2009). EU Kids Online: Final report (EC Safer Internet Plus ProgrammeDeliverable D6.5). London: EU Kids Online: LSE.Maccoby, E. (2007). Historical overview of socialization research and theory. In J. E. Grusec & P. D. Hastings(Eds.), Handbook of socialization: theory and research (pp. 13–41). New York: Guilford Press.Madden, M., & Smith, A. (2010). A Reputation management and Social Media. Washington, DC: Pew Internet& American Life Project.Marwick, A. E., Murgia-Diaz, D., & Palfrey, J. G. (2010). Youth, Privacy and Reputation (Literature Review).Berkman Center Research Publication, 5, 10–29.Mishna, F., Cook, C., Saini, M., Wu, M.-J., & MacFadden, R. (2010). Interventions to Prevent and ReduceCyber Abuse of Youth: A Systematic Review. Research on Social Work Practice, 21(1), 5–14.doi:10.1177/1049731509351988Nation, M., Crusto, C., Wandersman, A., Kumpfer, K. L., Seybolt, D., Morrissey-Kane, E., & Davino, K.(2003). What works in prevention. Principles of effective prevention programs. The AmericanPsychologist, 58(6-7), 449–456. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.58.6-7.449Pasquier, D., Simoes, J. A., & Kredens, E. (2012). Agents of mediation and sources of safety awareness: acomparative overview. In S. M. Livingstone (Ed.), Children, risk and safety on the internet researchand policy challenges in comparative perspective (pp. 219–230). Bristol; Chicago: Policy Press.Patchin, J. W., & Hinduja, S. (2010). Changes in adolescent online social networking behaviors from 2006 to2009. Comput. Hum. Behav., 26(6), 1818–1821. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.009Phillips, R., McNaught, C., & Kennedy, G. (2012). Evaluating e-Learning: Guiding Research and Practice.Connecting with e-Learning. Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.Pruulmann-Vengerfeldt, P., & Runnel, P. (2012). Online Opportunities. In S. Livingstone, L. Haddon, & A.Görzig (Eds.), Children, risk and safety on the internet. Research and policy challenges in comparativeperspective. (Vols. 1-26, Vol. 6). Bristol, UK: The Policy Press.Reeves, T. C. (2006). Design research from a technology perspective. In J. V. den Akker, K. Gravemeijer, S.McKenney, & N. Nieveen (Eds.), Educational Design Research (pp. 52–66). London: Routledge.Safer Internet Programme. (2009). Assessment report on the status of online safety education in schools acrossEurope.Retrievedfromhttp://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/sip/docs/forum_oct_2009/assessment_report.pdfSnowman, J., McCown, R., & Biehler, R. (2008). Psychology Applied to Teaching (12th ed.). WadsworthPublishing.Steinke, J., Lapinski, M. K., Crocker, N., Zietsman-Thomas, A., Williams, Y., Evergreen, S. H., & Kuchibhotla,S. (2007). Assessing Media Influences on Middle School–Aged Children’s Perceptions of Women inScience Using the Draw-A-Scientist Test (DAST). Science Communication, 29(1), 35–64.doi:10.1177/1075547007306508Sumter, S. R., Bokhorst, C. L., Steinberg, L., & Westenberg, P. M. (2009). The developmental pattern ofresistance to peer influence in adolescence: will the teenager ever be able to resist? Journal ofAdolescence, 32(4), 1009–1021. doi:10.1016/j.adolescence.2008.08.010The Design-based Research Collective, P. (2003). Design-Based Research: An Emerging Paradigm forEducationalInquiry.EducationalResearcher,32.Retrievedfromhttp://www.aera.net/uploadedFiles/Journals_and_Publications/Journals/Educational_Researcher/3201/3201_DesignCollective.pdfVanderhoven, E., Schellens, T., & Valcke, M. (2012). Changing unsafe behaviour on social network sites:collaborative learning vs. individual reflection. Manuscript Submitted for Publication.Vanderhoven, E., Schellens, T., & Valcke, M. (2013). How authentic should a learning context be? Using realand simulated profiles in an intervention about safety on social network sites. Manuscript Submitted forPublication.Vanderhoven, E., Schellens, T., & Valcke, M. (2014a). Educating Teens about the Risks on Social NetworkSites: Useful or Pointless? An intervention study in Secondary Education. Manuscript Accepted forPublication in Comunicar, (43).Vanderhoven, E., Schellens, T., & Valcke, M. (2014b). Educational packages about the risks on social networksites: state of the art. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 112, 603–612.doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.01.1207Vanderhoven, E., Schellens, T., & Valcke, M. (2014c). Involving Parents in School Programs about Safety onSocial Network Sites. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 112, 428–436.doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.01.1185ICLS 2014 Proceedings172© ISLSWang, F., & Hannafin, M. J. (2005). Design-Based Research and Technology-Enhanced LearningEnvironments. Educational Technology Research & Development, 53(4), 5–23.AcknowledgmentsThe research leading to these results has received funding from the Strategic Basic Research (SBO) Programmeof the Flemish Agency for Innovation through Science and Technology (IWT). We would like to thank all theteachers involved in the study for their participation and dedication.ICLS 2014 Proceedings173© ISLS