MOOCs: A Perspective from the Learning SciencesMichael Eisenberg and Gerhard FischerDepartment of Computer Science and Institute of Cognitive ScienceUniversity of Colorado, Boulder USAduck@cs.colorado.edu, gerhard@cs.colorado.eduAbstract: Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) have-with astonishing rapidity–become aformidable presence in global education. Such courses have obvious strengths in their abilityto convey (usually lecture-based) content at extremely low cost to widespread, and oftenunderserved, student populations. At the same time, MOOCs, for the time being at least,reflect traditional (and often contested) values in education: the default assumption for aMOOC is that a teacher or professor will present facts or interpretations, record these as videoor slide presentations, and convey them to an extensive audience of (usually individual)students. This paper addresses the default assumptions of MOOCs in the light of two decadesof research in the learning sciences, focusing on themes of collaborative work, embodiedcognition, and both the limitations and opportunities of learning analytics. With these themesin mind, we suggest paths for research and exploration into the next generation of MOOCdesign.Keywords: MOOCs, collaborative learning, embodied and extended cognition, isolationproblem, shop-oriented MOOCs, learning analyticsIntroductionTo anyone who has been attentive to global education over the past several years, the importance and explosivegrowth of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) is both striking and undeniable [Scientific-American, 2013].Arguably, MOOCs–or, more generally, the advent of online education–can be viewed as the most urgent subjectfor discussion in the learning sciences for the coming decade. There are, unsurprisingly, dozens of controversiesand unresolved issues [Daniel, 2012] regarding such courses: (1) whether they are destined to grow in impact or(alternatively) whether their importance is overrated, and a symptom of media "hype"; (2) whether theyrepresent an improved or cheapened educational experience; (3) what effects they may have on the structure andfuture of residential universities; (4) how their impact might vary across dimensions of geography, ofdemographics (are MOOCs as important for elementary education as for undergraduate education?), and ofdiscipline (are MOOCs more easily designed for technical material?).The state of the art in online education is both relatively short-lived, and fluid; generalizations madeabout a "typical MOOC" today are liable to be out of date in a matter of weeks or months. Recent technologicalhistory should be a chastening experience in this respect: it is not hard to find statements made about the natureof personal computing in (say) 1977, or about the importance of the internet in (say) 1995, that upon reflectionembarrass their authors. Even with this caveat in mind, however, it is important for those in the learningsciences both to reflect upon and to attempt to shape the development of large-scale online education; and wehave no choice but to make the attempt in real time, as events unfold. For the purposes of this paper, we beginby noting that despite the novelty of the transmission channel, in many respects MOOCs tend to represent ahighly traditional portrait of education, in which a teacher or professor delivers lecture-based material to a(relatively passive) audience of students. This portrait of a "typical course" is hardly unusual in mostuniversities, as can be seen by attending a standard introductory-level course in calculus, or chemistry, orWestern history. At the same time, this traditional portrait has been challenged in numerous respects by variouscommunities in the learning sciences over the past two decades. Such notions as collaborative learning[Koschmann, 1996], embodied and extended cognition [Dourish, 2001], and constructivist learning [Johnson,2010] are staples of learning sciences research, but in many ways they run against the grain of what, for now,could be called a traditional lecture-course structure for course design. In residential universities, the limitationsof lecture courses are often addressed through creative strategies such as "flipped classrooms", intensiverecitations or tutorials, and study groups; these strategies not infrequently employ MOOCs or online lectures ascomponents. Still, in contrast, a stand-alone MOOC outside a residential setting (based as it is on "pure"traditional lectures) might find these strategies tricky to implement. In other words, while both MOOCs andresidential universities might employ the traditional lecture-to-passive-students format for education, theresidential settings are able to experiment with alternatives or additions that are harder to implement in a purelyonline format.ICLS 2014 Proceedings190© ISLSBackgroundThis paper is intended to "take a step back" and discuss the current limitations and potential progress of MOOCdesign from the perspective of the learning sciences. It is thus intended as a complement, or counterweight, tomany other accounts that discuss the subject from an economic perspective (scalability, productivity, low cost)[Bowen, 2013] or the technological perspective (platforms supporting large numbers of students in onlineenvironments, enrichment components such as forums, peer-to-peer support, automatic grading) [Kolowich,2013]. Our perspective is derived from our own research over the past two decades in creating computationalenvironments for learning, incorporating notions such as collaborative, embodied, and extended cognition [Ariaset al., 2001; dePaula et al., 2001; Eisenberg & Eisenberg, 1999]. Our interest is also intensified by a newlybegun (arguably quixotic) project in which one of the authors is attempting to create an unorthodox MOOCbased as much on the format of a reading seminar as a lecture course. With these experiences as both foundationand motivation, we discuss the challenges to incorporating learning sciences research within MOOC design,and we outline several promising directions for integrating the work of the learning sciences with the near-termfuture of large-scale online education.Collaborative Learning in the Context of MOOCsOne of the notable features of MOOCs is their flexibility from the standpoint of the student: in general, anonline course can be taken from any Web-enabled site around the globe, at any time of day, in any setting. Thisadvantage of flexibility is accompanied by a concomitant problem of isolation: many, perhaps most, students ofMOOCs are placed in a situation in which they are taking a course without the immediate presence of a roomfulof classmates. As a result, it is tricky or effortful for MOOC designers to incorporate elements of collaborationor group work in a MOOC: one can use online tools such as student blogs, chat sites, shared documents, and soforth for these purposes, but they require additional effort on the part of both the professor and students beyondthe natural affordances of the physical classroom.A significant thread in learning sciences research over the years has in fact focused on the characteristicsof successful (or sometimes, unsuccessful) collaborative learning. Without attempting a summary of theextensive literature, suffice it to say that there are situations in which problem solving can be facilitated byconversation [Roschelle 1992]; in the same vein, the literature of self-efficacy theory in education takes note ofthe potentially positive role of "vicarious experiences" in which a student benefits from watching the techniquesof a successful colleague [Bandura 1997, p. 86 ff.]. Beyond these considerations, group work allows forcreativity from the professor's standpoint: in many disciplines there are challenging projects or assignments thatare most naturally undertaken not by a single student, but rather by a small group or team [Fischer, 2011].Collectively, these considerations suggest that there is an essential tension between the default structure ofMOOCs and the potential advantages of student collaboration. (For fascinating reflections along these generallines from a "MOOC practitioner", see also [Downes 2012, p. 503 ff.])All of this suggests that there is a strong incentive for applying the lessons of learning sciences research tothe "isolation problem" of MOOCs. Some of the natural avenues for work are incremental: finding modest,realistic means of enhancing Web-based tools for collaborative student work and real-time conversations over adistance. Just to take a representative example: it is well-known that the simple act of pointing to an object as afocus of conversation plays an important role in human learning. (Indeed, Tomasello [1999] among othersargues that pointing is a fundamental act differentiating human culture from that of other primates. For a recentstudy of the role of pointing drawn from mathematics education, see [Alibali & Nathan, 2012].) Pointing is, ofcourse, a natural act for two humans in conversation working at a lab desk, but it can be an unwieldy operationfor students conversing at a distance, particularly when the object being referenced is a physical entity, not on acomputer screen. Conceivably, then, a learning-sciences-motivated research effort could be undertaken in whicha user (call her "Alice") can point to a physical object present in the space of a second user (call him "Bob")through the use of a remotely-operated robotic hand. Roughly, the image here is that Alice can use some type ofglove-like input device at her site to manipulate a robotic pointing output device at Bob's desk, enabling her topoint directly to (say) a misplaced wire on a breadboard or a troublesome spot in a mechanical construction.Other possible research projects might be a bit more futuristic or far-fetched, but nonetheless plausible.Conceivably, for example, individuals could advertise their services not as local tutors for course material, butas local colleagues: people whose job it is to learn alongside a student and act as a "sounding board" forconversations and lab partner for projects. Such people could, in effect, specialize in joining others to takecourses [Fischer, 2013]; the skills required of a successful "co-learner" might, over time, come to be seen ascomparable to (but distinct from) those of a successful teacher or student. Still another possibility, along thesesame lines, would be to design artificial, computer-based colleagues (again, in contrast to the tradition of workin computer-based tutors [Anderson et al., 1995]); that is, the intent would be not to create computer-basedpresentations of existing material, but rather to create (where achievable) computer-based "learning partners"[Choua et al., 2003] whose role would be similar to those of the hypothetical human specialists just mentioned.The purpose of an "artificial colleague", then, would be to provide at least some of the benefits of real-timeICLS 2014 Proceedings191© ISLScollaboration (e.g., by assisting in problem-solving, note-taking, finding resources related to lecture material,and so forth). This, too, would represent a potentially interesting novel direction for the learning sciences andartificial intelligence: indeed, in some ways, it may in fact be more achievable (and more useful) to create aworking artificial student to accompany a human learner, rather than an artificial teacher.Weaving Embodied and Extended Cognition into Online EducationPerhaps the most vexing and fundamental problem associated with MOOCs (and arguably with onlineeducation in general) is the overwhelmingly "virtual", screen-based nature of the presentation channel. Screenbased education seems to lend itself fairly naturally to the recording of lectures, along with slides, text, audio,and video; it can also, to a fair degree, accommodate text-based exchange of information (as in student blogs oremail), and audio or video conferencing. All of this, in combination, makes for a powerful medium that can betailored to the presentation of a wide variety of course material: one could imagine well-done introductorycourses in history, philosophy, computer science, and English literature developed along these lines. In general,the types of courses that one associates with large lecture rooms on college campuses ("Calculus 101") seem tolend themselves reasonably smoothly to translation into MOOC form.A recurring theme heard from critics of MOOCs in higher education, however, is that there are manycourses that do not fit especially well into this mold. What about, for instance, lab courses in physics, or organicchemistry, or cell biology? All the equipment, staffing, materials, safety precautions, and so forth are parts ofphysical settings for learning experimental science; what happens to those elements in the MOOC format? Canone possibly learn experimental natural science exclusively through an online medium? For that matter, whatabout field trips in domains such as geography, or paleontology, or archaeology? The very essence of MOOCeducation is precisely that it is indifferent to settings; one can take a MOOC anywhere, at any time, all over theglobe. But a physical geography course takes on a different character if it is held in (say) Buenos Aires, orMinneapolis, or Hong Kong. To raise yet another issue, what about the example (so often mentioned by collegefaculty) of seminars or small-scale conversation? Is it possible to convey, through online form, anything like thevalue of a group of committed students sitting around a table [Arias et al., 2001] discussing a work of literature,or a philosophical argument?The difficulty of bridging the gap between MOOCs and the wide range of models (beyond the lecturehall) of undergraduate education connects with several running themes and traditions in learning sciencesresearch. One natural place to start here is with the twinned themes of embodied and extended cognition[Dourish, 2001; Menary, 2010; Clark 1997] In the context of this discussion the two themes, though distinct,have shared pedagogical implications. Extended cognition characterizes cognition and learning in the presenceof external artifacts–for our purposes, such artifacts might include lab equipment, shop tools, sports equipment,and so forth. To the extent that learning chemistry takes place through the use of pipettes, burettes, andseparation funnels, it would be difficult to teach "true" chemistry exclusively via video, in the absence of suchequipment. Embodied cognition characterizes cognition and learning as an activity of the entire body (often witha disproportionate focus on the hand), which again implies the importance of pedagogical tools and settings. Tothe extent that learning how to observe an infant in the laboratory is a matter of posture, tone, and "bodyknowledge", or to the extent that learning to shoot a basketball is a matter of information beyond the purelyverbal, it seems unlikely that video will be a sufficiently expressive medium; this is why we have labapprenticeships and sports coaches.If the very real, but very specific, advantages of MOOCs are to be enriched beyond the context oflecture hall material, it seems imperative that learning scientists work with designers to incorporate the findingsof extended and embodied cognition research into novel artifacts and settings. We might begin this process byreflecting on some exemplary disciplines. Is it possible to teach a student to conduct a safe laboratoryexperiment exclusively via online communication? Or to operate a drill press? Or to shoot a basketball? Or togive a haircut? If not, why not?On the "extended cognition" side of these questions, we might ask (among other questions) just howmuch it is possible to replicate or simulate the presence of physical tools in MOOC-accessible settings. Perhapsit would be feasible to augment online communication with desktop 3D printing so that at least someimplements could be output in physical form at the student's site. Admittedly, this would be only a very partial,or stopgap, means of addressing the absence of laboratory equipment: desktop 3D printers at present outputobjects in limited materials (typically plastic) and of small size (no more than about a cubic foot). Still, theability of students and staff to communicate via transmission of physical objects would be an importantextension to a strictly screen-based medium. The role of learning sciences research in such an effort would be tounderstand just how important, or meaningful, such an extension might be, and to direct design research whosegoal is to move beyond the current limitations of educational desktop 3D printing.There are other ways of addressing the "laboratory gap" in MOOC education beyond the purelytechnological. The growing "maker movement" [Anderson, 2012] of amateur, hobbyist, and student constructionis increasingly associated with a burgeoning network of physical sites–"makerspaces", or "hackerspaces"–inICLS 2014 Proceedings192© ISLSwhich participants (usually for a modest fee) can make use of physical materials and equipment for their ownprojects. Combining the presence and growth of settings such as these might allow for extended versions of"shop-oriented MOOCs": for instance, one might create a course that includes "shop videos" whose intent is tobe shown and followed in a local makerspace setting. This would represent a strategy of infrastructural ratherthan purely technological design–creating accessible educational settings that are distinct from schools oruniversities (or even school laboratories) [National-Research-Council, 2009]. The role of the learning scienceshere would be to understand and enhance the learning process in such settings. Much as learning scientists havestudied processes of social learning, language-making, and domain-oriented dialogue in schools (for particularlyprovocative foundational discussions in a vast literature, see for instance [Brown, 1992] and [Schoenfeld,1985]), there would be a necessity to understand the adaptation of these ideas to makerspaces, with their greateremphasis on physical construction.More important, at least in the near term, it would be useful for the learning sciences to pay increasedattention to the educational dimension of the maker movement itself, as it currently exists. For those childrenand undergraduate-age students who participate in "Maker Faires" and similar events, what sorts of projects arethey doing? What content are they learning (and how does that content contrast with that of traditional schoolsor universities)? What are the means by which learning takes place, and how can (or can't) these be integratedwith MOOC design? By understanding the educational dimensions of the burgeoning "DIY" culture, thelearning sciences can direct attention to precisely those aspects of "hands-on" learning that for the present seemto elude MOOC-based education.As to the "embodied cognition" side of this discussion, there are again a variety of approachestechnological and infrastructural-that could enhance MOOC design. On the one hand, we could see a vastexpansion of innovative wearable or body-based devices for communicating with computational systems. AMOOC student who can make use of a data glove, or a device like the soon-to-be-marketed MYO (with inputderived from large-scale arm movements; https://www.thalmic.com/en/myo/), or sensors placed on arms andlegs, might be able to take effective online courses in violin, painting, or how to throw a curveball. There arevast unexplored regions for the learning sciences in integrating an understanding of such devices into cognitivemodels and educational design; indeed, the increasing popularity of MOOCs might well spur a new round ofinput techniques and body sensing that could only be accomplished with the assistance of a rich theory ofembodied cognition. We could imagine the use of these new-generation devices being employed to createMOOCs for (currently) unexpected subject matter: an online system, equipped with the right sort of inputdevice, might be able to help a student wield a paintbrush, or conduct an orchestra, or titrate a solution, or grip atennis racket.There is an infrastructural side to the "embodied cognition" dimension of this discussion as well,focusing on the integration, within MOOC education, of settings for full-body interaction. Conceivably,MOOCs might be tailored to work with local science museums, with participating playgrounds, or with nationalparks. For example, a MOOC on the subject of geology might include a "general component", not specific toany location, and consisting of standard online material; and it might be augmented with a localized componenttailored to the proximity of specific public parks or spaces. Again, this represents new questions for the learningsciences to explore in order to make courses of this type meaningful for the students: what makes for aneducationally useful (or memorable) field trip? How should one structure these trips? (Are individual visits to,e.g., public national parks worthwhile, or should these visits be done in groups, and, if so, of what size?) Howcan one tailor the structure of these courses to international settings [Lewin, 2013]?The essential point in this discussion is that, without the participation of researchers who understandthe role of gesture, physical surroundings, and full-body movement in learning, MOOCs are destined to behighly cramped, constrained media of education. Designers of online courses need the learning sciences tocreate worthwhile experiences; and learning scientists can use the MOOC phenomenon as a source of newresearch and design for exploring embodied and extended cognition.Learning Analytics and the Challenges to a Truly Worthwhile Online EducationOne of the most interesting aspects of MOOC education is that it affords researchers access to large data sets ofstudent choices, behavior, and responses. LearningAnalytics (withits own society(http://www.solaresearch.org/) and its own conference series (http://www.solaresearch.org/events/lak/)) focuseson the way in which researchers can study the order in which students understand particular concepts ormaterial, the patterns of errors that they make in answering questions, the portions of lectures that they watch (orre-watch) in their studies, and so forth. These questions have antecedents in the literature of computer education(e.g.: in intelligent tutoring systems), but what is novel about MOOCs is the sheer volume and variety of thedata sets: it is now possible to study the learning behavior of thousands of students on specific questions, wherebefore it would have been effortful to derive similar data sets for dozens of subjects. The large numbers ofstudents also allow statistical analyses of students' behavior "broken out" by factors such as age, geographicregion, socioeconomic status, prior educational experience, and so forth.ICLS 2014 Proceedings193© ISLSThe growth of MOOCs, and the associated growth of techniques for learning analytics, posesinteresting philosophical challenges for the learning sciences. We can begin by asking whether this data is infact what people interested in learning really need? To what purpose will the data be put? For instance, if thegoal of education is to ensure that students make fewer errors in answering questions, then learning analyticscan clearly be put to that purpose. Certainly "making fewer errors" is one goal of education–everyone wouldprefer to answer questions correctly–but is it an important or primary goal? Likewise, we might use the patternsof a student's answers to speed up or slow down the pace of a course. No one would object to this practice, but isit the foundational issue facing the learning sciences?To put the matter another way: even assuming that all the currently envisioned benefits of learninganalytics are eventually realized in full, it is not at all clear how much students' educational experiences will beimproved. This is an empirical question, but it is at least arguable that a better-paced course with fewer errorsmade in answering questions will make only a modest impact on the educational issues that matter most tohuman beings.There is actually a cautionary note here for the learning sciences. It is conceivable that the growth ofMOOCs will result in a narrowing of the portrait of the learner necessary for educational improvement. That is,the "learning sciences" might become increasingly the study of very large patterns of data in answeringquestions or viewing video segments; such study would increase insight in some dimensions while suppressingit in others. We might find that the learning sciences pay less attention to the idiosyncratic, necessarilyindividual patterns of interest growth [Csikszentmihalyi, 1990]; or that studying anthropological factors ineducation (family dynamics, peer pressure among teenagers, how close friendships influence the development ofacademic interests, and so on) is increasingly "under the radar" of the sorts of large-scale data collected byMOOC enterprises. If we want to answer more biographical questions about education-such as: What is it aboutcertain settings that makes them inspirational for children? What kinds of experiences do children have withhandheld mathematical puzzles? Why do adolescents sometimes admire peers who actively spurn intellectualactivity? Why don't some children ever read for pleasure?-then we have to energetically pursue a type oflearning science that goes well beyond the content of learning analytics, at least as that field is currentlyenvisioned.There might be still other ways in which this tension between the "big data" style of MOOC researchand the "biographical", or "narrative" type of questions described here could be alleviated. One might, forexample, design novel types of online education created expressly to be addressed to "best-friend pairs"; that is,the "student" unit in this scenario would be a pair of close friends working together. Or MOOCs could bedesigned to be used by a family, or group of buddies at a lunch table, or the population of a neighborhood. Inscenarios of this sort, we could imagine the powerful techniques of learning analytics being turned to investigatethe behaviors of friends or families or close-knit groups. Large quantities of data could be gathered on howfamilies interact with course material, or how peer groups support (or suppress) learning, or how friendshipsevolve in the presence of intellectual challenge; the data gathered in this way might be unavoidably limited, butnonetheless point toward new questions for ethnographic observation. MOOCs could thus be tools for (at leastsome measure of) anthropological inquiry, and not merely a tool for massive-scale abstract cognitive modeling.This discussion returns us to some of the ideas of the earlier discussion on collaboration, and "going beyond theindividual student"; the techniques described above for encouraging collaboration could also be augmented bylarge-scale means of data collection and analysis.Some Closing Reflections: the Learning Sciences in Changing TimesLearning science, as an academic enterprise, is approximately 20-25 years old; though young, as scientificdisciplines go, it already has an identifiable history. The origins of the learning sciences, as we understand themtoday, are traceable in cognitive science, developmental psychology, and computer science in the second half ofthe twentieth century. It is fair to say that the learning sciences have, throughout this period, been closelyinterwoven with an understanding of the technology of the moment. The very ideas of cognitive modeling,intelligent tutoring, identifying problem-solving strategies, and the like emerge from metaphors closelyassociated with computation and information processing; the tools and innovations most closely associated withlearning sciences research tend likewise to be computational systems and languages.The technology of the moment, in education, seems increasingly to lean away from classroominstruction and toward online instruction, particularly in higher education. In some ways this is a promisingshift–it might herald democratized access to high-quality education, and a vast increase in numbers and diversityof committed students. At the same time, there are presently clear limitations of MOOCs as means of humancommunication. One could of course point out (and many do, persuasively) that there are substantial limitationsto conventional classrooms or lecture halls; but the rapid advent of MOOCs compels us to reconsider all theselimitations with fresh eyes. The learning sciences, by focusing on several of these limitations–of isolatedindividuals as students, of screens as media of embodied learning, of learning analytics as portrait of datacollection–can help us re-imagine a technological landscape for education that moves beyond the emergingICLS 2014 Proceedings194© ISLSportrait of higher education: (1) Techniques that foster in-person conversation and collaboration; (2) artifactsthat increase (e.g., through gesture, or direct physical fabrication) the expressiveness of online communication;(3) infrastructure that respects the processes of learning "through the hands" or "through the body"; and (4) anattention to anthropological and individual biographical data in addition to the massive population-level datacollection associated with MOOCs-all these are suddenly urgent tasks for the learning sciences, where they mayhave seemed relatively peripheral before.A profitable way to approach these questions might be to step back and re-examine fundamentalquestions associated with our field in the light of new technology. When we speak of "the learning sciences",what portrait of learning do we have? What comes to mind? One interesting division is between "learningabout" and "learning to be" [Brown, 2005]. To learn about is to focus on the accumulation of intellectual capital,organized into a curriculum that stresses the communication of culturally central theories, facts, and skills[Hirsch, 1988]. A curriculum of this sort is most naturally structured as a sequence (ideally, a fine-grainedsequence) of educational objectives; and the methodology for "learning about" is frequently linked to theintroductory lecture-hall style of delivery, augmented with readings, problems, and tests. In short, when wethink about "Calculus 101" or "American History 101" we are drawn into a portrait of "learning about" as anobjective for education.In contrast, learning to be is to focus less on teaching mathematics, physics, or history, and more onwhat it means and takes to be a mathematician, a physicist, or a historian (or, for that matter, a "Wikipedian",skier, or surfer). Education in the "learning-to-be" mold centers on engaging students in personally meaningfulproblems, encouraging teachers to model problem-solving activities in front of or alongside their students ratherthan lecturing (cf. [Schoenfeld, 1985]), and enculturating students into communities of practice or professionalbehavior (cf. [Nash & Shaffer 2011]) via techniques such as "legitimate peripheral participation" [Lave &Wenger, 1991]. In the context of this discussion, the current limitations of MOOCs (and the need for learningscience research) could be characterized as enhancing the ability of new modes of education to foster "learningto be" through conversation, varied communities, physical activity, participatory settings, and anthropologicalmethods.The objectives of "learning about" and "learning to be"–like other twinned objectives in educationaldiscussion (e.g., between "informal" and "formal" learning, or between "symbolic" and "kinesthetic"understanding)- represent antinomies [Bruner, 1996]: pairs of complementary truths, each worthwhile to bepursued in different contexts, but also presenting learners and educators with tensions and contradictions.Antinomies of this kind have woven their way, historically, into enduring questions in the learning sciences: forinstance, whether computers should be designed as independent stand-alone "intelligent tutors" or (by contrast)as "intelligent assistants", or "expressive tools of communication", or as some mixture of these and otherartifacts (for an early example of these debates, see [Taylor 1980]). Over time, we are likely to come to viewMOOCs and their offspring through the lenses of similar antinomies. Are we after uniform, standard, globalizedhigh-quality education (a chance to take the very best "Calculus 101" course for every student in the world)? Orare we after highly personalized, idiosyncratic pathways of learning [Collins et al., 2009] (a chance for a studentwith any particular interest–say, in the study of European ferns, or the geography of the planet Mercury, orViking ship design–to fashion a unique educational experience geared toward their own preferences)? To takeanother example: are we after an inexpensive educational infrastructure (in which students can easily afford atleast a minimal education, and in which the resources associated with residential universities are scaled back) oran expanded infrastructure (in which online education is complemented not only by residential universities, butby more widespread resources for construction, laboratory work, or field trips)?It is in the nature of such educational antinomies that they elicit multiple responses, depending on thematerial to be learned, the students, the setting, and many other factors. The essential goal of the learningsciences in the face of new technology is to identify the various sides of the antinomies latent in the technology;once identified, we can use the technology in an informed way, research its role in learning, and designalternative or complementary technologies that mitigate the problems of one-sidedness. Where MOOCs (andonline education) are concerned, we are faced with a potentially powerful technology–especially powerful ineconomic and political terms. It is plausible that not only higher education, but also K-12 education,professional training, vocational education, and graduate work may be increasingly defined by thecharacteristics that we see, in embryonic form, in MOOCs today. If the science of learning is to serve our endsas human beings, we must pitch our theories to the types of learning that really matter to us, and address ourdesigns to the creation of artifacts that enable us to fulfill our aims.ReferencesAlibali, M. and Nathan, M. (2012) Embodiment in Mathematics Teaching and Learning: Evidence fromLearners' and Teachers' Gestures. Journal of the Learning Sciences 21(2), pp. 247-286.Anderson, C. (2012) Makers - the New Industrial Revolution, Crown Business, New York.ICLS 2014 Proceedings195© ISLSAnderson, J. R., Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., & Pelletier, R. (1995) "Cognitive Tutors: Lessons Learned,"The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4(2), pp. 167-207.Arias, E. G., Eden, H., Fischer, G., Gorman, A., & Scharff, E. (2001) "Transcending the Individual HumanMind—Creating Shared Understanding through Collaborative Design." In J. M. Carroll (Ed.), HumanComputer Interaction in the New Millennium, ACM Press, New York, pp. 347-372.Bandura, A. (1997) Self-Efficacy. New York: W. H. Freeman.Bowen, W. G. (2013) Higher Education in the Digital Age, Princeton University Press, Princeton.Brown, A. (1992) Design experiments: theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), pp. 141-178.Brown, J. S. (2005) New Learning Environments for the 21st Century, available athttp://www.johnseelybrown.com/newlearning.pdf.Bruner, J. (1996) The Culture of Education, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.Choua, C.-Y., Chanb, T.-W., & Lin, C.-J. (2003) "Redefining the Learning Companion: The Past, Present, andFuture of Educational Agents," Computers & Education, 40, pp. 255-269.Clark, A. (1997) Being There. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Collins, A., Fischer, G., Barron, B., Liu, C., & Spada, H. (2009) "Long-Tail Learning: A Unique Opportunityfor CSCL?" In Proceedings (Vol 2) of CSCL 2009: 8th International Conference on ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, University of the Aegean, Rhodes, Greece, pp. 22-24. Available at:http://l3d.cs.colorado.edu/~gerhard/papers/2009-CSCL-symposium.pdf.Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990) Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience, HarperCollins Publishers, NewYork.Daniel, J. (2012) Making Sense of MOOCs: Musings in a Maze of Myth, Paradox and Possibility, available athttp://www-jime.open.ac.uk/jime/article/viewArticle/2012-18/html.dePaula, R., Fischer, G., & Ostwald, J. (2001) "Courses as Seeds: Expectations and Realities." In P.Dillenbourg, A. Eurelings, & K. Hakkarainen (Eds.), Proceedings of the European Conference onComputer-Supported Collaborative Learning, Maastricht, Netherlands, pp. 494-501.Dourish, P. (2001) Where the Action Is — the Foundations of Embodied Interaction, The MIT Press,Cambridge, MA.Downes, S. (2012) Connectivism and Connective Knowledge. Available at: http://www.downes.ca/files/Connective_Knowledge-19May2012.pdfEisenberg, M. and Eisenberg, A. (1999) Middle tech: Blurring the division between high and low tech ineducation. In Druin, A. (ed.), The Design of Children's Technology. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann,pp. 244-273.Fischer, G. (2011) "Understanding, Fostering, and Supporting Cultures of Participation," ACM InteractionsXVIII.3 (May + June 2011), pp. 42-53.Fischer, G. (2013) "From Renaissance Scholars to Renaissance Communities: Learning and Education in the21st Century." In W. Smari, & G. Fox (Eds.), International Conference on Collaboration TechnologiesandSystems,IEEE,SanDiego,pp.13-21.Availableat:http://l3d.cs.colorado.edu/~gerhard/papers/2013/CTS.pdf.Hirsch, E. D. (1988) Cultural Literacy: What Every American Needs to Know, Vintage, New York, NY.Johnson, S., ed. (2010) Neoconstructivism: the New Science of Cognitive Development. New York: OxfordUniversity Press.Kolowich, S. (2013) With Open Platform, Stanford Seeks to Reclaim MOOC Brand, available athttp://chronicle.com/article/With-Open-Platform-Stanford/142783/.Koschmann, T. D. (Ed.) (1996) CSCL: Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm, Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates, Mahwah, NJ.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation, Cambridge UniversityPress, New York.Lewin, T. (2013) U.S. Teams up with Operator of Online Courses to Plan a Global Network, available athttp://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/01/education/us-plans-global-network-of-free-online-courses.html.Menary, R., ed. (2010) The Extended Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Nash, P. and Shaffer, D. (2011) Mentor modeling: the internalization of modeled professional thinking in anepistemic game. Journal of Computer-Assisted Learning 27, pp. 173-189.National-Research-Council (2009) Learning Science in Informal Environments — People, Places, and Pursuits,National Academy Press, Washington, DC.Roschelle, J. (1992) Learning by collaborating: convergent conceptual change. Journal of the LearningSciences, 2(3): 235-276.Schoenfeld, A. (1985) Mathematical Problem Solving. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.Scientific-American (2013) Learning in the Digital Age (Special Report), available athttp://www.scientificamerican.com/editorial/digital-education/.ICLS 2014 Proceedings196© ISLSTaylor, R., ed. (1980) The Computer in the School: Tutor, Tool, Tutee. New York: Teacher's College Press.Tomasello, M. (1999) The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.AcknowledgmentsThe challenges, reflections, ideas, and envisioned developments articulated in this paper are based on (1) thecollaborative research of the two authors in technology enhanced learning over the last two decades in theCenter for Lifelong Learning & Design (L3D) and its support by the National Science Foundation; (2) thenumerous contributions of the researchers and PhD students in L3D; (3) the discussions with colleagues in thelearning science community (specifically: Allan Collins, Mark Gross, Sharon Derry, Frank Fischer); and (4) theinteractions with researchers who have developed or are developing MOOCs (specifically: Mitchel Resnick,Don Norman, Pierre Dillenbourg, Sriram Sankaranarayanan). This work was also supported in part by theNational Science Foundation under grant IIS0856003.ICLS 2014 Proceedings197© ISLS