Developing an Orchestrational Framework for Collective Inquiry inSmart Classrooms: SAIL Smart Space (S3)Mike Tissenbaum and James D. Slotta, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, miketissenbaum@gmail.comAbstract: This paper describes PLACE - a 12-week cross-contexts curriculum for grade 11physics that engaged students at home, in class, in their neighbourhoods, and in a smartclassroom setting. Using a design-based research approach we introduce a smart classroominfrastructure (SAIL Smart Space; S3) and investigate its role in supporting students in thecurriculum as a knowledge community. The present paper focuses on the culminating smartclassroom activity, where students use the community knowledge base to scaffold theirsolving of ill-structured physics problems involving popular Hollywood movies. We examinethe efficacy of the tools and the environment, including software agents and data miningapproaches that serve to define S3, and help orchestrate the flow of activities, materials, andstudents during the activity’s enactment. We conclude with a set of design principles thatsupport collaborative inquiry in smart classrooms and across learning contexts.Supporting Knowledge Communities and Inquiry LearningWithin the field of learning science there is a growing call to think of classrooms as knowledge communitieswhere students approach learning as a collective endeavor (rather than an individual one), towards solvingauthentic and personally relevant real-world problems (Slotta & Najafi, 2010). The knowledge communityapproach, with its focus on user-contributed content and student driven inquiry, is particularly well suited forinvestigating learning that goes beyond the traditional confines of classroom settings. For example students mayvisit a local stream or waterway to investigate issues around water quality (Hsi, Collins & Staudt, 2000), or aplayground to investigate geometry principles (Milrad et al, 2013). Within this work there is a correspondingchallenge of connecting this learning across contexts back into the classroom in meaningful ways.In response, a promising new approach to supporting such designs is the digital embedding of aspectsof the community’s inquiry in the walls, ceilings, and floors of the physical learning environment. Examplesinclude a simulated ecology of bugs living in a classroom’s walls (Moher, 2006), and evolutionary simulationsof rainforest fauna and flora over millions of years (Lui & Slotta, 2013). By connecting students to these inquiryenvironments with personal, portable and connected computing devices (such as tablets), we can unchain themfrom traditional classroom configurations, instead fostering a dynamic “smart classroom” model where studentscan move throughout the room engaging in spatially index real time collaborative activities (Slotta, 2010).The enactment of complex real-time inquiry activities places a high load on teachers, requiring them tosimultaneously manage changing student roles and groups, assign activities, and organize materials – includingpotentially large and diverse community-generated content from the knowledge base (Tissenbaum & Slotta, inpress). The supporting of teachers and students in the enactment of such activities is often termed orchestration(Dillenbourg, Jarvella, Fischer, 2009), and has been highlighted as a major design challenge in the learningsciences (STELLAR, 2011). In response, technology enhanced learning spaces like smart classrooms, may offera means for supporting the orchestration of such curricula, including tracking student movement within theroom, providing procedural scaffolds, and making real-time decisions including student group formation and thedelivery of timely materials (Tissenbaum & Slotta, 2013).In order to investigate the role that a smart classroom could play in supporting a knowledge communitycurriculum, we needed both a pedagogical model and an underlying technology infrastructure. The pedagogicalapproach we used for this study is the Knowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI) model, which engagesstudents to work collectively, contributing, tagging and improving content in a shared knowledge base thatserves as a resource for subsequent inquiry. In KCI, inquiry activities are carefully designed so that they engagestudents with targeted content and provide assessable outcomes, allowing students some level of freedom andflexibility but ensuring progress on the relevant learning goals (Slotta & Najafi, 2013). The teacher also plays acritical role within a KCI curriculum, as they must be able to adapt (orchestrate) the designed script “on-thefly,” based on emergent themes and community voices (Tissenbaum & Slotta, 2013).SAIL Smart Space (S3) – a Technology Framework for Smart ClassroomsIn order to successfully enact the kinds of complex designs required for KCI, we needed a flexible and adaptiveinfrastructure to support the design and orchestration of collaborative activities that include spatial, social, andsemantic dependencies. To this end, we developed SAIL Smart Space (S3), an open source framework thatcoordinates complex pedagogical sequences, including dynamic sorting and grouping of students, and deliveryof materials based on emergent semantic connections. S3 allows the physical space of classrooms or otherlearning environments to play a meaningful role within the learning design – either through locational mappingICLS 2014 Proceedings831© ISLSof pedagogical elements (e.g., where different locations are scripted to focus student interactions on differenttopics) or through orchestrational support (e.g., where physical elements of the space, like projected displays),help to guide or coordinate student movements, collaborations or activities. S3 was developed to add a level ofintelligence to classrooms or other learning environments, including real-time data mining and computationperformed by intelligent agents to support the orchestration of inquiry scripts. A key component to these agentsis that although their roles are well defined within the activity (e.g., grouping students with peers they have notpreviously worked with), who (or what) will satisfy these conditions cannot be know a priori, rather theyemerge during enactment (requiring agents to process information in real-time; Tissenbaum & Slotta, in press).In order to investigate S3 as a smart classroom infrastructure to support collaborative inquiry, threequestions have driven our research: (1) How can S3 support students’ inquiry activities? (2) How effective areintelligent software agents and data mining in providing students with needed materials and enacting specificpedagogical moves? (3) How does S3 support the teacher in orchestrating class activities? Below, we discuss animplementation of S3 within a grade 11 physics classroom, highlighting specific orchestrational supports(including the design of intelligent agents), and evaluating their effectiveness for supporting classroom inquiry.MethodsWe employed a co-design methodology (Roschelle, Penuel & Shechtman, 2006) working closely with a highschool physics teacher to ensure that he was an active voice in the design and that the designed intervention fithis goals for the students and expectations for student learning. As the study took place in a “real class” (ratherthan a canned lab) a design based-research approach was employed (Wang & Hannafin, 2006). Generally,design-based research does not attempt to validate a particular curriculum, rather it strives to advance a set oftheories on learning that transcend the particulars in which they were enacted (Barab & Squire, 2004). As such,a major outcome of this research was the design of the curriculum and supporting technologies themselves. Toevaluate the enacted design we used a mixed methods approach to triangulate the data and get a more completepicture of the intervention (Mason, 2006). Sources included pre- and post-interviews with teacher and students,server logs, the user-contributed artifacts, and video and audio recordings.Design of the KCI curriculumIn order for the smart classroom to be more than a supplemental activity, we needed to develop a completecurriculum in which the smart classroom was one of several learning contexts, integrated with activities acrossclassroom and home settings. We also wanted to investigate how the smart classroom could leverage studentcontributed content for authentic learning activities, and we therefore also needed the curriculum to produceartifacts that could be reused in meaningful ways. To this end, we worked closely with the high school Physicsteacher to develop a curriculum that implemented KCI, including collaborative and collective forms of inquiryand critical reflection. In initial co-design meetings with the teacher he identified two main goals for thecurriculum: First he wanted to help students recognize “physics in their everyday lives” and bring this viewback into the traditional class setting; Second, he wanted a way for students to develop a coherent understandingof the underlying physics principles of the course, and connections amongst them (i.e., to “see that all theprinciples are ties together”). In response to the second goal we began by generating set of fourteen “core”principles (Table 1) that the teacher felt were of core relevance to the content of the course.Table 1: Grade 11 fundamental principles for kinematics, force and motion, & work, energy, and power• Vectors• Newton’s First Law• Newton’s Second Law• Newton’s Third Law• Acceleration• Uniform Motion• Kinetic Friction• Static Friction• Fnet = 0• Fnet = Constant (non-zero)• Fnet = non-constant• Kinetic Energy• Potential Energy• Conservation of EnergyWe then co-designed a 12-week grade 11 physics curriculum, named PLACE (Physics LearningAcross Contexts and Environments), which guided students to capture examples of physics in the world aroundthem (through pictures, videos, or open narratives). PLACE was organized into three major units covering thefirst three units of the course: (1) Kinematics, (2) Forces and Motion, and (3) Work, Energy, and Power. Foreach unit, we developed a script that allowed students to upload, tag, and interact with physics examples.For each unit in the curriculum students were required to upload their own found examples of physicsprinciples (i.e., from their everyday life experiences) to a shared social space, including tags and explanationsaccording to the relevant physics principles. The wider class community was encouraged to respond to theseuser-contributed artifacts: debating tags or explanations, voting, and adding new tags – with the stated aim ofdeveloping consensus about each item. Students were required to upload at least one example and to completethe idea refinement script on at least two of their peers’ examples: (1) voting on existing tags and/or adding anew tag, (2) voting on the contributions of their peers, and (3) adding a reflection or rationale of their own. Thisensured that students focused on the principles, reflected on the work of peers, and added their own thinking.ICLS 2014 Proceedings832© ISLSStudents were also encouraged to upload their class lab reports, to gain feedback on methodologies andresults and to connect them to the contributed examples. The teacher also developed homework multiple-choiceproblems, which the students solved using a script similar to the idea refinement script, where they tagged,answered and reflected on the problem. In-class, students were given further inquiry tasks, and asked to develop“challenge problems” for their peers, which built upon examples from the community’s knowledge base.The products of these various inquiry activities became a dynamic knowledge base used within thecommunity from one part of the overall unit to the next. This knowledge base, called PLACE.web, served as aresource for a culminating smart classroom activity where students applied what they had learned in the threeunits to solve ill-structured physics problems relating to selected Hollywood movie clips. The smart classroomenvironment, detailed below, was called PLACE.neo, and provided an important technology enhancedenvironment in which we could develop and test the orchestrational framework that is at the heart of this paper.Developing S3: Orchestrating Cross-Context Inquiry in PLACETo help students work as a knowledge community at home, in their neighbourhoods, and in class, we needed todevelop a technology environment that facilitated the various interactions and knowledge contributions requiredby our curriculum. Consistent with Scardmalia and Bereiter’s (2006) argument that the technology environment(in their case, the Knowledge Forum) should be developed to support the particular epistemic and pedagogicalforms within the research (in their case, knowledge building), we needed to develop specific software tools tosupport our own designs around KCI. S3 was developed to support student interactions, data structures, andpedagogical flow, including two specific software systems: PLACE.web, a collaborative social network, whichsupported students in contributing and engaging with the products of their teacher and peers; and PLACE.neo, asmart classroom environment in which the culminating Hollywood physics activity was orchestrated. Below wedescribe both learning environments, their role in supporting student interactions across context and as aknowledge community, and the role of intelligent data mining and software agents in facilitating these actions.PLACE.webThe PLACE.web learning environment consisted of five distinct interaction spaces for students in support of thescripted activities described above: (1) The student status page, which showed aggregated newsfeeds thatprovided students with updates on the community knowledge and their own contributions; (2) The contributionupload page, where students uploaded their examples; (3) The user contribution discussion pages; (4) Theassigned homework pages; (5) And the “Associative Web”- a visualization of the community knowledge,showing a complex interconnected web of social and semantic relations, where students could filter theresources to match their interests or needs.Figure 2.The smart classroom with (1) An interactive whiteboard that orients students towards a specificHollywood scenario, aggregates scenario specific student contributions and facilitates idea negotiation; (2) Asecond board with a different scenario; (3) Individual tablets provide students instructions, allow them to accessthe knowledge base, and contribute ideas to the shared display; and (4) An ambient display showing wherestudents are in the room, completed tasks and time left in the current task.PLACE.neoAn important goal of this project, in terms of developing S3, was to create a culminating activity (i.e., theHollywood physics activity) where students needed to use materials from earlier co-constructed knowledge as aresource for an inquiry project. This would support our design of S3 intelligent agents and other features thatcould gather and distribute materials, assign student groups, and coordinate the pedagogical flow of activities.The overall script for the Hollywood physics activity involved three micro-scripts that spanned home,classroom, and smart classroom settings, At home, students were tasked with reviewing a collection of problemsdrawn from the proceeding 12 weeks (including student generated challenge problems), verifying the principletags that had been applied by their peers, and adding equations that might be used in solving the problems. InICLS 2014 Proceedings833© ISLSclass, students worked in small groups to achieve consensus on a “final set” of the tags and equations for eachproblem. The resulting set of problems, tagged with principles and equations, were then used as raw materialsfor the final smart classroom script, where students would be orchestrated in a complex sequence of rotatingsmall group assignments to set up and solve the Hollywood physics problems.When students entered the smart classroom they were presented with four scenarios drawn frompopular Hollywood movies (e.g., from the movie Ironman, a short scene where he survives a ballistic fall toearth). Each video was shown in one quadrant of the room (Figure 2) on a large display, together with otherinformation added by students progressively throughout the activity. The activity was broken into four differentsteps: (1) Principle Tagging; (2) Principle Negotiation and Problem Assignment; (3) Equation Assignment, andAssumption and Variable Development; and (4) Solving and Recording. In each of these steps, intelligentagents played a role in assigning students to a new group (i.e., “move from video A to video D”) andcoordinating the inquiry activities in the next step. This included distribution of materials (e.g., presenting thegroup with a set of equations that were datamined according to the tags the previous group had added),communications with the teacher, and coordination of group activities (e.g., consensus or voting).Figure 3: The ambient display (1) tracked each student within the room - when students moved location (orwere sorted by an agent) their avatars moved on the display; (2) the timing of activities was tracked using acolored bar at the top of the display, which moved from solid green to flickering red time ran out; and (3)updated student progress by displaying an icon next to their avatar on the completion of each task.The physical design of the room was a major consideration in supporting classroom orchestration.Similar to successful Problem-Based Learning (PBL) approaches, we wanted to support the teacher as a“wandering facilitator” (Hmelo-Silver, 2004). To this end, in a manner similar to the use of post-it boards inPBL, we placed the products of inquiry (the videos and collaboratively constructed student work) on the wallmounted displays (Figure 2). This wandering facilitator model, which includes the demands of managingstudent groupings, monitoring the timing of tasks and supporting their inquiry with resources from theknowledge base, produces high levels of “orchestrational load” (Dillenbourg, 2012). To reduce this load wedeveloped several technical supports. First, following a recent method shown to be effective (Alavi et al., 2009),we designed an ambient display for the front of the smart room (Figure 3). A teacher tablet was also developed,iterating on observations and feedback from previous designs (Tissenbaum & Slotta, 2012), from a device thatshowed student work post hoc (which the teacher could not act upon), to a regulatory orchestrational tool. Thisversion of the teacher tablet showed him where each student was within the script and alerted him whem he wasneeded to approve a group’s work (at the end of Step 3). The goal of these devices (the display and the tablet)was for them to sit at the periphery of the teacher’s awareness so that they only needed to be attended whennecessary (Ishii et al., 1998).Another critical support in managing the orchestrational load of the teacher was the use of intelligentsoftware agents and real-time datamining, which were able to respond to the emergent class patterns in order tomake on-the-fly decisions. During the smart classroom activity, four agents were implemented: (1) The SortingAgent sorted students into groups and assigned room locations first (between Step 1 and Step 2) based on thefrequency of their tags at each board during Step 1; and the second (between Steps 2 & 3) based on placingthem students they had not previously worked with; (2) The Consensus Agent monitored groups requiringconsensus to be achieved among members before progression to the next step; (3) The Bucket Agent coordinatedthe distribution of materials to ensure all members of a group received an equal but unique set of materials (i.e.,problems and equations in Steps 2 & 3); and a Student Progress Agent which tracked individual, small group,and whole class progress to send status updates to other devices (e.g., the teacher orchestration tablet).ICLS 2014 Proceedings834© ISLSTo support student participation the smart classroom activities, we developed tablet applications andinteractive displays. Students’ personal tablets facilitated their login at each zone, provided task specificmaterials and instructions, and collaboration support. Any student work done on his/her tablet while in a zone(e.g., adding tags, suggesting variables) instantly appeared on the zone’s interactive display, which also held apersistent representation of all of the student-negotiated contributions. These displays were also used duringgroup negotiation phases (e.g., deciding which equations would help in solving the video), where studentsphysically dragged the individually suggested items into “Yes” or “No” boxes until consensus was reached.Results and DiscussionIn evaluating PLACE, two forms of analysis are important: 1) the inspectable artifact of PLACE, including thetools and the environment, including software agents and data mining approaches, that serve to define S3, 2) thestudent produced artifacts and collaborations that characterize learning in a KCI model. The present paperfocuses on the first analysis, confirming that PLACE was enacted according to its design, specifying thetechnology elements that allowed such an enactment. One outcome of this work will be a set of designprinciples that support collaborative inquiry in smart classrooms and across learning contexts.Student Contributed ContentIn total, 169 student examples were created, with 635 total discussion notes contributed around those examples.Students also attached 1066 principle tags to the examples and cast 2641 votes on those tags. On average,students uploaded 3.84 examples, which is greater than the requirement of 3 (one per unit), suggesting activecommunity engagement. Figure 4 shows the times of day at which students contributed to the knowledge base,with uploads or comments made at nearly every time except 3am to 6am. This highlights the ability of PLACEto seamlessly connect students within their overall community whenever they felt the desire to take part, with53% of the contributions taking place outside of school hours (4pm-9am).Figure 4. Student contributions to PLACE.web by time of dayFigure 5. How many problems Bucket Agentsent to each group, and time spent on each.During the “challenge problem” script, student groups (n=3 or 4) were tasked with developingproblems for the class to use as review, drawing from the wider knowledge base of peer-contributed examples.The script successfully engaged students in leveraging the collective knowledge base towards developing newobjects for peer engagement and investigation. In total, 13 challenge problem were developed by the groups,each referring to on average 2.23 examples from the knowledge base. The Associative Web employed theunderlying S3 data mining structures to support students in the activity, helping them find examples thatmatched their expertise groups and supported their creation of challenge problems. Post-interviews indicatedthat students found the Associative Web very useful for filtering the overall knowledge base and findingartifacts that matched their search criteria, noting that it “made it clear what examples are related to ourconcepts, because you could see what example was related to more than one of the concepts, and it's easy tobrowse through multiple areas.”S3 Orchestration Across Contexts: The Hollywood Physics Culminating ActivityWithin the culminating activity, students were able to access, contribute to, and use the knowledge base athome, in class, and in the smart classroom. The activity was an important test of S3’s capabilities to supportseamless orchestration of learning activities, and the intelligent software agents and data mining were central toour success. The following sections address how S3 supported the learning within and across these contexts.ICLS 2014 Proceedings835© ISLSOrchestration of the at-home activity: At home students were scaffolded in answering a subset ofproblems from the knowledge base depending on their “expertise groups” from the previous units. S3 agentswere used to ensure that students representing all fourteen principles saw each problem.Orchestration of the in-class activity: In-class, the S3 agents successfully grouped students andfacilitated consensus building on homework problems. Two items were of particular interest to this study. First,was the ability of S3 to capture the individual student work (i.e., the assignment of principles and equations),and to re-visualize them as aggregates for the in-class activity. This highlighted S3’s ability to effectivelycontextualize artifacts from the knowledge base based on the scripted activity. Second was the effectiveness ofthe Bucket Agent in orchestrating the real-time distribution of problems to individual groups. As soon as a groupfinished a problem, the Bucket Agent dipped into the “bucket” of problems and sent the group a new one, untilthe bucket was empty. This allowed a large collection of resources to be distributed to groups as they worked inparallel,TABLE 3: such that all the resources were attended to in a single 60-minute class and every group finished withinof teacherorchestrationduring twothe fourand theagents“orchestrational3Frequencyminutesof eachothermoves(Figure5).ofInthisrunsway,were able to accommodate variations in resourcetechnology” used to enact the move. Box colors indicate ra ges of frequency (see legend below)difficulty and group skill levels (i.e., some resources were more challenging and some groups were quicker).Teacher Orchestration MoveOrchestrational TechnologyCheck Explain Start Check Check/AssignStatusTask Task TimingLocationClarifyTaskApprovalTaskTeacherTablet114170006AmbientDisplay201121000Studenttablet8600010LargeFormatDisplay20000110None460243001#56#1011#1516#20Figure 6. Frequency of teacher orchestration movesFigure 7. Negotiated Equations, Variables andAssumptions (VA) and their use in solution.Orchestration of the smart classroom activity: The S3 agents successfully responded to emergentstudent actions (i.e., actions that were not known or knowable beforehand), drawing on semantically relevantartifacts from the community knowledge base to support follow-up tasks. During Step 2, the Bucket Agentsupplied each group with problems whose principles matched those that had been negotiated by students fortheir scenario. The agents connected, on average, 23 problems to each scenario, distributed evenly across allgroup members, who then promoted 3.4 problems on average; these were negotiated down to 2.6 on average.During Step 3 (“Equation Assignment”), the Bucket Agent drew equations from the knowledge base, which hadbeen tagged in the pre-activity, to the negotiated problems, to serve as a further resource for students. Fromthese agent-filtered equations, students recommended an average of 4.9 equations, which were negotiated downto 4.3 on average.The Sorting Agents also successfully sorted students based on the frequency of the tagging after Step 1,and the condition of working with new group members after Step 2. The ability of these agents to sort studentsbased on pre-defined pedagogical goals where the students who would fit their conditions could not be known apriori was an exciting outcome. Grouping and moving students is a complicated and time intensive task in anyclassroom, and being able to automate it and include the processing of emergent patterns (an impossible task fora human in real-time) provided critical support for managing of orchestrational load. The success of the sortingagents used in PLACE holds promise for the design of more complex agents, and the scripts that employ them.“It was such a paradigm shifting kind of lesson, with the pacing and, the kinetics, and the motion in the roomand kids moving around was a lot to follow. [But] I didn’t need to worry about it, it was just taken care of by thevarious technologies” (Teacher).Video analysis of the teacher during the smart classroom activity provided insight into theorchestrational support provided by the various S3 technologies. All the teacher’s orchestrational “moves” weretime stamped and coded for use of any orchestrational technology (e.g., looking at the ambient display – Figure6). This revealed the potential efficacy of certain technologies to support certain tasks over others – such as theambient display to check student locations, and the teacher tablet for checking group status. Exit interviews withteachers and students support the effectiveness in these technologies for support the enactment of complex smartclassroom activities and in managing orchestrational load. “With the board it was like this is where we have toICLS 2014 Proceedings836© ISLSgo and that’s how much time we have left so we didn’t need the teacher for that any more. He could just focuson going around and talking to the groups” (Jen).Analysis of the student-generated final products and server logs indicate that S3 was effective insupporting student inquiry. We compared the groups’ final answer sheets with their co-developed evidence onthe large-format displays and found, on average, groups used 54.6% of the assigned equations and 76.8% of theassigned variables and assumption (Figure 7 above). We were curious why (especially when compared tovariable and equations) the percentage of equations was so low. Exit interviews indicated students preferred tokeep more equations on hand (in their tool belt) until they were sure which they would use. “If [we were] nottotally sure like it’s a grey area we would put it in “yes” just in case” (Sarah).In exit interviews, students indicated that the interactive large-format displays were effective insupporting their co-construction of evidence and in supporting them in approaching the final problem-solvingstep (Step 4). “Just looking at what other groups had left us you got a good sense, and then from there the groupcould take over and be like this is what we need to do to solve it” (Robert).Comparing the interactions around the board with regular class activities, students indicated a greatersense of collaboration and involvement in discourse and idea generation. “In class if a teacher were to tell [agroup] to solve a problem together then [laughs] I would say that rarely everyone participates, and there are oneor two people who are just not doing anything, but in here it really engaged us to participate” (Rebecca).Cross-Context Learning: Factors and Design PrinciplesAn important outcome of this research is a description of how our design supported a knowledge community –not only within multiple contexts, but also in the transitions between contexts. This work has led to thefollowing high-level design principles for cross-context learning. While these principles are not the only onesfor supporting cross-context learning, they are grounded in a successful design and offer concrete guidance insupport of future designs for cross-context learning that include individual and collaborative inquiry activities,at home, on field trips, in-class, or in smart classrooms. These principles are situated within three importantaspects of cross-context learning:Visualizations of Community KnowledgeIn PLACE we needed to consider the transition from the individually collected examples to collaborative onlineactivities. We wanted student inquiry to be the focus of the activities (rather than materials found in textbooks orother professionally curated materials). Our main challenge was finding ways for the students to effectivelysearch a large repository of student artifacts to find materials that fit their specific needs. In response to this webuilt the Associative Web, allowing students to mine artifacts based on their assigned tags, and present them ina ways that were useful to their given context.At home, we wanted students to see how in-class activities affected their own contributions to theknowledge base. This was the impetus for the aggregated newsfeeds, which leveraged system generatedmetadata about individual students (e.g., which artifacts they had worked on) providing them withcontextualized updates and a macro view of the whole class’ activities. These different aggregated and filterableviews served as a bridge for students to orient themselves within the larger knowledge community.Design Principle: In order to bridge different learning contexts, visualizations of the communityknowledge must present the aggregated information in ways that are relevant to the present context and activity.Data Structures and Semantic Metadata SupportsAn important transition concerned the movement of materials and student roles between the at-home stage (i.e.,on PLACE.web) and the in-class stage (using tablet apps in the classroom). In order for small groups to work onthe assignment of principles and equations in class, we needed S3 to aggregate the individual homeworkresponses in ways that fostered collaborative discussion and debate. Because the underlying metadata weresemantically well defined (e.g. using tags such as “problems”, “principles”, “equations”), we were able to easilycreate views that supported the desired scripted interactions. Metadata also played a significant role inconnecting the in-class artifacts to the smart classroom. In the smart classroom, S3 agents could easily leveragethe semantic metadata generated by students during the activity around each video (e.g., their negotiated tags),to query all artifacts that had been similarly tagged in the in-class stage. These metadata allowed information toflow seamlessly across contexts and to be repurposed for the particular scripted goals within each context.Design Principle: To facilitate the organization of student materials for use across contexts, datastructures should be defined to support flexible query and representation by students, and access by intelligentagentsThe Orchestrational Role of Intelligent Software AgentsIn the smart classroom we knew that we wanted students to be able to use materials from the in-class stage asresources for their problem solving, and that we wanted these materials to be evenly distributed among groupICLS 2014 Proceedings837© ISLSmembers; however the materials would be needed by each group and the students that would make up thosegroups could not be known a priori. Thus, we needed to develop agents that could respond to emergent classpatterns in to support our pedagogical designs – a task that on their own would place a prohibitive level oforchestrational load on the teacher (and students). Similarly, during the in-class stage we needed to distributethe aggregated problems completed during the at-home activity to the individual groups. Here, the goal here wasnot that every groups saw the same number of problems, rather it was to ensure that every problem was attendedto only once in a 60-munite class. The ability of the Bucket Agent to quickly assess the state of the activity anddraw the required materials from another context in pursuit of the scripted goals provides another layer ofadaptive orchestrational support.Design principle: To help orchestrate sequences of activities, intelligent software agents can bedesigned to retrieve materials from the knowledge base or execute pedagogical logic in response to real timeconditions or emergent patterns within student data.Conclusions and Future DirectionsThis study addresses the challenge of supporting a knowledge community that blends rich inquiry practices inthe world around them with well-defined pedagogical and curricular goals. We show the promise of smartclassroom infrastructures such as S3 for leveraging the products of a knowledge community in support ofinquiry activities. Within PLACE.neo, we introduced a role for intelligent software agents to support theorchestration of these activities, by responding to emergent class patterns and enacting pedagogical moves thatwould be impossible to orchestrate “by hand”. This work demonstrates the potential for smart classroom designsto support both long-term student investigations through persistent portals such as PLACE.web, and in real-timeenactments as in PLACE.neo. We believe that going forward, such infrastructures have the potential to createnew avenues for knowledge awareness for individuals by connecting them more directly with the work of theirpeers, and for the broader community by producing unforeseen “rise above” themes for further investigation.ReferencesAlavi, H. S., Dillenbourg, P., & Kaplan, F. (2009). Distributed awareness for class orchestration. In Learning inthe Synergy of Multiple Disciplines (pp. 211-225). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.Barab, S., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. The Journal of theLearning Sciences, (October 2013), 37-41.Dillenbourg, P. (2012). Design for classroom orchestration, position paper. In P. Dillenbourg, Y. Dimitriadis,M. Nussbaum, J. Roschelle et al. (Eds.), Design for classroom orchestration Computers & Education.Dillenbourg, P., Jarvela, S., & Fischer, F. (2009). The evolution of research on computer-supportedcollaborative learning. In N. Balacheff, S. Ludvigsen, T. Jong, A. Lazonder & S. Barnes (Eds.),Technology-enhanced learning (pp. 3-19). Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2004). Problem-based learning: What and how do students learn? Educational PsychologyReview, 16(3), 235-266.Lui, M., & Slotta, J. (2013). Immersive simulations for smart classrooms: Exploring evolutionary concepts insecondary science. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 1-24.Milrad, M., Wong, L., Sharples, M., & Hwang, G. (2013). Seamless learning: An international perspective onnext generation technology enhanced learning.Moher, T. (2006). Embedded phenomena. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors inComputing Systems - CHI '06, 691.Roschelle, J., Penuel, W. R., & Shechtman, N. (2006). Co-design of innovations with teachers : Definition anddynamics. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Learning Sciences, pp. 606-612.Slotta, J. D. (2010). Evolving the classrooms of the future: The interplay of pedagogy, technology andcommunity. In K. Makitalo-Siegl, F. Kaplan, J. Zottmann & F. Fischer (Eds.), The classroom of the futureorchestrating collaborative learning spaces (pp. 215-242). Rotterdam: SensePublisher.Slotta, J. D., & Najafi, H. (2013). Emerging technologies for the classroom. In C. Mouza, & N. Lavigne (Eds.),Emerging technologies for the classroom: A learning sciences perspective (pp. 93-112). Springer.Tissenbaum & Slotta (in press) Scripting and orchestration of learning across contexts: A role for intelligentagents and data mining. In Milrad, Wong & Specht (eds.) Seamless Learning in the Age of Connectivity.Tissenbaum, M. & Slotta J. D. (2013). Scripting and orchestration of collaborative inquiry: An increasingcomplexity of designs. Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on CSCL (pp. 367-368), Madison.Tissenbaum, M, & Slotta, J. D. (2012). Scaffolding a Knowledge Community for High School Physics.Proceedings of the 10th International Conference for the Learning Sciences (pp. 436-440). Sydney.Wang, F., & Hannafin, M. J. (2005). Technology-enhanced learning environments. Educational TechnologyResearch & Development, 53(4), 5-23.ICLS 2014 Proceedings838© ISLS