“I Want to be a Game Designer or Scientist”: Connected Learningand Developing Identities with Urban, African-American YouthJune Ahn, Mega Subramaniam, Elizabeth Bonsignore, Anthony Pellicone, Amanda Waugh and Jason YipUniversity of Maryland, College Park, 4105 Hornbake Building, South Wing, College Park, MD 20742Email: juneahn@umd.edu, mmsubram@umd.edu, ebonsign@umd.edu, apellicone@gmail.com,awaugh@umd.edu, jyip@sesame.orgAbstract: Understanding identity, including how young people come to aspire to becomesomeone, is vital to address the underrepresentation of minorities in science, technology,engineering, and mathematics (STEM). We report on a two-year, research project where wedesigned, implemented, and conducted case study research in an after-school program forinner city, middle school students. The program utilizes the school library, new mediaactivities, and science fiction to engage young people to imagine STEM as relevant in theirlives. We focus our analysis on two African-American boys, Damian and Jamal, who are bestfriends and avid gamers. Despite their similar backgrounds, they show starkly divergentidentity trajectories while participating in our program. We highlight how they experienceddifferent connected-learning activities and social positioning over time, and how theseexperiences related to Damian’s developing aspiration to become a game designer or scientist,contrasted with Jamal’s struggle to imagine a future in STEM.IntroductionIncreasing the representation of minority groups in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)fields is a high profile issue in education (Chen & Weko, 2009). However, helping individuals develop anaspiration to pursue STEM related fields is a complex endeavor. Identity-development experiences that helpindividuals define themselves and encounter positive positioning by others may provide important mechanismsto develop such aspirations. Research has shed light on how young people develop identity in a variety of formaland informal learning contexts (Barton et al., 2013; Nasir & Hand, 2008; Polman & Miller, 2010; Polman,2006). We build on these studies to examine how young adolescents develop identity in a world in which theyhave increasing access to new media, online networks, and information.In this paper, we report on a longitudinal, design-based research (DBR) project (Collins, Joseph, &Bielaczyc, 2004) in which we (a) designed and implemented an after-school program called Sci-Dentity forurban, middle school students that utilized science storytelling and new media to engage youths in STEM ideas,and (b) examined the students’ developing sense of personal identity over an 18-month time period. Wedeveloped the project within the ethos of recent efforts to understand young people’s new media participation,interest-driven practices, and connected learning experiences (Ito et al., 2013; Pinkard & Austin, 2010). Studentsin our after-school program engage in various storytelling and new media production activities that examineSTEM in popular culture. We iteratively designed the program to allow youths to pursue their own interests andwe leveraged this context to examine their experiences and identity development over time.We focus our analysis on two African-American, adolescent males, Damian and Jamal (pseudonyms).They are best friends who share a deep affinity toward video games and technology. They attend the samemiddle school and are among a select group of students who have participated in our program consistently forthe last two years (as 6th and 7th graders). Despite their similar backgrounds, Damian begins to assert anaspiration to be a game designer or scientist by the end of his 7th grade year, while his friend Jamal continues tostruggle to imagine his future. In this paper, we outline how theories of identity development, new medialiteracy, and connected learning help us to understand their participation in our program and their evolvingaspirations. Our findings contribute to current discussions about learning, such as Connected Learning modelsthat foreground the potential for young people to leverage technology to produce, participate, and connect withresources – informational and social – to pursue their interests and develop career goals (Ito et al., 2013).Theoretical FrameworkThe driving motivation for our research is to shed light on the ways in which school libraries, storytellingactivities, and new media participation can help young adolescents identify with STEM and develop aspirationsto pursue a future in a STEM field. We build from prior scholars who have examined (a) learners’ identitydevelopment and (b) ideas about how individuals learn with new media and across informal environments.Identity DevelopmentWe leverage Barton and colleagues’ (2013) definition of identity as how a person figures themselves, and isperceived by others, in a given moment. How a person figures themselves can be observed as a series of storiesICLS 2014 Proceedings657© ISLSor narratives that are told about the self, such as the communities one affiliates with, what actions one is capableof, and what futures one can envision (Sfard & Prusak, 2005). Thus, an initial point of understanding isobserving how the youths in our program voice their aspirations and interests. Figured selves are also enacted inspecific contexts of practice that influence what actions and discourse can occur and are valued (Polman, 2006).The concept of positioning describes how a person authors him or herself in relation to the people with whomthey interact, and the activities and community in which they participate (Polman & Miller, 2010). A keyelement of understanding an individual is how they are perceived, recognized, and socially positioned by others.Recognition by others has been shown to play a major role in how female students connect withscience and how they decide to pursue science careers (Carlone & Johnson, 2007). Learners are influenced byhow a teacher or adult facilitator views and subsequently treats them, and what others see as their capabilities(Barton et al., 2013; Polman, 2006). In prior research, such identity-developing experiences have been analyzedas moments or scenes (Polman, 2006) that can illuminate how local and seemingly ephemeral interactions leaveimprints on how individuals perceive their opportunities, position in society, and aspirations toward futureactivities. In our research we seek to examine the moments of interaction that our participant youths experience,and leverage these moments to glean insight into their developing identities over time. Identity develops throughthe history of accrued moments that span across contexts and time (Barton et al., 2013). Thus, we also turned ananalytical eye toward understanding how our focal learners’ moments (or scenes) linked together over time torelate to their own articulated aspirations and self-image.Connected Learning, New Media Literacy, and IdentityWe examine our youths’ developing sense of self in a Connected Learning context, in which young people haveincreased access to a wider ecology of information, technology, and interest-driven learning communities (Ito etal., 2013). For example, informal learning programs and online communities provide ways for young people tolearn important skills, cultivate relationships, and develop their own identities in the process. Theoretically,these capabilities should provide more pathways for young people to develop deeper identification with apersonal interest, develop expertise and skill, and connection to career and life goals. However, there is a needto understand how these pathways develop and how learners actually make these connections between interests,learning opportunities, and formal academic or career goals. Much of the early work has focused onunderstanding successful learners, but attention is also needed to articulate the challenges that arise for learnersin these contexts.The intersection of new media literacy and identity provides a framework to understand and articulatethese ideas. Skills such as searching for information, assessing credibility of content, and understandingcomplex cultural practices such as remix, are vital to fully participate in connected, interest-driven learningexperiences. Research is needed to better understand the consequences for learners who are still developing, orface obstacles in learning these literacy skills. There is also increased understanding that successful learners areable to effectively mobilize and activate their ecology of resources in order to pursue self-interested learning(Barron, 2006; Ito et al., 2013). For example, successful learners can search for information and connect tocontent in ways that further their knowledge. They can develop relationships with peers or mentors, in order todevelop skills and guide their activities. However, there are open questions still concerning how to supportstruggling learners who might not yet have these skills to mobilize their ecosystem of resources. One potentiallink is understanding how literacy skills and identity moments intersect in the cycle of experiences that a learnermay face. For example, in order for an individual to fully participate in an environment or learning community,they need to have some modicum of literacy skills. To gain skills, one needs incremental and sustainedparticipation. However, to sustain participation, one also needs to self-identify with the community in the firstplace. How do these inter-related factors combine in cycles of experiences for learners, and subsequently relateto their developing sense of future aspirations?Research QuestionsTo delve deeper into this broader question, we focused on three research questions that were informed by theidentity development and connected learning literature:R1a:R1b:R1c:How did our youth participants position themselves, and how did others position them,throughout their experiences in Sci-Dentity?How did these experiences relate to each other, and inform future interactions over time?How did youth participation in the interest-driven, new media based activities in Sci-Dentityrelate to their identity trajectories?ICLS 2014 Proceedings658© ISLSMethodologyContext of the Study and Design of Sci-DentityThe context of this study is an after-school program called Sci-Dentity that is run in middle school libraries, inpartnership with school librarians, and focuses on using science-based stories to help adolescents think about therelevance of science in their everyday lives (Subramaniam et al., 2013). The students read young adult books, orwatch videos that incorporate science in stories. In addition, they engage in storytelling activities usingtraditional (e.g. writing) and new media (e.g. videos, infographics etc.) modes of production. Participants in theprogram also network and share their work in a private social network site (http://sci-dentity.org/).We implemented Sci-Dentity in a large, urban school district where approximately 90% of studentscome from minority groups and nearly 77% qualify for free and reduced meal (FARM) programs. Damian andJamal, our two focal learners, attend a school where nearly 100% of students qualify for FARM and 98% of thestudent population is African-American. Over an 18-month period, the research team planned and facilitatedweekly after-school sessions at two urban middle school libraries. At various iterations of the project, the projectteam included seven graduate student assistants and ten masters student volunteers that helped with the program.This team attended the after-school sessions, worked individually with the students, and participated in datacollection and weekly team debriefing meetings where we discussed what occurred each week, emerging issues,and redesigned activities based on our findings. The project was designed iteratively, with periodic redesigns ofthe general after-school program based on research and analysis.Data CollectionWe collected several forms of data that spanned a period from January 2012 to June 2013. Each week, sessionsat each school were video recorded. All members of the research team, including student assistants andvolunteers, wrote weekly observation notes; took pictures, video, and audio recordings; and logged individualinteractions with the youth participants. Our weekly team meetings were also audio recorded and included in ourcorpus of data. All artifacts and projects created by the students (e.g. stories, sketches) were collected, as well aslog data of their activity on the social network site (e.g. record of logins, posts, comments etc.). Finally, studentsand librarians in our program were interviewed at the end of each school year, May 2012 and May 2013, whichcoincided with the end of 6th and 7th grade. In total, our data sources included nearly 60 hours of video and audiorecordings, approximately 250 pages of written observation notes, and over 50 interviews.Data AnalysisWe analyzed our corpus of data using a case study framework (Yin, 2003). Each member of the research teamchose several focal learners in our program. For each focal learner, the researcher reviewed each week of dataover the 18-month period, and chronologically catalogued: (1) specific learner interactions that were captured invideo and audio recordings, with salient interactions transcribed for dialogue and actions, (2) mentions of thelearner in written observation notes by the project team, (3) artifacts such as posts to the social network site andtheir project work, and (4) identity-related information culled from our interview transcripts.Our chronological data trail allowed us to both triangulate data sources to develop our claims and checkthe trustworthiness of our interpretations in a systematic way. For example, we could match scenes on videorecordings with observation notes of the same interaction made by the project team, and notes from teamdebriefing sessions that mentioned that scene. We could combine multiple perspectives of the same scene –from video, from the perspective of an actor in the scene, or group understanding of that scene in team meetings.This constant comparison process enabled us to examine how our focal learners positioned themselves indifferent interactions, how others perceived them, and how they experienced our program activities. Interviewdata from the focal learners provided insight into their aspirations, perceptions of self, their participation in theprogram, and their home life. Interviews with librarians provided an additional window into how our focallearners were perceived in school. Each researcher coded data for instances of participation, positioning, andliteracy. Each researcher also annotated the data for emerging themes, particularly if they were recurring andrelated longitudinally across time. Thick case descriptions for each learner’s identity trajectory were craftedthrough this process, and enabled us to make comparisons across learners as well.FindingsMany of Damian and Jamal’s moments in the program occurred together or in close vicinity to one another.Likewise, we present their cases through intertwined vignettes that are representative of their closely linkedexperiences, while illuminating the contrasts in their identity trajectories over time.New Beginnings, New FriendshipsWe began our after-school program with the students in January 2012. In the first session, students watched avideo about storm chasers (scientists who follow and study tornados), and did a short story exercise based on theICLS 2014 Proceedings659© ISLSvideo. Immediately, we observed how Damian and Jamal positioned themselves and how our own project teampositioned them. Several facilitators immediately recognized Damian as a young man seeking to makeconnections and being proactive about charting his own path. One facilitator noted, “Damian is a researcher inthe group. Our first week with him, I noticed that he was searching a lot of information concerning StormChasers” and another added, “Damian was extremely proactive, even searching other websites for informationto enhance his story”. These initial observations – a willingness to engage in activities, search for informationonline, and move off on his own based on the task given – became consistent ways that Damian positionedhimself throughout the program.In contrast, Jamal had a rather inauspicious beginning. One facilitator wrote in her observation notes,“Jamal had his head on the desk. Not sure why he was even there. He did not seem the least bit interested in thestory writing. I tried working with him individually, but it was like pulling teeth. His story was uninspired, shortand full of spelling errors. I’ll be surprised if we see him again.” Other project volunteers confirmed thisobservation, noting that the other students treated his disengaged behavior as if it was the norm. Thischaracterized a recurring theme for Jamal, one in which he positioned himself as outwardly disengaged, whileadults responded by positioning him as apathetic to the program and showing low literacy skills. Despite thisinitial perception, Jamal was one of the few participants who attended the program fairly consistently, for theentire two-year period of this study. What explains this contradiction?Damian and Jamal began a close friendship during this time period that revealed aspects of theirmotivations and personalities. Damian was a new student to the middle school and had few existingrelationships with peers. Perhaps it was this situation that related to our consistent observations of Damianseeking social connections with both peers and adult facilitators over time. In our second week, videoobservations showed Damian developing a friendship with Jamal. Jamal confirmed these observations in ourinterviews with him, and he explained how he became friends with Damian, “He came here in the sixth grade,and I just started talking about games. That's how we became friends.” Jamal’s self identity as kind and helpfulalso relates to this developing friendship. In our interviews with students, we asked them to imagine writing abiography and explain how they would describe themselves. Jamal provided insight into how he saw himself, “Idon't really know. I'm kind of fun sometimes. I'm always there to mostly help. Like when a new student's hereand you know, he gets bullied and stuff, I'm always there to help. I'm easy to be friends with. I like to playgames and fix stuff.” The school librarian corroborated these observations of Jamal saying, “So, in his class, he'svery well-behaved. Like, he's one of the better students and kind of just has to deal with a bunch of ruckus goingon around him all the time, because he's very respectful and he's not going to give anybody a hard time. [But] Ithink his problems come with engaging in the work.”Utopian and Dystopian FuturesThe students’ primary 6th grade project was to develop a short story based on a discussion of utopian anddystopian future societies. The students read and discussed The Hunger Games (a popular young adult seriesthat had a major movie release at the time). A requirement of the project was for students to search for and findan interesting scientific idea, around which they could craft a plot and characters. Damian and Jamal, like manyof the other learners, struggled when using the library iPads to search for information related to their interests. Inone video scene, we observed Jamal struggling to search for information and remarking, “everything is blocked”through the school district’s Internet filter. A facilitator asked Jamal what he was interested in and he replied“weapons”. This interaction led to a series of guided Internet searches about weapons, ballistics, and somehowto information about the game World of Warcraft. The two boys became very excited at this finding, leading toDamian jumping into the exchange:Facilitator: … Perhaps you can do a search about what it takes to make video games anduse that in your story… have you ever seen Tron?Damian:I love Tron! That’s a video game.Facilitator: Yea it is a video game… Someone actually made a story about the gameTron.Damian:Like a virtual world.Facilitator: Yea, so I would find a fact about virtual worlds and write a story about that.”Jamal:I want shooting games.In this scene we noticed how the facilitator was initially helping Jamal through his difficulty in conceptualizingwhat to search for and how to conduct a search for information. However, Damian jumped into this activity andsubtly took advantage of an opportunity to connect with this facilitator. We also observed how the adultfacilitator positioned the boys’ interests in video games as a valid avenue to engage in the task. Damian made aconnection, observing that the story of Tron was centered on the ramifications of designing and living in avirtual world. We later learned that Damian was an avid Minecraft player, a game where players can build avirtual world themselves. Damian realized that his interest in virtual worlds was a valid way by which he couldICLS 2014 Proceedings660© ISLSconnect his interest in games with the exercise of imagining futures. In contrast, Jamal exhibited behavior thatbecame a recurring pattern for him, where he was a silent participant who seemed passive but secretly listenedin on the conversation and tried to make his own connections. Jamal chimed in at the end and voiced his interestin researching shooting games, revealing that he had been following the conversation silently. Both Damian andJamal continued to follow this interaction pattern in future sessions.In later weeks, we observed Damian searching for information on Minecraft. Video observations showDamian explaining to a facilitator that at home he was making a “cobblestone generator that mixes lava andwater and makes cobblestones” in the game. Ultimately, Damian developed a story in which life was entirelylived in a virtual world, and incorporated his view of the societal ramifications of this future. His path to thisproject illuminated his propensity to connect ideas. His initial interest was in video games and Minecraft, but hewas able to readily connect his out-of-school interest to the after-school activity of combining science(programming, virtual worlds) with stories (Tron) and apply it to his own imagination.In contrast, Jamal faced obstacles that related to his self-doubts about his formal literacy skills. As aresult, he consistently positioned himself in public as someone who was disengaged with formal academic workwhile privately attempting to engage behind the scenes. In one session the students worked in groups to thinkabout utopian and dystopian futures, and how science and technology would play a role in those imaginedfutures. Jamal was a leader during group discussions, often contributing ideas such as zombies that the otherstudents took up enthusiastically. However, a facilitator wrote in her observation notes that Jamal did not seeminterested in writing his own story, “When he starts writing, his stories and ideas are always really interesting,but I think he is hesitant in people reading the materials or criticizing his work.” Video recordings show Jamalin this session, with his head down not knowing how to start. He also steals glances and listens in on his peerstalking around him, searching for clues as to how to make progress, but does not readily accept help from adultfacilitators. This pattern of interaction occurred regularly. Jamal would often engage when thinking about ideasor discussing topics of interest to him, but when asked to create formal products he often reverted quickly backto a posture of public disengagement.Connections and DisconnectionsIn the 7th grade, we guided the students to consider identity by imagining themselves as superhero characters inscience fiction. The learners created infographics about their characters, linking science and life events to thestories. Damian particularly struggled to focus in this activity. He spent much of his time using an online avatarcreator to visually depict his superhero character, and joked around with Jamal who was often not engaged withthe project. However, he also spent time trying to connect with facilitators that led him to new discoveries.Damian’s superhero character’s name was Wesker, who had a magic helmet and hammer, and camefrom another planet. We learned later in the year that Damian was interested in the movie Thor, which wasabout a comic book character that had a similar storyline. Eventually, Damian focused on exploring potentialplanets that Wesker could have come from, and in one session, he suddenly exclaimed out loud “Hey I found anew planet like Earth!!!” Damian proudly posted a news article to a section of our social network site called the“Brain”, where we encouraged learners to share science inspirations that could be used in stories. The articledescribed NASA’s Kepler space telescope project that set out to discover planets that resided in “habitablezones” similar to Earth. This breakthrough energized Damian and in future sessions, we consistently observedhim engaged in learning more about planets discovered through the Kepler satellite. In one session we sawDamian, working with a facilitator, leveraging his new discovery to engage with scientific ideas. Damian wasexcited, exclaiming, “Awww!! There's more planets! …I found another planet!!” He began to describe to thefacilitator the facts about the planet, such as the number of candidate planets, the search for Earth sized worlds,and how satellites detect new planets by the dimming of star lights as a planet crosses a star.While Damian found connections with facilitators and ideas, Jamal struggled. He often sat away fromothers during whole group activities or discussions, but still within the vicinity of his friend Damian and anotherfemale friend Chanda, who was close to the two boys. Often Jamal would not engage with tasks unless Damianor Chanda urged him on. For example, Jamal was not particularly interested in creating an infographic for hischaracter, Dark Batman, who he envisioned as a more evil version of the comic book character. However, hereadily engaged in describing his character when we encouraged Damian to “interview” Jamal using their iPad(instead of writing in a document). These patterns related to Jamal’s self-perceptions about his academic ability(not writing, but participating in other new media forms of storytelling). We also came to understand that hismain motivation was to have a place to hang out with friends.We learned through interviews with the school librarian, that Jamal was in the “lower academic track”in his school. His friends, including Damian, were all in the high academic track. In Jamal’s interview at the endof 6th grade, he noted that he had very little time to hang out with Damian and their friends during school time.They had different classes, different lunch periods, and Sci-Dentity was one of the times that they were able tohang out together. These details of Jamal’s school life suggested that the opportunity to be with friends, whomhe is otherwise disconnected from, was a main motivation that drove him to continually attend the program.ICLS 2014 Proceedings661© ISLSMuch of his 7th grade data described Jamal’s friendship, joking around, and social drama with Damian andChanda. The school librarian also confirmed this observation saying, “He wants to be around his friends, whichare Damian and Chanda, but he doesn't to me really feel like doing anything. He just kind of wants to be thereand not be missing anything.”The baggage of Jamal’s perceived lower-academic positioning also emerged in other instances. Forexample, in late Spring 2013, we had one session where nearly all of the students did not attend. We learned thatthe students had to practice for the school play, but only those in the high academic track were in the play. Thissituation left Jamal as one of the only youth in Sci-Dentity that afternoon and served as a reminder of hisacademic status in school and his disconnect from his friends. We noticed a consistent pattern of interaction andpositioning with Jamal that harkened back to a previous comment by the school librarian that he was respectful,but just had to deal with the “ruckus” of his school environment. We observed that Jamal would often shut downat predictable moments. When his peers would get rowdy and the school librarian would shout at the students,he often just put his head down and tuned out. When the librarian or a facilitator would attempt to push Jamal tocontinue writing or searching for ideas online, he would disengage and respond with reasons for his lack ofprogress (often saying that he did not know how to spell). He also shied away from asking adults for help,instead preferring to listen-in on other students’ conversations, to glean clues about what he should do. Theseseries of experiences were related to Jamal often positioning himself at the outset of a session as cool anddisengaged. In moments where we observed him striving to engage, his momentum was often halted by amyriad of factors: distractions from the sometimes hectic atmosphere of the school, lack of confidence in hisliteracy skills, and reticence to approach adults or peers for help (e.g. mobilizing his ecosystem).Finding a Spark: Video GamesAt the end of 7th grade, the students defined their own interests and the after-school sessions were focused onguiding interest-driven learning. Jamal and Damian (along with several boys) decided to learn how to designvideo games. We leveraged this interest to focus on game design tasks and talking about computing relatedcareers. This project seemed to ignite Jamal. The school librarian also noticed a change in him and began toposition Jamal differently: “I feel like at the beginning of the year we couldn't even get him to sit and listen orpay any attention to what we were supposed to be doing. And by the end of the year, he started to come up withthe video game. Once we started that video game project, he really came up with his own ideas. So, he definitelyimproved in that aspect.” Towards the end of 7th grade, we began to see a spark of interest with Jamal despitethe fact that he continued to struggle with his self-positioning and literacy skills.Damian also latched onto this project, having been one of the loudest voices to advocate a focus onvideo games. We introduced a tool called GameMaker that allowed the learners to design and develop simplegames by loading sprites and coding simple scripts. Damian was immediately interested in learning how to useGameMaker and it was clear that the concept of actually building a video game himself ignited a passion in him.We observed the two friends deeply engaged in interest-driven learning activities and they spent much timedeciding on the details of their game design. However, it was interesting to observe how members of our ownteam positioned these activities at times. One facilitator wrote in her notes, “Damian was working with Jamal ontheir game, but in fact spent the entire time looking up music to script to their game, which has not really beenstarted. On the one hand, it is great to see them engaged in something, on the other, there was not a lot ofproduct at the end. That said, they were very thoughtful about the kind of music they wanted.” While the boyswere very engaged in the project, there were some tensions with facilitators viewing activities such as lookingup music for the game as non-productive.Ultimately, the school year ended before the students could fully develop their video games. Theexperience illuminated some of the tensions related to interest-driven learning environments. We touched on apassion for these two friends (games) that spurred engagement in other interest-driven learning practices such asusing technology to research information (e.g. find music to fit their game narrative), design products, and learnabout tools to produce artifacts (e.g. GameMaker). In contrast, this interest-driven process also required muchmore time and personal guidance from facilitators. The boys (and other learners doing this project) were excitedabout their game designs, but were somewhat disappointed when the school year ended before they couldbecome fluent enough with GameMaker to realize their game designs as actual games. A spark – an interest –was a vital first step, but formal practices such as design and coding also need time to develop and learn. Theboys were disappointed that summer vacation would bring a lull in the program. However, they both cited thisproject as the most memorable and interesting of their two-year experience in Sci-Dentity and voiced a strongdesire to continue the project in their 8th grade year.DiscussionThis study contributes additional understanding of Connected Learning contexts and the role of identitydevelopment in such learning environments (Ito et al., 2013). Past research has identified factors that contributeto a successful connected learning experience. For example, successful learners begin with an interest and utilizeICLS 2014 Proceedings662© ISLSnew media to work on active projects that promote further learning within those interests. They participate inlearning programs and online communities to glean support from peers and mentors. And, finally they find waysto connect their learning in these experiences to formal endeavors such as schoolwork or progressing toward acareer aspiration. Much of the early research describes success cases and focuses on the importance ofconfiguring access to an ecosystem of resources – technology, people, institutions etc. – to enable this type oftechnology-mediated, interest-driven process.This study lends additional detail and considerations to this framework. The cases of Damian andJamal highlight the local processes – identity and literacy experiences – within a connected learningenvironment that relate to their successes and challenges over time. Damian’s story shows a young man whowas well served by our program. He was in the high academic track in school and was already deeply engagedin a well-defined interest (Minecraft). Damian brought this background to Sci-Dentity, and he accumulatedpositive experiences over time that further reinforced his interests and sense of self. Despite struggles he mighthave had with new media literacy skills or social distractions, he found ways to continually relate hisexperiences over time. Like more successful new media literacy learners, Damian developed an aptitude toproductively mobilize his ecology of available resources. He sought help from facilitators and connected topeers, bridged his ideas across informal and formal contexts, and used technology to aid in these tasks. From anidentity perspective, Damian positioned himself to achieve these goals and others positioned him in positiveways. We argue that this cycle of mutually reinforcing experiences related to Damian beginning to developaspirations toward STEM. In his 7th grade interview, Damian voiced aspirations to become a “game designer orscientist”. He also shared details that spotlight his deepening identity trajectory. He disclosed that he knew ofparticular game design companies in his home state that he aspired to work for and had also done independent,online research to identify colleges that had game design degree programs.Jamal’s case highlights a young man who could fall between the cracks, even in interest-drivenprograms that value alternative pathways to learning. Jamal brought his background to Sci-Dentity, as a studentthat was insecure about his academic positioning in school. These factors related to his self-positioning in theprogram. Outwardly, he did not ask for help, but instead took to silently listening in and observing his peers, inefforts to get clues about to how to engage in tasks. When able to tackle tasks that he was literate in – recordingvideos, designing a game – he showed progress. When we asked him to work in formal ways – doing researchor writing – he shut down. We observed a learner who identified with our program because it gave him aconnection to his friends. Jamal’s story is of a well-intentioned learner, who progresses in fits and starts, due toa cycle of obstacles that accrue over time. These experiences related to Jamal’s struggle to connect his learningacross contexts and imagine his future. When asked about his future aspirations he replied, “Hoping to mostlyfix cars or to customize cars or become I don't really know. That's mostly what I think I can do.” Interestingly,Jamal had never voiced an interest in cars for the 18-months he had been in the program, although it could havebeen a valid avenue to engage with STEM ideas. Jamal also had few plans for his educational future, stating thathe should get a good education but probably would not go to college. When probed further, we learned that hisgrandfather and his socioeconomic success were the salient identity stories in Jamal’s mind. Jamal stated that hisgrandfather was the person he most looked up to, “… he's successful. He's not like that big time rich person, buthe is successful. He has his own house. He has three cars that he was able to buy. He has a big TV. He was ableto do all that stuff and retire too.”Design Considerations and ConclusionsThe results of this study have several implications for practice and research. In the context of our DBR project,the case studies introduce several considerations that we aim to explore in the next iteration (the students’ 8thgrade year). A major challenge for interest-driven learning environments is designing experiences to continuallypromote each individual learner’s unique development of interest, expertise, and skill at every given moment intime (Edelson & Joseph, 2001). For Damian, we need to design activities that push him to further his expertisein formal technical skills, interact with individuals who can further his imagination of possible futures in gamedesign or computing, and link his future educational plans to his developing interest. Damian needs furtherpositive experiences that continue to add onto his positive identity trajectory and future aspirations. For learnerslike Jamal, we are faced with a complex task of how to break through his cycle of obstacles. We must find waysfor him to engage in literate ways that do not lead to shut down, but also guide him towards more confidence informally recognized practices and dispositions. Furthermore, there are other learners in Sci-Dentity who eachhave their own unique interests to address. For example, some learners are avid storywriters, and other learnersin the program, like Jamal, are still searching for interests to pursue and facing their own unique obstacles.In our next DBR iteration, we see intriguing opportunities to further integrate ideas of interest-drivenlearning, within the unique affordances of Connected Learning environments, while serving the specific goal ofhelping under-represented youths develop stronger identities in STEM. For example, Edelson & Joseph’s (2001)Interest-Driven Learning framework provides insights into the types of contextual motivation strategies thatcould be employed in our weekly sessions. The Connected Learning literature underscores the importance ofICLS 2014 Proceedings663© ISLSputting into place a larger ecosystem of resources and experiences – beyond just our after school setting – thatcould help our learners to begin explicitly linking their experiences across contexts and expand theirimagination. Finally, research in learners’ identity-development attunes us to examine the cycle of experiencesthat our youths experience, connected to their broader social, economic, and cultural settings, that relate to theirdeepening sense of self over time. Integrating these separate research streams may help us better understandcomplex challenges such as how to promote a learner from an interest to a deep commitment to pursue a STEMcareer. As one example, DiSalvo and Bruckman (2009) found that there is a correlation between video gameinterests and a student’s decision to pursue computer science in college, but the relationship is very small andthe majority of avid gamers never translate their interest in games to actually pursue computer science. Ourfindings offer a potential response to this perplexing relationship. The careful design and accumulation ofinterest-driven activities, enhanced through connected learning contexts, that promote identity-consciousexperiences, may be required in concert to reduce the gap between a learner’s figured self with their potentiallyrealizable self. We posit that the cases of Damian and Jamal are applicable to other learners. By being attuned tothe contextual factors at play, at key moments during the identity development of learners like Jamal andDamian, we can perceive and design for those moments that present opportunities to spark more productivetrajectories and to sustain those already rocketing forward.ReferencesBarron, B. (2006). Interest and self-sustained learning as catalysts of development: A learning ecologyperspective. Human Development, 49, 193 – 224.Barton, A. C., Kang, H., Tan, E., O’Neill, T. B., Bautista-Guerra, J., & Brecklin, C. (2013). Crafting a future inscience: Tracing middle school girls’ identity work over time and space. American EducationalResearch Journal, 50(1), 37–75.Carlone, H. B., & Johnson, A. (2007). Understanding the science experiences of successful women of color:Science identity as an analytic lens. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44(8), 1187–1218.Chen, X., & Weko, T. (2009). Students Who Study Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)in Postsecondary Education (No. 2009161). U.S. Department of Education, National Center forEducation Statistics. Retrieved from http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2009161Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15–42.DiSalvo, B. J., & Bruckman, A. (2009). Questioning video games’ influence on CS interest. In Proceedings ofthe 4th International Conference on Foundations of Digital Games (pp. 272–278). Retrieved fromhttp://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1536561Edelson, D. C., & Joseph, D. M. (2001). Motivating active learning: A design framework for interest drivenlearning. Retrieved from http://www.designbasedresearch.org/reppubs/edelson-joseph.pdfIto, M., Gutierrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, W. R., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., … Watkins, S. C. (2013).Connected learning: An agenda for research and design. Irvine, CA: Digital Media and LearningResearch Hub.Nasir, N. S., & Hand, V. (2008). From the court to the classroom: Opportunities for engagement, learning, andidentity in basketball and classroom mathematics. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(2), 143–179.Pinkard, N., & Austin, K. (2010). Digital youth network: Creating new media citizens through the affinitylearning model. International Journal of Learning and Media, 2(4).Polman, J. L. (2006). Mastery and appropriation as means to understand the interplay of history learning andidentity trajectories. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(2), 221–259.Polman, J. L., & Miller, D. (2010). Changing stories: Trajectories of identification among african americanyouth in a science outreach apprenticeship. American Educational Research Journal, 47(4), 879–918.Sfard, A., & Prusak, A. (2005). Telling identities: In search of an analytic tool for investigating learning as aculturally shaped activity. Educational Researcher, 34(4), 14 – 22.Subramaniam, M., Ahn, J., Waugh, A., Taylor, N. G., Druin, A., Fleischmann, K. R., & Walsh, G. (2013). Therole of school librarians in enhancing science learning. Journal of Librarianship and InformationScience, 0961000613493920.Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research: Design and methods (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGEPublications.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank all of the school librarians, our students, and graduate research assistants who played anintegral role in this project. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundationunder Grant No. 1124176. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in thismaterial are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings664© ISLS