Concept Formation in ActivityYrjö Engeström, University of Helsinki, yrjo.engeström@helsinki.fiAnnalisa Sannino, University of Helsinki, annalisa.sannino@helsinki.fiYuri Lapshin, Moscow State University of Psychology and Education, annoory@gmail.com,Maria Safronova, Moscow State University of Psychology and Education, mariasaf@gmail.comJaakko Virkkunen, University of Helsinki, jaakko.virkkunen@helsinki.fiIrene Vänninen, MTT Agrifood Research Finland, irene.vanninen@mtt.fiMarco Pereira Querol, Federal University of Paraná, mapquero@gmail.com	  Discussant: Rogers Hall, Vanderbilt University,	  r.hall@vanderbilt.edu	  	  Abstract: This symposium introduces the study of formation of concepts in collectiveactivities (concept formation “in the wild”) as a new research field in learning sciences. Usingmeditational and activity-oriented theoretical frameworks, the contributors analyze conceptformation in diverse activities, asking: What are the key characteristics and mechanisms ofemergence of functional concepts embedded in activities and what analytical dimensionsmight be fruitful for the investigation and facilitation of the formation of such concepts? Whatare the pontentials and limitations of different mediational means and multimodalinstrumentalities in the formation and development of functional concepts? How are volitionand future-oriented agency intertwined with the formation of functional concepts?Overview of SymposiumConcept formation and conceptual change are central topics in studies of human learning. However, these topicsare studied predominantly in laboratory and classroom contexts in which the focus is on individual learners andthe concepts to be acquired are neutral, well known and defined by the researchers or instructors ahead of time.The formation of functional concepts (Greeno, 2012) in work and other collaborative activities “in the wild” hasonly recently been identified as a field of research (see the special issue of Mind, Culture, and Activity; 3/2012).Embedded in activities, concepts need to be understood as complex, emergent, contested and volitionally chargedcollective constructs that have serious practical consequences for communities (Engeström & Sannino, 2012).This is a new challenge to the learning sciences.The objectives of the symposium are to take a step forward in the development of the newly formulatedresearch field characterized as concept formation in the wild, to open up analyses of future-oriented volition asan important aspect of concept formation, and to bring together for comparison and exchange empirical analysesof different cultural contexts of concept formation and volition embedded in human activities.Cultural-historical and activity-oriented theories (Vygotsky, 1997; Davydov, 1990; Hutchins, 2005;Nersessian, 2012) regard concept formation as crucially dependent on the construction and use of mediatingmeans, specified as material anchors, models, or signs. Traditionally language has been seen as the dominantmediator and modality of concepts. However, there is increasing evidence that functional concepts take shapeand function by means of multiple interacting modalities, ranging from the body to physical artifacts, picturesand graphic representations, symbols and various sign systems. The mediational means and multimodalinstrumentalities involved in the formation and development of functional concepts are a central issue addressedby the contributors to this symposium.Vygotsky (1997) built an explicit connection between concept formation and volition with his principleof double stimulation. In collaborative activities the formation of future-oriented concepts and volitional action toconstruct the future in practice go hand in hand. We may speak of future-oriented perspectival concepts orpossibility concepts (Engeström & al., 2005). These qualities point toward an important, yet practicallyunexplored connection between concept formation and volition. Volition may be understood as the capacity toform and implement intentions that go beyond and transform the accepted routines and given conditions of theactivity in which the subjects are involved. In the symposium, concept formation is discussed as a volitional andagentic process. This is a novel perspective on concept formation that requires ambitious theoretical,methodological and empirical work.The papers opf the symposium will address the following major questions:••What are the key characteristics and mechanisms of emergence of functional concepts embedded inactivities and what analytical dimensions might be fruitful for the investigation and facilitation ofthe formation of such concepts?What are the pontentials and limitations of different mediational means and multimodalinstrumentalities in the formation and development of functional concepts?ICLS 2014 Proceedings1308© ISLS•How are volition and future-oriented agency intertwined with the formation of functional concepts?The four papers focus on concept formation and learning in different activities and cultural settings,ranging from home care for the elderly in Finland (Engeström) to an internship of future elementary schoolteachers in Italy (Sannino), public schools in Moscow, Russia (Lapshin, Safronova and Virkkunen), andgreenhouse vegetable farms in Finland (Vänninen and Pereira Querol). The discussant will be Professor RogersHall (Vanderbilt University).What are Functional Concepts?Yrjö Engeström, Center for Research on Activity, Development and Learning (CRADLE), University ofHelsinkiFunctional concepts embedded in collective activities are typically polyvalent, contested and contradictory. Theycarry ethical and ideological challenges and visions. They are often “loose” (Löwy, 1992) and generatesurprising manifestations. They cannot be easily defined and put to rest as categories in a dictionary. Yet we needfunctional concepts as tools, which makes it necessary that we try to fix and stabilize them, at least temporarily.Formal-logical notions of a concept are not sufficient for the understanding of functional concepts (Greeno,2012).This paper will examine five key dimensions of functional concepts, namely (1) the dimension ofempirical vs. theoretical contents of concepts, (2) the dimension of verbal vs. multi-modal mediation of concepts,(3) the dimension vertical vs. horizontal movement and interplay of concepts, (4) the dimension of stabilized vs.fluid or loose concepts, and (5) the dimension of adaptive vs. transformative agency. Two examples of functionalconcepts with which we are currently working in our research group will be analyzed through the lenses of thefive dimensions. These are the concept of integrated pest management or IPM (Kogan, 1998) as it is shaped andimplemented among greenhouse vegetable growers in western Finland, and the concept of sustainable mobilityas it is constructed and implemented among the workers and clients of home care for the elderly in Helsinki,Finland (Engeström, Nummijoki & Sannino, 2012).For Vygotsky (1987), the key difference between what he called everyday and scientific concepts wasthat the former are learned in personal casual experience whereas the latter are acquired by means of instructionin school. Davydov (1990) points out that this distinction tells nothing about the contents of the two types ofconcepts. The second key difference between everyday and scientific concepts according to Vygotsky is that thelatter form hierarchical systems while the former are without a system. Davydov points out that also empiricalconcepts commonly appear is systems, such as genus-type relationships, elaborate classifications and pyramidlike hierarchies. In other words, the existence of a system or hierarchy of concepts in no way guarantees that it isa theoretical or scientific concept. For Davydov the essential point is that with empirical concepts you performactions of comparison, identification, naming, and classification. Empirical concepts are definitions andcategorizations that aim at fixing and freezing the reality, creating closed compartments which can be filled ormatched with appropriate examples. Theoretical or dialectical concepts are procedures of ascending from theabstract to the concrete in a given domain, requiring actions of historicizing, transforming and experimenting,modeling (constructing a germ cell abstraction), examining or testing the model, and deriving new expandedimplications and applications from the germ cell (rising to the concrete). Theoretical concepts are open-ended,they generate constantly new possibilities and applications. Both the concept of integrated pest management andthe concept of sustainable mobility can be used either as an empirical categorization device or as a theoreticaldevice for ascending from the abstract to the concrete. The paper will demonstrate how these alternatives, andtheir mixtures, are displayed in the history and current life of these two concepts.Vygotsky emphasized the verbal, language-bound character of concepts. On the other hand, researcherssuch as Poddyakov (1977; 2011) have shown that already preschool children are capable of key actions oftheoretical thinking, namely experimentation and modeling, using material artifacts and visual images. Our ownwork (Engeström, Nummijoki & Sannino, 2012) points toward the great potential of physical movement andbodily sensation in the formation of theoretical functional concepts. The paper will analyze how each of the twoconcepts discussed here appears in different guises, as verbal definitions and instructions, as graphic models andpictorial representations, and as bodily actions and sensations, and how the movement and blending between themodalities may be obstructed or facilitated in various ways.The vertical movement of concepts was powerfully disucssed by Vygotsky and Davydov. Thehorizontal movement may be understood as comparison, confrontation and blending between differentperspectives and definitions of a concept (Engeström & al., 2005). This polyvalence is present not only in newlyemerging concepts such as sustainable mobility but also in a concept with a long history and official authoritysuch as integrated pest management.Stabilization of functional concepts typically happens by means of political, economic and legalauthorization and investment. Functional concepts serve as future-oriented visions that engender transformativeICLS 2014 Proceedings1309© ISLSagency. But they also serve as mechanisms of adaptation, calling for adherence to received wisdom andgradually becoming self-evident components of hegemonic consciousness. Thus, as Löwy (1992) shows, certainlooseness in key concepts may be may necessary for the development of our understanding of complexphenomena. Along with stabilization, we may observe, perhaps also facilitate, processes of destabilization offunctional concepts.Anchoring Backward and Anchoring Forward: Conceptualization and theEmergence of Agentive ActionAnnalisa Sannino, CRADLE, University of HelsinkiIn situations of uncertainty or cognitive incongruity human beings usually turn to conceptual and materialanchors to support sense making and engage in meaningful actions. Available literature on anchoring primarilyfocuses on what may be characterized as backward anchoring, that is, well-stabilized representationalcomponents in the conceptualization processes involved in these situations. On the other hand, literature onsense- and meaning making does not systematically identify actions involved in this conceptualization processes.With the help of empirical analysis in laboratory setting, the analysis presented here aims at opening up a waytoward a notion of forward anchoring which involves both conceptualization and agentive action.Anchoring backward relies on background knowledge and relatively stable representations utilized forexplaining problem situations and for acting in such situations. Conceptualizations of anchoring proposed byTversky and Kahneman (1974), Moscovici (1984) and Marková (2000) are examples of this type of anchoring:reliance on starting points yielding to biased estimates (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974) and categorization of newor unfamiliar ideas under familiar concepts and their transformation into cultural beliefs (Moscovici, 1984;Marková, 2000).Anchoring forward is stepping into the unknown by building supporting anchors partly similar tomaterial anchors depicted by Hutchins (2005). Forward anchoring involves representations not yet consolidated,emerging though personal sense and social interactions. These anchors are instrumental in the elaboration of newmeaning, which may be stabilized to the point of supporting actions. In this paper, the notion of anchoringforward is elaborated on the basis of Vygotsky’s (1987) principle of double stimulation, according to which oneturns to external means for support to produce a new meaning and to be able to act.Studies using the idea of double stimulation primarily examine concept formation without addressinghow emerging concepts are related to agency. This was, however, a central concern for Vygotsky and thecontinuing relevance of Vygotsky’s legacy largely resides in the relation between concept formation andvolitional action. Vygotsky (1987; 1997; 1998) used the experiment of “meaningless situation” as aparadigmatic example of double stimulation. A subject escorted to a room is told that the experiment will startsoon, but the experimenter does not return. This design allows tracing how the participants start forming aconcept of the situation and how they engage (or fail to engage) in agentive actions. Videotaped, annotated andtranscribed experiments with 25 individuals and 30 groups, based on Vygotsky’s description, are analyzed in thispaper, together with participants’ stimulated-­‐recall interviews, also recorded and transcribed.The other set of empirical data used in the paper concerns a formative intervention to develop theinternship of future elementary school teachers in Italy. 13 third-year university internship students wereinvolved in the study. One or two first-­‐ and fourth-­‐grade pupils were assigned to each internship student whoassisted them in accomplishing learning tasks. As none of the internship students had prior teaching experience,the interactions with the pupils proved to be at times challenging situations which required conceptualizationefforts and agentive actions. The data in which the students report how they dealt with these challengingsituations include 108 ethnographic fieldnotes by the internship students, transcriptions of 28 interviews and 10meetings with the internship students.The two empirical sets of data are analyzed by focusing on both verbal and physical aspects ofinteraction to investigate how double stimulation is simultaneously a mechanism of conceptualization andagency. The analyses reveal both backward anchoring-based conceptualization actions and forward anchoringbased conceptualization actions. The latter are in turn further differentiated into search actions, taking-overactions, and breaking-out actions. The analyses lead to the formulation of a hypothesis of the interrelatedness ofconceptualization efforts and the emergence of transformative agency.School Change as Collective Concept FormationYuri Lapshin and Maria Safronova, Moscow State University of Psychology and EducationJaakko Virkkunen, CRADLE, University of HelsinkiThe problems typically encountered in attempts to profoundly renew school education are aptly crystallized inthe conclusion of an analysis of a school reform program conducted by Hubbard, Mehan and Stein (2006): "(…)ICLS 2014 Proceedings1310© ISLSa reform that began as conceptually driven was proceduralized; an approach to learning that began as studentcentered became teacher-centered; a framework with many openings for the application of professionaljudgment became understood as scripted.” In our paper we argue that a predefined concept easily turns into arule for the practitioners rather than into an intellectual tool for creatively meeting the challenges of their jointactivity. The practitioners need to be involved in the process of forming the new concept for it to become amotive and instrument of their transformation efforts. The formation of such a concept requires that practitionerstake jointly epistemic actions to reveal the change-demanding inner contradictions within their activity systemand to find and implement a way to re-mediate them.The Change Laboratory is a formative intervention method that is designed for helping practitioners toaccomplish this in collaboration with researcher-interventionists. The Change Laboratory aims at creating atheoretical abstraction of the new form of activity and ascending from it to the concrete new activity system(Engeström, 2007; Virkkunen & Tenhunen, 2010; Virkkunen, Newnhamn, N’leya, & Engeström, 2012). Thisprocess also builds the practitioners’ transformative agency. In our paper, we will analyze such collectiveconcept formation processes in two Russian schools.The School Integration CaseEducation in the Russian Federation is currently in the process of being modernized. A new system ofeducational objectives is implemented that highlight the development of students’ general learning abilities. Atthe same time, separate educational institutions are merged to form Educational Incorporations in order to secureequal educational opportunity and to raise the quality of education. In the first case we analyze in our paper, asenior high school (Gymnasium), a public school and two kindergartens are being merged. Our analysis of thistransformation focuses on how the ideas behind the externally given new rules can be turned into new conceptualand practical tools for the practitioners to master the new challenges. That is only possible when they construct afuture-oriented concept of a shared object of the educational activity of the professionals of the new institution.In a Change Laboratory process conducted in 2013, 18 administrators and teachers from the four previouslyseparate institutions analyzed the development of their educational activities. The analysis showed that innercontradictions had evolved within each institution’s activity that the fusion aggravated while also providing newpotential for resolving the contradictions, highlighting the need to find a concept of a jointly produced “product”.In the Change Laboratory discussions, the idea of individualized instruction emerged as a possible coreof the new concept, based on the senior high school’s existing practice of constructing individualized study plansas well as on the other institutions’ experiences of individualizing instruction. We will examine the conceptcreated in the Change Laboratory against the historical variations and phases of development of this concept(e.g., Gibbons, 1970; Rothrock, 1982; Hiemstra & Sisco, 1990). We will analyze the steps of ascending to a newconcrete system of the joint activity of the merged institutions as stepwise resolution of manifestations of thecontradiction between the individual and the common in the education on different levels of the new institution’sactivity.The Case of Redefining the School’s Educational ActivityThe “School of Self-Determination” at Moscow’s periphery was created to educate self-confident, cultured andactive persons and over the past three decades it developed a community of kindred spirits around itself. Lately,however, its pedagogical efficiency as well its reputation in the local community have declined. The ongoingschool reform in the country forced the school to begin to redefine its activity. This effort was supported by aChange Laboratory intervention from October 2012 to March 2013, in which a representative group of 24teachers and managers took part. Interviews and videos of work situations were used as stimuli and material todiscuss and analyze the current situation. Origins and systemic causes of the problems were traced in the ChangeLaboratory by analyzing the historical development of the activity. The analysis revealed contradictory needs andpressures within all elements of the activity that the school reform further aggravated. The reform requires theschool to focus on academic results. It sharpens the contradiction between two ideas of the school, understood as“a school for all” and “a school for kindred spirits”. The core of this contradiction was modeled in the ChangeLaboratory through two orthogonal dimensions of developmental objectives: “openness of the school” and“commonality of values” within the school community. The challenge was defined as a need to integrate theseobjectives. The participants seeked to realize this with a new formulation of the object and concept of theireducational activity: “Each pupil is potentially able and individually gifted to be a subject of his or her owneducational trajectory; to learn from his or her own strengths and weaknesses; and to choose his or her own wayof development”. Each element of the activity was redefined on the basis of this concept. Task force groups wereformed to work on concrete tasks of implementation. The headmaster and four teacher leaders coordinated thiswork. Follow-up data shows that the practitioners have actually managed to concretize the abstract germ cell ofthe concept.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1311© ISLSObservationsIn both these Change Laboratory processes, a dialectical process evolved in which the new external demands andpressures, the practitioners’ own experiences and concepts, the history of the institutions, and their futureperspectives were brought into a creative dialogue. The practitioners reviewed the history of their activity fromthe point of view of their current challenges and at the same time approached the latter through their historicalexperience and the resources inherent in it. Instead of receiving the school reform as an external rule thepractitioners integrated it in their analyses of their activity as an change in conditions that aggravated the innercontradictions in the activities and provided new resources for resolving them. Abstracting and modeling thecentral inner contradictions in the activities enabled the practitioners to make thought experiments and, throughthem, to cross the boundaries of current classifications and institutions. In both cases a new concept evolved as anew vision and motive of the activity and as a principle the practitioners’ applied in resolving the contradictionsof their activity both in thinking and in practice, thus objectifying the new concept through reconfiguration theorganization and the daily practices of the schools’ educational activity.The Role of Models and Modeling in Collective Concept Formation:Transforming Pest Management in Finnish HorticultureIrene Vänninen, MTT Agrifood Research Finland, and Marco Pereira-Querol, Federal University of ParanáModels are understood as special kinds of mediating artifacts that play a crucial role in helping us to learn abouttheories and the world (Morgan & Morrison, 1999). Studies of the role of models in scientific practice providesome knowledge about the relationship between theories and reality, but they do not say much about how modelsare used in the process of transforming activities (for important work in this direction, see Nersessian, 2012). Inthis paper, the case of greenhouse vegetable production in Ostrobothnia, Finland, is analyzed as case in whichmodels are needed in the creation and implementation of a concept that guides the transformation of an activity.The learning challenge of the producers in this context is to construct an integrated management of a systemicwhitefly problem. The individual producers need to overcome their competitive separation and construct a sharedpest management system at the level of the whole village. The study was conducted as a Change Laboratoryintervention (Virkkunen & Newnham, 2013) designed to facilitate collective pest management among theproducers.In the six Change Laboratory sessions the participants constructed and used a series of graphic modelsdo depict, analyze and transform their problematic situation. By tracing the generation, application andmodification of these models, we show how the object and concept of whitefly management was reconstructedduring the collective learning process and how different forms of transformative agency emerged in the process.Using the framework of expansive learning (Engeström, 1987), we analyze in which phases of the expansivelearning cycle the models were created, what specific purposes they served, what modalities of represention wereinvolved (e.g., how the graphic models interacted with bodily gestures and verbal discourse), and which types ofexprfessions of transformative agency (resisting, criticizing, explicating, envisioning, committing, and takingactions) they were connected to.We identified three models that contributed to the expansive re-conceptualization of the activity andreconstruction of its object. The most important model served as a springboard for expanding the participants’understanding of the whitefly problem and consequently expanding the solution. The model represented theinterplay of the outdoor and indoor parts of the whitefly problem and its contributing factors. It took the generalform of a vicious circle, a sequence of reciprocal cause and effect in which two or more elements intensify andaggravate each other, leading inexorably to a worsening of the situation until an external factor breaks it. Themodel was developed in several stages during the questioning and analyzing phases of the process. The initialversion was produced by growers with the help of the facilitators. Thereafter its development was continuedcollaboratively by growers, advisors, facilitators and the tutor of the process. It was notable that the initialversions of the model did not include the leverage component of the ensuing new model of activity: improvingcommunication to share information between growers. The modeling process helped the participants go beyondmere bio-ecological and technical aspects of the problem, opening up the social system and its contribution to thewhitefly problem and directing attention to those parts of the system that could be used as leverage point to breakthe vicious circle. The model helped growers to form the new object of whitefly control that is more realistic fora community of interdependent producers: not eradicating but keeping whitefly levels continuously low throughcollaboration. The model was referred to several times both during and between the sessions. Thus it guidedthinking, triggered participants’ agentic actions, and guided them in forming hypotheses on how to deal with theproblem.Based on the problem model and the associated solution components, in the solution design and testingphases the interventionists designed a second model representing a solution to the problem. The core of themodel stemmed from a realization obtained when constructing the system-specific vicious circle: that a newdivision of labor was needed between firms for producing information that would help them improve pestICLS 2014 Proceedings1312© ISLSmanagement collectively. The solution includes a standardized monitoring method of whitefly densities in thefarms, a boundary object (Akkerman and Bakker, 2011) in the form of a database for storing monitoring and pestmanagement results, and a learning club involving growers, advisors and researchers for collective analysis anddiscussion of the data and related pest management approaches. The solution model guided the planning ofpractical trials of the monitoring tool of whiteflies as well as the planning of rules for the learning club.Additionally, it proved very useful in the last session of the Change Laboratory when introducing the newconcept to the growers of the neighboring village in an attempt to geographically expand the new activity.The third model was produced and used during the testing and implementation phase to help in decidingabout the format of the learning club, the two options being a webpage or face-to-face meetings. Theinterventionists produced a prototype webpage to exemplify how and what kind of information could be madeavailable through the web. Prototyping enables designers and users to test new ideas through thinking-by-doing(Hartmann & al., 2006). The prototype eventually helped the growers decide in favor of face-to-face meetingsthat suited their learning needs best for the time being.A preliminnary analysis shows that growers first tried to reach a solution by applying the prevailingapproach to solving problems; this often involves fixed roles and individual responsibilities. During theintervention, limits of the current concept and practice were recognized. The construction and use of the systemspecific model of the problem were important in triggering the agentive actions of criticizing and explicatingpossibilities. The second and third models were important in triggering and supporting envisioning.ReferencesAkkerman, S. F., Bakker, A. (2011). Boundary crossing and boundary objects. Review of Educational Research,81, 132–169.Davydov, V. V. (1990). Types of generalization in instruction: Logical and psychological problems in thestructuring of school curricula. Reston: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research.Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit.Engeström, Y. (2007). Putting Vygotsky to work: The Change Laboratory as an application of doublestimulation. In H. Daniels, M. Cole, & J. V. Wertsch (Eds.), The Cambridge companion to Vygotsky(pp. 363-382). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Engeström, Y., Nummijoki, J. & Sannino, A. (2012). Embodied germ cell at work: Building an expansiveconcept of physical mobility in home care. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 19(3), 287-309.Engeström, Y., Pasanen, A., Toiviainen, H. & Haavisto, V. (2005). Expansive learning as collaborative conceptformation at work. In K. Yamazumi, Y. Engeström & H. Daniels (Eds.), New learning challenges:Going beyond the industrial age system of school and work. Osaka: Kansai University Press.Engeström, Y. & Sannino, A. (2012). Concept formation in the wild. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 19(3), 201–206.Gibbons, M. (1970). What is individualized instruction? Interchange, 1(2), 28-52.Greeno, J. G. (2012). Concepts in activities and discourses. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 19(3), 310-313.Hartmann, B., Klemmer, S. R., Bernstein, M., Abdulla, L., Burr, B., Robinson-Mosher, A. & Gee, J. (2006).Reflective physical prototyping through integrated design, test, and analysis. In Proceedings of the 19thAnnual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, UIST ’06. New York: ACM(pp. 299–308).Hiemstra, R. & Sisco, B. (1990). Individualizing instruction: Making learning personal, empowering, andsuccessful. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Hubbard, L., Mehan, H. & Stein, M. K. (2006). Reform as learning: School reform, organizational culture, andcommunity politics in San Diego. New York: Routledge.Hutchins, E. (2005). Material anchors for conceptual blends. Journal of pragmatics, 37(10), 1555-1577.Kogan, M. (1998). Integrated pest management: Historical perspectives and contemporary developments.Annual Review of Entomology, 43, 243-270.Löwy, I. (1992). The strength of loose concepts - boundary concepts, federative experimental strategies anddisciplinary growth: The case of immunology. History of Science, 30, 371-396.Marková, I. (2000). Amédée or how to get rid of it: Social representations from a dialogical perspective. Culture& Psychology, 6(4), 419-460.Morgan, M. S. & Morrison, M. (1999). Models as mediators: Perspectives on natural and social science.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Moscovici. S. (1984). The phenomenon of social representations. In R. Farr & S.Moscovici (Eds.), Social representations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Nersessian, N. J. (2012). Engineering concepts: The interplay between concept formation and modelingpractices in bioengineering sciences. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 19(3), 222-239.Poddyakov, N. (1977). The thinking of a pre-school child [In Russian]. Moscow: Pedagogika.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1313© ISLSPoddyakov, N. (2011). Searching, experimenting and the heuristic structure of a preschool child's experience.International Journal of Early Years Education, 19(1), 55-63.Rothrock, D. (1982). The rise and decline of individualized instruction. Educational Leadership, 39(7), 528530.Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185(4157),1124-1131.Virkkunen, J. & Newnham, S. (2013). The Change Laboratory: A tool for collaborative development of workand education. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.Virkkunen, J., Newnham, D. S., Nleya, P. & Engeström, R. ( 2012). Breaking the vicious circle of categorizingstudents in school. Learning, Culture, and Social Interaction 1(3–4), pp. 153-258.Virkkunen, J. & Tenhunen, E. (2010). Finding a concept that integrates specialists’ know-how: The case ofspecial school for handicapped and neurologically ill children. Actio: International Journal of HumanActivity Theory, 3, 1-23.Vygotsky, L. S. (1987). The collected works of L. S. Vygotsky: Vol. 1. Problems of general psychology. NewYork: Plenum Press.Vygotsky, L. S. (1997). The collected works of L. S. Vygotsky. Vol. 4: The history of the development of highermental functions. New York: Plenum.Vygotsky, L.S. (1998). The collected works of L.S. Vygotsky. Vol. 5: Child psychology. New York: Plenum.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1314© ISLS