Diving into Practice with Children and Undergraduates: A CulturalHistorical Approach to Instantiating Making and Tinkering Activityin a Designed Learning EcologyLisa Hope Schwartz, University of Colorado Boulder, lisa.h.schwartz@colorado.eduDaniela DiGiacomo, University of Colorado Boulder, daniela.digiacomo@colorado.eduKris D. Gutierrez, University of Colorado Boulder, kris.gutierrez@colorado.eduAbstract: “Making and Tinkering” has become popular in informal education circles. Thepractice links science, technology, engineering and mathematics learning (STEM) to the do-ityourself “maker” movement, where people of all ages “create and share things in both thedigital and physical world” (Resnick & Rosenbaum, 2013). This paper examines a culturalhistorical approach to Making and Tinkering at two sites of El Pueblo Mágico (EPM), a socialdesign experiment that joins university students, researchers and k-8 youth frompredominately non-dominant communities together in joint activity for expansive andconsequential learning (Gutierrez & Vossoughi, 2010). In the lineage of design experimentsin the learning sciences our work addresses what Resnick and Rosenbaum discuss as thecritical importance of designing contexts for tinkerability from a theory-based and iterativedesign approach that aims to both understand and change practice. With our work we seek tore-mediate normative STEM learning contexts for youth from non-dominant communities.“Making and Tinkering” has become popular in informal education circles. The practice links science,technology, engineering and mathematics learning (STEM) to the do-it-yourself “maker” movement, wherepeople of all ages “…create and share things, in both the physical world and the digital world” (Resnick &Rosenbaum, 2013, p. 163). This paper examines how undergraduates, children and researchers worked togetherto instantiate a cultural historical approach to making and tinkering at two instances of El Pueblo Mágico(EPM), a social design experiment that joins university students, researchers and k-8 youth from predominatelynon-dominant communities together in joint activity for expansive and consequential learning (Gutierrez &Vossoughi, 2010).In the lineage of design experiments in the learning sciences our work addresses what Resnick andRosenbaum (2013) discuss as the critical importance of “designing contexts for tinkerability (p. 179)”, from atheory-based and iterative design approach, that aims to both understand and change practice and the context oflearning (Gravemeijer & Cobb, 2006). Expanding the design experiment in what Gutierrez and Vossoughi(2010) discuss as a social design experiment, an overarching goal of our research is to address issues of equityby engaging theory in practice to circulate power in joint activity, so that participants work to collaborativelynegotiate the process and objectives of their work. We articulate this process as re-mediation (Gutierrez, Hunter& Arzubiaga, 2009), or the redesign of what is normatively the social organization of STEM activity inacademic spaces in order to expand and reconfigure the forms of mediation available for youth, in particulargirls and youth from non-dominant communities, within STEM learning environments.Following an emphasis in design research on situating a theoretically articulated approach in practice,in order to recursively generate new theoretical understandings and design principles, we first present ourtheoretical framework to Making and Tinkering (M & T) at El Pueblo Mágico as a hybrid model. Our approachengages commonalities across the Maker Movement as articulated by Resnick &Rosenbaum (2013), tenets ofcultural historical theory that are integral to the designed learning ecology that is the context of our work (seeTables 1 and 2), and our research theorizing the “inventos” or inventive, everyday practices of Latino youth andfamilies (Schwartz & Gutierrez, 2013). To examine our theoretical approach in practice at the sites of ourresearch we investigate two interrelated questions: 1) How do undergraduates enact and conceptualize culturalhistorical concepts in M & T activity with children? and 2) How does our approach work to provideopportunities for participants to engage in robust STEM practices that involve children and adults in jointarticulation of the objectives of activity? To explore these questions we present examples of what we view aseffective appropriation of our theoretical approach as well as how less successful activity is reflective of thenormative STEM education practices we are working to re-mediate. We argue that our cultural historicalapproach to M & T within our designed learning ecology presents a significant example for other researchersand practitioners who are working to create contexts for tinkerability that address issues of equity in STEMeducation.A Cultural Historical Approach To Making and TinkeringOur implementation of M & T at El Pueblo Mágico is based on tenets of cultural historical theory historicallytaken up in the social design experiments developed by Gutierrez (Gutierrez & Vossoughi, 2010). These activitysystems involve undergraduates enrolled in university courses on child and adolescent development in jointICLS 2014 Proceedings70© ISLSactivity with children in an after school space. This multi-sited social design experiment is organized aroundwhat Gutierrez and Vossoughi (2010) call “equity-oriented and robust learning principles (p. 101) taken up“toward transformative ends through mutual relations of exchange (p. 101)”. Of significance, our work seeks tore-mediate the functional system of science education for all students, and in particular for women and studentsfrom non-dominant communities. We do this through foregrounding the joint activity, playful inventiveness,and human ingenuity we see as common threads of theory and practice across social design experiments, makerspaces, and the activity of members of non-dominant communities.An overarching goal of both EPM and M & T articulated by Resnick and Rosenbaum (2013) is to remediate normative school practice. Resnick and Rosenbaum explain that rather than a focus on planning that isoften pervasive in academic contexts and that adheres to formal rules and recipes for activity, tinkering ismessier, more improvisational and more open ended, and is actually more like how science is actually practicedby scientists. What they refer to as “bottom and up” forms of participation align with cultural historical activitytheory’s (Engestrom, 1987) emphasis on horizontal and vertical development that underlies EPM. In otherwords, both approaches seek to leverage participation in a range of activities for deepening, broadening andconnecting interests, and for forming sustained inquiries through multidimensional movement. The biggestshared criticism of M & T and the EPM design experiment from teachers and novice teachers respectively isthat activity seems unorganized and unstructured. We concur with both Resnick and Rosenbaum that this viewis misguided because “true tinkerers (p. 167)” know how to move tinkering into focused activity. It is preciselythis capacity that we are working to foment in teachers and children at EPM. Rather than teaching lessonplanning and top down classroom control, we emphasize “diving into practice” with children and a process ofmediated praxis (Gutierrez & Vossoughi, 2010) whereby novice teachers reflect on activity and visualize newpossibilities for joint activity with children.Table 1. A Cultural Historical Approach to M & T at El Pueblo Mágico:El Pueblo /4411 Learning Ecology Making and TinkeringPractices in HomesPlay and the imaginary situation as Play; Experimental, iterative style of Play is the main activityforming zopeds (Vygotsky, 1978)engagementvideotaped in 14 homesStone & Gutierrez (2007)- Joint problem articulation- Serial mediation e.g. continualreassessment and re-directing ofobject-oriented activity- Just enough assistance 	  Gutierrez & Vossoughi (2010)- mediated praxis-Expansive learning (Engestrom, 1987)-­‐ horizontal / vertical movement-­‐ growing together everyday andscientific concepts (Vygotsky,1978)---Continual goal reassessmentContinual exploration of newpaths and imagining newpossibilitiesImmediate feedbackSchwartz & Gutierrez, 2013- Directives- Assistance for “levelingup”- Tool sharing- Idea sharing- Assisted turn-takingFluid experimentation: easy todive in, connect and extendProcess over productOpen explorationImprovisation/adaptation/iterationSchwartz & Gutierrez, 2013Inventos: crafting new rules ofengagement with digital mediato engage tight circumstances	  Community of Leaners (Rogoff, 1994) - Engagement with people and- Distributed expertise amongmaterialsintergenerational ensembles- Learning as taking on new rolesand responsibilities in joint activity(Vygotsky, 1978)- Cultural mediation- Distributed expertise,fluidity of roles betweenexpert and novice- Assistance for noviceplayers- Shared / negotiated accessto tools within families(Gutierrez, 1999)- Hybridity and heterogeneity- Hybrid language practices- Diverse examples, divergentthinkingTable 1 above outlines our approach to M & T within our designed learning ecology. Table rows areorganized to show complementary concepts across the three approaches and activity systems. Column oneoutlines the main tenets of the cultural historical approach articulated in the university course. Column two,derived from Resnick and Rosenbaum’s seminal paper, shows how our approach connects to and draws newemphases from M & T. Column three shows how we pull from our research on digital media and learning inhomes (Schwartz & Gutierrez, 2013). Overall, each of these contexts and frameworks highlights play, jointmediated activity with people and things, hybridity, joint problem articulation, distributed expertise and fluidexperimentation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  71© ISLSPutting the Design into Practice: Context and Methods of Data Collection andAnalysisIn the sections that follow we focus on the work of undergraduates, called amigos (friends) at EPM, andchildren in the two instantiations of our approach to M & T within the social design experiment of El PuebloMágico. Table 2 and Figure 2 and 3 show information about each context. In both sites of EPM, members of theresearch team served as designers and facilitators of activity. To differentiate these two contexts we use 1)EPM1 for the Spring 2013 instantiation with undergraduates and predominately Latino children from nondominant communities in grades 2-5 at Posada elementary school, and 2) EPM2 for the summer 2013 site withundergraduates and middle school students from privileged and non-dominant communities at Smiley MiddleSchool. At this site, Schwartz conceptualized the M & T activity and coordinated the research team.Fundamental to the EPM social design experiment is providing space for reflection and dialogue between theundergraduate and the instructor. In EPM1 the cognitive ethnography (CE) that engages students in dialogicreflection on activity is the key space for mediated praxis. At EPM2 this occurred primarily through interaction,blog posts and course papers. Consequently, our primary data sources are CEs for EPM1 and videotaped data,course papers and blog posts for EPM2.In order to address our questions regarding how undergraduates enacted and conceptualized M & T wefirst conducted an overall analysis of CEs for EPM1 and videotaped data for EPM2 (see Figures 1 and 2). ForEPM1, a subset of CEs was identified through text searches for M & T and key concepts taught in the course(e.g. mediation). Out of 132 CEs by 26 students, where students averaged 5-6 CEs/EPM visits, 86 (65%) of CEsby 24 (92%) of students discussed M & T, and of this subset, 76 (88%) of CEs by 23 (96%) of students used keytheoretical concepts. Subsequently, we selected the work of a subset of students (n=8) that demonstrated arange of effectiveness in putting theory into practice for further analysis. We chose 26 CEs written by fiveundergraduates from EPM1 and the work of three ensembles at EPM2. For EPM2, initial analysis and codingwas a team effort between Schwartz and our undergraduate research opportunities (UROP) team of physics andeducation students. We assigned a ranking scheme and notation for undergraduates’ questioning strategies andindicators of group collaboration. After selecting representative cases we coded data with a focus on 1) types ofstrategic assistance, 2) distributed expertise and roles emerging in activity, and 3) use of key theoreticalconcepts for mediated praxis.Table 2. EPM1 and EPM2, Site, Participants, Key Activities and Data SourcesSitesParticipantsKeyActivities/ Data SourcesTermsEPM1Adventure Guides:- Undergraduates in 5507- 86 Cognitive- 5507 child(one time a week over 2.5- Zoom Zoom (cars)Ethnographies (CEs)development coursemonths)by 24 students- Scribble machines- EPM at Posada- 5507 instructors- X CEs by 4 students- Squishy circuitsElementary School - EPM staff (doctoralfor close analysis- AgentCubes /over one semesterstudents)- Video data; fieldSheetsnotes- Children in grades k2-5- World Maker(~85)- Researchers / M & TsupportEPM2- Undergraduates in 5508- Solar Cars, solar- Videotaped data from- 5508 adolescenttheramin6 days of EPM2, ~1.5- Children grades 6 and 7 (18)development course - Researchers, 5508hours per day- Produce circuits- EPM at Smiley- Utilized closely threeinstructors, and M & T and- LED/squishyMiddle School / CU8-18 minute longEPM2 designers andcircuitsBoulder, 6 daysclipsfacilitators- Sewn circuitsover 2 weeks- Field notes- UROP student designers and - Minecraft circuitsresearchers- Student papers, blogsStrategies and Concepts for Learning and Becoming in PracticeFigures 1 and 2 below show the big picture regarding the theoretical concepts and forms of assistance utilizedby undergraduates as well as instructors. On closer examination of the work of 8 students in EPM1 and EPM2,our analysis revealed that successful strategies for re-organizing the roles and responsibilities, or what we termdistributing expertise in activity and jointly articulating problems, involved strategic questioning, in particularwhat we designate as “design questions”. We found that that successful design questions allowed for children to“dive into practice” and extend their inquiries by focusing children’s attention and imagination on particularICLS 2014 Proceedings	  72© ISLSaspects of the task, re-voicing children’s nascent ideas to the group, and giving options for potential directionsfor activity that included children’s choices and interests. Undergraduates reflected on their activity and the roleof play, motivation and engagement primarily through the concepts of mediation (and related forms, e.g. serialmediation, re-mediation), zoped, and community of learners. The examples shared here show how thesestudents also used terms resonant of M & T, such as “dove into” and “trial and error”. In both instances of EPM,moving away from a planning and recipe approach and taking up fluid experimentation where children couldimmediately engage with tinkering and were subsequently supported in reflecting on and extending theirpractices was acknowledged by participants as a critical re-mediation of accustomed school practice. Activitydiscussed below demonstrates how the common tensions felt by teachers to have all the answers and to serve asthe sole authority were re-mediated by the process of jointly articulating the objectives of activity with childrenthrough distributing responsibility for thinking, imagining, teaching and learning to undergraduates andstudents.Figure 1. Concepts used by undergraduates regardingM & T at EPM1Undergraduate assistance:Questioning, direct assistance, modeling, sideby-side, doing nothing, sharing ideas1: good12 instances identified2: adequate113: poor9Peer support:Modeling, turn-taking, sharing ideas, etc.1: good10 instances identified2: adequate93: poor5Figure 2. Ranking of assistance strategies in 32instances of interaction at EPM2We present an example from Ann Smith’s CE to show how activity created new participation pathwaysfor children. Smith documented her group’s creation of “squishy circuits” with playdoh and LED lights. Sheexplained how she turned thinking over to the students, through idea sharing and questions eliciting theirthoughts about design. Smith related how this provided the space for 2nd grader Cecilia to take on a new voiceand role in activity:I asked them if they all remembered how to make the Squishy Circuits and Flor and Ceciliasaid they did, but Michael told me he had never made them before and asked me how to makeit. (OC: This is where I thought that making the other kids the in group the expert instead ofme would be a better way of getting the instructions across). Cecilia, who usually doesn’t talkmuch, piped right up and started explaining to Michael how the Playdoh had to be on top ofthe insulating dough and the Playdoh couldn’t touch other Playdoh or it wouldn’t work. Thenshe said that the battery wires had to be touching the Playdoh, but not the insulating doughand that the light had to be plugged into those same Playdoh pieces. (OC …it was a nicechange to hear her talk more than I had ever heard her talk before. Cecilia also acted as themediator in this process between the instructions and Matthew understanding how to make thecircuit.). Michael looked like he kind of understood what Cecilia had said, but tried to pretendthat he understood everything because he dove right into making a mermaid.This example demonstrates how Smith privileged distributed expertise. Significantly, Cecilia a Latina girl andsecond grader, who Smith related was usually extremely reticent, became the expert teaching an older boy. Shegave Michael what Stone & Gutierrez (2007) call “just enough assistance” for him to dive into making hiscircuit. Smith recounted “Their interactions also showed Vygotsky’s ZPD. Matthew was not able to make hislights turn on until Cecilia turned his light the other way. This simple act of assistance showed me that Ceciliaunderstood how the circuits worked and was able to help Matthew come to that same understanding.” Ceciliacontinued to provide assistance to Michael until he eventually completed a circuit on his own. The interactionshows how consciously distributing expertise to students and allowing them to take on new responsibilitiessupported fluid experimentation and the creation of zopeds that engaged students’ potential development.Importantly, activity in Smith’s group supported a young Latina girl, a member of two groups (women andLatinos) underrepresented in many scientific fields in taking on the role of an expert. The following examplealso demonstrates expanded possibilities for normative gender roles with 3rd grader Maria taking a leading role.In the next example, Schwartz supported an undergraduate, Suz Miller and 3rd grader Maria, onstrategies for joint problem articulation. Maria wanted to create squishy circuits but was resisting group workICLS 2014 Proceedings	  73© ISLSand getting started. Schwartz, through privileging joint activity among a wider range of participants, assistedtheir team with how they might collaborate with a group that was creating a movie. She suggested that Mariamight contribute to the movie by helping to fabricate set items the group wanted with squishy circuits materials.In her CE, Miller described the learning opportunities that were opened up by widening the frame of possibilityfor collaboration:…Maria used her experiences with the scribbling machine to communicate its function to thegroup. No one else had done the tinkering activity so they were all novices making her theexpert. The children’s roles swapped while filming as Maria had a very minimalunderstanding of that project. Operating in a diverse group promoted the members zone’s ofproximal development as they acquired the opportunity to apply knowledge across manyactivities. Problem solving through group trial and error produced unique solutions as theensemble members exchanged ideas and learned together. The opportunity to revise activitiesfurther enhanced critical thinking and the transfer of knowledge. Our problem solving processresembled a reflective collaborative learning model as the undergrads initiated communicationand the children expanded on topics/ ideas.Despite Maria’s initial reluctance to join the new group, Miller related that the merger was extremely successfulprimarily through the cross-pollination of ideas, and distribution of expertise and roles among participants.Miller’s work with the children also utilized what we term design questions to mediate joint problemarticulation:“Oh, so you think we should lay the propeller flat like this instead of attaching it upright like awing? What do the rest of you think?” I “What feature of the machine do you think needs tochange in order to make it fly?” [OC: using open ended questions I guided the children’sthought processes and re-structured my questions when they did not seem to grasp what Ioriginally presented]. “It needs to have four spinning things not two, like a helicopter,” Mariasuggested. “So you think we need more propellers, and Isaiah thinks the propeller needs to beattached differently. Should we try these theories out and see if they work?” [OC: Maria usedher understanding of flying objects to construct an analogy that helped her articulate herhypothesis to the group].Miller’s open ended questions about the design of the “flying boots” for the film assisted children in connectingtheir thinking to prior experiences and to features of the design needed for their current objectives. Shespecifically asked children what they thought and modeled taking up others’ divergent thinking as resources foractivity. Miller also used scientific language and practices to suggest to the students to test out their ideas withcontinued tinkering. Overall, her strategic questions distributed expertise to the children and expanded theiractivity. The open-ended but specific function of the questions that Miller used to turn decision making over tothe children are what we define as features of “design questions”. In her CE, Miller discussed her questionasking strategy with the concept of mediated serial assistance (Stone & Gutierrez, 2007), a process where thefacilitator helps to organize interaction so children jointly determine the sub-tasks and direction of activity. Shewrote “mediated-serial assistance appeared far more often in my group this week…As we worked through theflying machine issue I promoted critical thinking by posing “open-ended” questions to the group. … as thechildren responded I acknowledged their ideas, reflected on them, and expanded on the question in new ways”.In each of these examples, a focus on design and the imaginary situation engaged children in fluidexperimentation whereby they could jump into activity, but also pull back and reflect on the direction of theirgoals. By helping children imagine possibility, undergraduates used play to form a zoped that engaged students’potential understandings. Additionally, undergraduates’ discourse moves provided immediate feedback that didnot restrict children’s imagination and helped push them into new perspectives and practices.Problems with PlanningWithin M & T and EPM, play can be hard work, but there is an element of spontaneity and experimentation thatenlists participation. In CE1 Ruth Penn wrote her group attempted to begin the adventure guide for Zoom Zoom(car creation). She related that Andres and Jose easily shared ideas and drew complex sketches, but that theyquickly lost interest in planning and went to play computer games. She surmised that if they had immediatelyworked on building the car, they might have stuck with the activity. In CE3 her group was undecided on aproject. Penn related how an EPM staff person intervened to lecture them that they had to create a plan beforethey began “worldmaker”. The dialogue shut down the boys’ enthusiasm, with Andres’s lack of voice indexedby the action of putting a piece of tape over his mouth. This situation, where an EPM staff-person presented anapproach contrary to the one espoused in this article, is also indicative of the gaps that often arise betweenICLS 2014 Proceedings	  74© ISLSuniversity and k12 schools, the hurdles for putting theory into practice, and how easily novice teachers will referto a perceived authority, even if the interaction does not align with theory they are learning in their universitycourses.In CE4 Penn wrote that Andres exclaimed, “I can’t believe I am having fun!” Her final CEs show amove away from planning and the introduction of new tools to immediately tinker with. In these CEs Penn’sdiscourse evolved into more strategic questioning and idea sharing. In CE5, Penn explained her role in Andresand Miguel’s design of an experiment with Mentos candy and soda.… the new goal became how to make the soda explode higher, while putting in as manyMentos as possible before it exploded. Once we went inside the library, my assistance turnedto become a mediator. I mediated the discussion we had with the experiment. Whendiscussing what we would do for the future, and why the soda exploded, I asked open-endedquestions to encourage critical thinking. I didn’t want to give them the answer, but at the sametime, if I didn’t ask them to think about what they would change in the future, I’m not sure ifthey would have volunteered the information. So, I acted as the lever to get them to answerthese important questions (CE6).The progression of activity in Penn’s CEs shows how when children are restricted from tinkering andarticulating he goals of activity, they lose interest and motivation, but when Penn allowed for the youth to jumpinto activity first, she was able to position herself, through questioning and framing the boys inquiry, to serve asthe “lever” for expanding their thinking. Unsurprisingly, when Andres was having fun, he was engaged andextended his abilities as he created and reflected on his world building in AgentCubes and his “candychemistry” experiments.Hands, Control and Distributed ExpertiseEnjoyment and learning also went hand in hand at EPM2. On the last day Schwartz asked children to relate whatthey had learned and what they enjoyed. Children shared they liked designing and testing their cars, learningabout circuits, building and competing with others in popular digital game Minecraft, and working withundergraduate amigos. Many students expressed that what they enjoyed and learned were the same. This sectiondiscusses joint activity at EPM2 among middle school aged youth and undergraduates in an adolescentdevelopment course. EPM2 focused specifically on M & T activities as exemplar practices for learning theorywithin the university course and at EPM. Our discussion highlights best practices and problematic exchanges ininstantiating our approach to M & T. Table 3 below outlines the activity of the three ensembles we selected forfurther analysis. In each group children from non-dominant communities immigrant heritage were paired withAnglo youth and undergraduates, one of whom was also Latino. These ensembles present a range of forms ofassistance, from primarily top-down, to a mix of directives and guided design questions, to more open-endedassistance.First we focus on the movement of hands on materials in the different ensembles. For solar carconstruction there were tensions around the control of materials. In groups two and three the instructors utilizedmore heavy-handed “next-step” design questions—questions that veered towards known answers and lacked adistribution of agency to the children for deciding the direction of subtasks (Stone & Gutierrez, 2007). The mostproblematic interaction occurred in group three. It began with Amber constructing the solar car while the threeboys looked on:Instructor Bill:Amber:Instructor Bill:Amber:Why are your hands all over it?I was trying to put the wheel onWhy are you trying to put the wheel on?Because they can’t do it(playful tone) What do you mean they’re capable 8th graders with workinghands.This exchange re-mediated Amber’s top-down approach and the boys took control of the car materials. But,shortly thereafter activity moved back to Amber and Instructor Jim who took the materials to demonstrate whenhe saw the boys having trouble. Watching the adults work together indexed their authority for Jorge. Heexclaimed, “you guys are so smart!”. Eventually thinking and acting was turned back over to the youth whenMarnie initiated two design questions modeled after Bill’s and with his support negotiated a shared placement ofthe car’s motor. Activity in ensemble two was less problematic but also relied on directives and “next-step”design questions. As seen in row two, the children had double the amount of time on turn with the materials asTamara. Still, Manuel’s time with the materials overshadowed Yolanda’s turn-taking, even as he oriented morethan Yolanda to Tamara’s approval. A positive aspect of this group was their use of hybrid language practices.Instructor Bill:ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  75© ISLSDuring the most interactive sequence between the children they utilized Spanish to discuss their shareddecision-making.Table 3. The Activity of Three Ensembles at EPM2Group 11. ParticipantsUndergrad: Marnie3 boys: Merza, Tarik and Tom2. MaterialsProduce Circuits: Multiple sets3. “Hands On”:Times on turnwith materials,and implyingmanipulation ofmaterials4. PrimaryUndergraduateDiscourseStrategies5. Role of CourseInstructor(s)Undergraduate, Tarik and Sam:each have their hands on theirown materialsMerza: observes (related thatMerza was able to explain thewhole process later)- Models her own thinking (8)- Questions boys to explaintheir thinking (18)- Suggests boys view eachother’s work (10)- Refers to prior experiences (8)Bill: Strategies and ideas forparticipants thinking, modelsdiscourse for MarnieGroup 2 (3 people)Undergrad: TamaraManuel and YolandaSolar Cars: One setGroup 3Undergrad: Amber3 boys: Edgar, Bob, and JoeSolar Cars: one setUndergraduate: 8Manuel: 14Yolanda: 4 turns(touched materials 15x)Girl & Undergrad: 4Boy and girl: 1Explicit Directives (7)“Next step” designquestions, e.g. “"howwill the wheel turn?,"where does this go?" (7)Undergraduate: 10Instructor Jim: 5Jorge: 8 Bob: 5 Joe: 0Adult total =15 Children =13Among Instructors: 1Undergrad & Boys: 2Explicit Directives (2)Yes / No questions (3)IRE (2)Next step design questions (9)Design questions (3)No instructor present ininteractionBill: Re-mediates top-downapproach, design questionsJim: Models, questionsIn group one the movement of people and expertise was much more fluid and open. Merza and Tarikmoved constantly, and Marnie followed suit, in order to engage with them. Marnie referred to the children’sprior experience, during the summer program, and more broadly in their lives to assist the creation of producecircuits:Marnie:Tarik:Marnie:Tarik:When it didn’t work last time with the play do, what did we do to the light?We switched it.We switched it. Do you wanna try to switch that and see what happens?So… (Mumbles. Sticks LED into playdoh, pauses). This is what we did with theplaydohwhen the light didn’t work. (Pulls LED out, turns it around, sticks it back in)Marnie: hmmm (points, touches LED) What could be wrong? I wanna have you troubleshoot it.Tom:Maybe the bulb burned out?Marnie: The bulbs burned out? Okay, lets try a different bulb.Tom: (Puts a new bulb in the circuit, it works).Tarik: Ah I knew it worked!Marnie: Awesome you just made another circuit. Congrats! How can you use that to extendit?Tarik: You can connect another batteryMarnie’s discourse encouraged Tarik to trouble shoot. The tone of interaction remained playful despite initiallack of success. When the LED did not light up, Tarik was not blamed, rather it was recognized that the issuemay be with the materials and not the user. This interaction literally ignited Tarik’s confidence. He took upMarnie’s invitation to extend his tinkering, exclaiming “Ooo!” when Marnie obtained more batteries for him touse. Marnie’s learning was also supported during this activity. Akin to the situation with Amber, Instructor Billoffered examples of questions to elicit students thinking and agency that Marnie used when the group struggled.Tinkering With Our DesignAt EPM the complex layers of mediation from children, undergraduates, and instructors present us with richresources to support continued tinkering with our cultural historical approach to M & T. We saw positiveoutcomes regarding the re-mediation of participation in STEM activities for youth from non-dominantcommunities when undergraduates allowed for children to dive into activity, and when their strategicquestioning and assistance distributed thinking to children. While these may seem like very simple strategies,unfortunately we also saw in our own sites how often this is not the approach adults take with children.Undergraduates who were successful in re-mediating STEM activity invoked theories of serial mediation andICLS 2014 Proceedings	  76© ISLSjoint problem articulation and related how their strategies worked to distribute expertise to children so that theyouth could form zopeds with their peers.The kind of multidimensional movement and distribution of expertise that we place as the centralaffordance of our approach to M & T necessitates examining contradictions that arise in activity. While we seein homes that children’s inventos foment the creation of new rules for distributing participation when materialsare scarce, at home and at EPM we see that it is often far too easy for the older person or the male to take therole of authority and owner of the materials and thereby claim the expertise to dictate the objective of activity.Though we discussed here some examples where young girls took the lead in teaching others, there are alsomore gender normative exchanges, including the predominance of Manuel’s hands on the car materials.Continuing to examine and design for broadening normative gender roles and rules is critical to the evolution ofour approach. Aligned with this issue is continued thinking on how to design new rules, roles and artifacts fordistributing materials and expertise so that joint problem articulation is embedded in interaction.We find with M & T what might be “good” strategies in one context can easily remove agency fromparticipants in other interactions. Design questions can serve as supports for students thinking and distributeagency to youth through “just enough” assistance (Stone & Gutierrez, 2007) to prompt their continued inquiry.Yet, through slight changes in wording or through tone or gesticulation, questions around design can work in themore lockstep fashion of next step assistance. We plan to continue retrospective analysis of design questionsand discourse with more of our video data and CEs. Through the present analysis we see that many of thecontradictions that arise with design questions are linked to issues of confidence. Children and undergraduatesworry about being right, and need to be supported in taking risks and not giving up authority to those whonormatively wield power. However, in this model, adults do need to take the role of facilitator who can widenthe frame of possibility and model thinking through sharing ideas and ways to approach open-ended problemsolving. A continued tension, also related to this role, is the amount of expertise the undergraduates need inorder to extend children’s thinking, and how much they should be involved in the activity of tinkering to createtheir own or shared products with children.In our next iteration of the design experiment we plan to set up mobile M & T materials centerscoupled with undergraduate “connectors” who model generative design questions and idea sharing. The centerswill provide spaces for children and undergraduates to jump into activity together. Through presenting an arrayof materials we will organize the space for horizontal and vertical expansion across activities and ways ofknowing. Additionally, we have begun an extension study where we visit children’s homes to work withfamilies on M &T activities. With this endeavor we seek to continue to engage families’ inventos as a source forM & T, and to expand participation through actively valuing and enlisting a wide range of practices for STEMlearning. To conclude, we offer a fundamental cultural historical concept that informs this social designexperiment: “change in the individual involves change in the social situation itself” (Engeström, 2008 inGutierrez & Vossoughi, 2010, p. 101).ReferencesEngeström, Y. (1987). Learning by Expanding. Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-konsultit.Engeström, Y. (2008). From teams to knots: Activity theoretical studies of collaboration and learning at work.New York: Cam- bridge University Press. Engeström,Gravemeijer, K. & Cobb, P. (2006). Design research from a learning design perspective. In:Van den Akker, J., Gravemeijer, K, McKenney, S. & Nieveen, N. (Eds). (2006). Educational designresearch. London: Routledge, 17-51.Gutierrez, K., Hunter, J. & Arzubiaga, A. (2009) Re-mediating the University. Pedagogies: An InternationalJournal 4 (1-23).Gutierrez, K. D., & Vossoughi, S. (2009). Lifting Off the Ground to Return Anew: Mediated Praxis,Transformative Learning, and Social Design Experiments. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1-2), 100–117.Resnick, M., & Rosenbaum, E. (2013). Designing for Tinkerability. In Honey, M., & Kanter, D. (eds.), Design,Make, Play: Growing the Next Generation of STEM Innovators, pp. 163-181. Routledge.Schwartz, L. & Gutierrez K. (2013, March). Turn-Taking and Inventos: Examining The Everyday Lives ofLatino Families and Designing Learning Ecologies with Youth and Under-graduates. Paper presentedat the Digital Media and Learning Conference, Chicago, IL.Stone, L.D. & Gutiérrez, K.D. (2007). Problem articulation and the processes of assistance: An activitytheoretic view of mediation in game play. International Journal of Educational Research 46. 43-56.Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes (pp. 79-91).Cambridge: Harvard University Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  77© ISLS