Can Scaffolds from Pedagogical Agents Influence EffectiveCompletion of Sub-Goals during Learning with a Multi-AgentHypermedia-Learning Environment?Michelle Taub, Roger Azevedo, Nicholas Mudrick and Erika Clodfelter, North Carolina State UniversityFrançois Bouchet, Sorbonne Universitésmtaub@ncsu.edu, razeved@ncsu.edu, nvmudric@ncsu.edu, eeclodfe@ncsu.edu, francois.bouchet@lip6.frAbstract: Research on Self-Regulated Learning (SRL) in hypermedia-learning environmentsrevealed that students are unable to engage in effective use of SRL, which have importantimplications for designing hypermedia-learning environments. 60 undergraduate studentsinteracted with MetaTutor, an intelligent, multi-agent hypermedia-learning environment, withthe overall goal of learning about the human circulatory system. There are two experimentalconditions; prompt and feedback and control. We investigated if there were significantdifferences on the performance on and use of sub goals among the different experimentalconditions. Results indicated significant differences between experimental conditions, suchthat participants in the prompt and feedback condition had higher sub goal quiz scores, spentmore time engaging in each sub goal, had larger page relevant ratios, and had lower irrelevantpage ratios, compared to participants in the control condition. These results suggest theimportance of scaffolding in promoting the effective use of SRL strategies while interactingwith a hypermedia-learning environment.IntroductionSelf-Regulated Learning (SRL) research has investigated students’ use of Cognitive, Affective, Metacognitive,and Motivational (CAMM) processes as they interact with hypermedia-learning environments (e.g., Azevedo etal., 2013, Kinnebrew et al., 2013; Lester et al., 2013). According to Winne and Hadwin’s (1998) model,learning occurs through different cyclical phases, during each of which information processing occurs.Unfortunately, students typically do not regulate their learning and therefore several researchers haveincorporated Pedagogical Agents (PAs) to model and scaffold self-regulatory processes in Computer-BasedLearning Environments (CBLEs). Research has investigated how effective the agents are in fostering effectivelearning (Veletsianos & Russell, 2014). Such research has examined agent aesthetics (Mayer & DaPra, 2012)and agent presence (Park & Catrambone, 2007), with respect to learning; and the influence of PAs on learningand motivation (Baylor, 2009), but has not investigated how Pedagogical Agents can influence students’engagement in self-regulated learning processes and activities, such as goal-setting, taking quizzes, and visitingcontent, which is relevant to the current sub-goal being worked on.This study investigated how students completed their sub-goals in order to complete the learningsession with MetaTutor, a hypermedia-learning environment. More specifically, we investigated if there weresignificant differences in students’ performance on sub-goal quizzes, time spent on sub-goals, and navigation torelevant and irrelevant pages to the particular sub-goal, among experimental conditions, which differ on thefeedback provided form the PAs. We expected that: (1) participants in the prompt and feedback condition wouldobtain significantly higher sub-goal quiz scores than participants in the control condition; (2) participants in theprompt and feedback condition would spend significantly more time engaging in each of their sub goals thanparticipants in the control condition; and (3) participants in the prompt and feedback condition would havesignificantly higher relevant page ratios and significantly lower irrelevant page ratios than participants in thecontrol condition.MethodsParticipantsSixty undergraduate students (60% female) from two large universities in North America participated in thisstudy. Participant ages ranged from 18-38 years old; M = 21.3, SD = 2.66. They were compensated with $10 perhour for their participation, up to a total of $40.Research DesignThis study was conducted with an experimental design; participants were randomly assigned either to theprompt and feedback condition (n = 29) or control condition (n = 31). These conditions vary with respect to therole of the Pedagogical Agents (PAs) in the system. Briefly, in the prompt and feedback condition, students areprovided with scaffolding from the PAs, who prompt students to engage in several cognitive (e.g., TakingNotes, Summarizing, and Prior Knowledge Activation) and metacognitive (e.g., Judgment of Learning, FeelingICLS 2014 Proceedings1052© ISLSof Knowing, and Content Evaluation) SRL strategies, and provide feedback on the use of these strategies. Thus,in this condition, participants were not expected to learn independently for they are provided with assistancefrom the PAs, who are there to guide them to engage in effective SRL, and furthermore to learn successfullyabout the human circulatory system. In the control condition, students were not provided with any prompts orscaffolds from the PAs. Students were, therefore, free to navigate the system as they choose to, and can engagein the SRL strategies, but will not be prompted to do so.MetaTutor: A Multi-Agent Hypermedia-Learning EnvironmentMetaTutor is an intelligent, multi-agent hypermedia-learning environment that provides learners with an overallgoal of learning everything they can about the human circulatory system (Azevedo et al., 2013). In thisenvironment, there are 48-pages of text and diagrams, which students can navigate to as they complete their subgoals. The sub goals, which students can set for learning are: (1) Path of Blood Flow, (2) Heartbeat, (3) HeartComponents, (4) Blood Vessels, (5) Blood Components, (6) Purposes of the Circulatory System, and (7)Malfunctions of the Circulatory System. Each student sets two sub-goals, and can choose to add more during thelearning session. The experimental session lasted for two days. On day one, the session lasted thirty minutes,and involved the student completing several demographic self-report questionnaires, and the pre-test, whichincluded 30 multiple-choice questions on the human circulatory system. On day two, students returned to thelab, where they were instructed to use the MetaTutor system and its hypermedia content for 90-minutes,followed by the completion of a post-test (which also included 30 multiple-choice question test on thecirculatory system). During the 90-minute session, Gavin the Guide (one of the four PAs embedded in theenvironment) administered the AEQ self-report emotions questionnaire (e.g., Pekrun et al., 2011), in order toassess how the student was currently feeling at that point during the session. Gavin administered this measureevery 14 minutes, for a total of six times throughout the learning session. There are seven sub goals, whichstudents can set at the beginning of the learning session.There are four Pedagogical Agents (PAs) embedded within the system, who represent the differentfacets of SRL. Gavin the Guide introduces the learner to the session, and administers the pre-test, post-test,demographic questionnaires and emotion questionnaires throughout the session. Pam the Planner assists inplanning, and helps students set sub goals to work through during the session. Sam the Strategizer assists in theuse of learning strategies, and encourages students to create summaries on the content. Mary the Monitorfocuses on monitoring strategies, and administers the sub goal quiz when a student has completed working onhis or her current sub goal.Figure 1. Screenshot of the MetaTutor interfaceICLS 2014 Proceedings1053© ISLSThe MetaTutor interface consists of multiple parts. See Figure 1 for an image of the MetaTutorinterface. On the top left corner, there is a clock, which displays the time remaining in the session. Just belowthe timer, there is a table of contents, which displays the title of each page, and so students can choose whichpage to navigate to. On the bottom, there is a text box, where students can type in information, and can respondto the questions, which respond to the metacognitive SRL strategy questions. On the right hand side, there is theSRL palette, which lists the cognitive and metacognitive SRL processes, such as taking notes, contentevaluation, and judgment of learning, which students can click on, if they choose to engage in one. ThePedagogical Agent is located in the top right corner. One agent is displayed at a time, and is displayed accordingto the scaffold and activity the student is engaging in. On the top of the interface, the student’s overall learninggoal, to learn everything about the human circulatory system, is listed, with a list of the sub goals set, which areplaced underneath it. There is a status bar for each sub goal, which indicates how far along the student is incompleting the sub goal; and students can click to complete the current sub goal if he or she feels it is complete.Experimental ProcedureDuring learning with MetaTutor, we collected multi-channel data, which provides a wide array of product andprocess data related to cognitive and metacognitive SRL processes and learning activities. As students learn, wecollected: (1) log-file data, which include time-stamped information, at the millisecond level, of every mouseclick and keyboard entry the student makes into the system, which includes when the student engages in an SRLstrategy, and when a PA intervenes; (2) eye-tracking (Tobii T60) data, which measures students’ gaze behaviorand fixations as he or she navigates through the system; (3) physiological data, which measured students’arousal based on electro-dermal activity to events (e.g., agent feedback) during learning; (4) video recordings,which captured the students’ facial recording and allows for us to detect their emotional states during learning;and (5) video and audio recordings of the learners’ concurrent think-aloud protocols and interactions with thesystem. For this study, we only analyzed data from the log-files.Coding and ScoringSeveral variables were extracted from the multi-channel data. However, in this study we only report on a subsetof the variables extracted from the log-files. For example, mean sub-goal quiz scores and time spent engaging inthe current sub goal were obtained from the log-files. Quiz scores ranged from 0-9; M = 6.16, SD = 2.33, andmean time spent on each sub-goal was calculated in seconds. A graduate student, with the assistance of twoundergraduate students read through the printed log-files and identified the sub-goals participants set (e.g., Pathof Blood Flow), how long students spent engaging in each sub goal, and which pages students navigated to as heor she completed the sub goal.Sub-goals were coded into two groups, based on level of difficulty. Group 1 consisted of the lessdifficult sub goals: Path of Blood Flow, Heart Components, Blood Vessels, and Blood Components; and Group2 consisted of the more difficult sub goals: Heartbeat, Purposes of the Circulatory System, and Malfunctions ofthe Circulatory System. Sub-goals were categorized into these categories based on the number if pagesassociated with the sub-goals, such that sub-goals with more relevant pages were deemed less difficult, andcategorized into Group 1, whereas sub-goals with fewer relevant pages were deemed more difficult, and werecategorized into Group 2. In order to determine page relevancy ratios, each page number was marked as relevantor irrelevant, based on an excel sheet containing information regarding each sub-goal, including which pages ofcontent and which diagrams are relevant to each of the seven sub-goals, and so we were able to mark the pagesrelevant to each sub goal. Total numbers of relevant and irrelevant pages were calculated, which were thencalculated as ratios using the following formulas;for relevant page ratio and irrelevant pageandratio, respectively. Participants set at least two sub goals each, and so although we had 60 participants, weobtained 183 data points, which represented the total amount of sub goals that were set among all 60participants.ResultsIn order to address the posited research questions, we ran several t-tests, in order to test for significantdifferences between the experimental conditions on their performance and use of the seven MetaTutor subgoals.Research Question 1: Are there Significant Differences between Conditions on SubGoal Quiz Scores?An independent samples t-test was used to determine if there was a significant difference between experimentalgroups on their scores on Sub Goal quizzes. We extracted quiz scores from the log-files, which captured timestamped information during the learning session.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1054© ISLSResults from the t-test revealed that there were significant differences between sub goal quiz scores= 0.11. More specifically, students in the prompt andamong experimental groups; t(40.688) = 2.693, p = .01,feedback condition obtained higher mean sub goal quiz scores (M = 6.94, SD = 1.20) than students in thecontrol condition (M = 5.43, SD = 2.87). This result indicates that participants who were provided with promptsand feedback during the learning session performed greater and achieved higher mean sub-goal quiz scores thanparticipants in the control condition, suggesting that scaffolds from the Pedagogical Agents were effective ininfluencing how students performed on sub-goal quizzes.Research Question 2: What Are the Effects of Prompts and Feedback on Time Spenton Sub Goals?To address this research question, we performed an Independent Samples t-test, with time spent on sub goals asour independent variable. We calculated the time spent per sub goal by scanning through the log-files andcalculating duration by obtaining the time started and time completed for each sub goal the participant workedon. We obtained data from 60 participants, however each participant completed at least two sub goals (range = 2to 7; Mean number of sub-goals per participant = 3.05. SD = 1.28), and so we obtained 183 time data points.Results from the Independent Samples t-test revealed a significant difference on time spent per sub= 0.03. Specifically, participants in thegoal among experimental conditions; t(181) = -2.246, p = .03, =prompt and feedback condition spent significantly more time working on each of their sub goals (M = 37.54minutes, SD = 26.54 minutes) than participants in the control condition (M = 28.55 minutes, SD = 27.05minutes). This finding indicates that when participants interacted with the Pedagogical Agents during learning,they spent significantly more time working on the sub goals that they set, which suggests that these participantsmade more valuable use of their learning time, compared to students who did not interact with the PedagogicalAgents during learning.Research Question 3: Are there Significant Differences between Condition andRelevant Pages?In order to test this research question, we performed two Independent Samples t-tests, with relevant page ratioand irrelevant page ratio as the independent variable for each test. The page numbers, which participantsnavigated to were obtained from the log files, and were then assessed as being relevant or irrelevant to thecurrent sub goal. The page ratio was then calculated by dividing the total relevant pages/total pages and the totalirrelevant pages/total pages for the relevant ratio and irrelevant ratio, respectively.Results from these analyses indicated two sets of significant results. We found a significant difference= 0.14.in the ratio of relevant pages visited among experimental conditions; t(181) = -5.442, p = .00,Participants in the prompt and feedback condition had significantly greater relevant page visited ratios (M = .62,SD = .26) than participants in the control condition (M = .40, SD = .31). Furthermore, we found a significantdifference in the ratio of irrelevant pages visited among experimental conditions; t(174.838) = 2.853, p = .01z,= 0.04. Participants in the prompt and feedback condition had significantly lower irrelevant page visitedratios (M = .35, SD = .24) than participants in the control condition (M = .47, SD = .32). These results indicatethat if students interacted with the Pedagogical Agents during learning, this allowed for them to spend moretime reading pages, which are relevant to the current sub-goal, and reading less pages that are irrelevant to thecurrent sub goal. This suggests that students contributed effectively to completing their sub-goals, in terms ofvisits to relevant pages and less visits to irrelevant pages.Discussion and Educational ImplicationsThe results obtained from these analyses revealed the importance of providing prompts, scaffolds, and feedbackto students as they learn with multi-agent, adaptive hypermedia-learning environments. In addition, these resultshave important implications for Self-Regulated Learning because they inform us of the usefulness of settingsub-goals, and of including Pedagogical Agents in hypermedia-based learning systems, in order to provideprompts and feedback to students to ensure effective SRLMoreover, it is important to consider the educational implications from these results. First, the role ofthe teacher is crucial in the classroom because teachers can provide the appropriate scaffolds and feedback to hisor her students to ensure that each student understands the content, and can apply these constructs to every daylife. If teachers were able to collect multi-channel data on each student, this would allow for the teacher togather reliable data, as opposed to making inferences, about each student’s progress during learning. In addition,teachers can use methods, such as having students set sub-goals, in order for them to grasp an optimalunderstanding of the topic they are learning. Future work can, therefore, implement using multi-channel data inthe classrooms, which would allow for accurate measures of student performance, and thus promote optimallearning in the classroom. The agents can be adaptive based on students’ pre-test scores, sub-goal quiz scores,page quiz scores, use of SRL strategies (e.g., Taking Notes, Judgment of Learning, and Content Evaluation),emotional states, and think-aloud data, which they can assess and provide the appropriate prompts and feedback,ICLS 2014 Proceedings1055© ISLSbased on performance on all of these aspects. If we were to design adaptive multi-agent hypermedia systems,this would allow for us to cater to individual students’ learning needs, and will promote optimal self-regulatedlearning when interacting with CBLEs.Overall, results from this study indicated that there is support for incorporating Pedagogical Agents inhypermedia-learning environments, as well as having students set sub-goals to work on as they navigate throughthe system. The PAs can be an important asset to include in Computer-Based Learning Environments becausethey have been shown to be effective in providing prompts, scaffolds, and feedback, which have assistedlearners in obtaining higher mean sub-goal quiz scores, spending more valuable time accomplishing sub-goals,visiting more pages, which were relevant to their sub-goals, and visiting fewer pages, which were irrelevant totheir sub-goals, compared to students who were not provided with this assistance from the PAs. Therefore, thePAs were effective in fostering and promoting effective completion of sub-goals, and thus effective selfregulated learning. It is advantageous, therefore, to maintain two experimental conditions in our set-up, in orderto compare and determine how students interact with the PAs the most effectively. In addition, the resultsconfirmed that setting sub-goals can be a useful tool for learning, and that when students are scaffoldedappropriately, they can make effective use in completing the sub-goals they set.ReferencesAzevedo, R., Harley, J., Trevors, G., Duffy, M., Feyzi-Behnagh, R., Bouchet, F., & Landis, R. (2013) Usingtrace data to examine the complex roles of cognitive, metacognitive, and emotional self-regulatoryprocesses during learning with multi-agent systems. In R. Azevedo & V. Aleven (Eds.), Internationalhandbook of metacognition and learning technologies (pp. 427-449). Amsterdam, The Netherlands:Springer.Baylor, A. L. (2009). Promoting motivation with virtual agentes and avatars: Role of visual presence andappearance. Philosophical Transactions, 364, 3559-3565. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2009.0148Kinnebrew, J., Biswas, G., Sulcer, B., & Taylor, R. (2013). Investigating self-regulated learning in teachableagent environments. In R. Azevedo & V. Aleven (Eds.), International Handbook of Metacognition andLearning Technologies (pp. 451-470). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Springer.Lester, J.C., Mott, B.W., Robinson, J.L., & Rowe, J.P. (2013). Supporting self-regulated science learning innarrative-centered learning environments. In R. Azevedo & V. Aleven (Eds.), International Handbookof Metacognition and Learning Technologies (pp. 471-483). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Springer.Mayer, R. E., & DaPra, C. S. (2012). An embodiment effect in computer-based learning with animatedpedagogical agents. Journal of Experimental Psychology, Applied, 18(3), 239-252. doi:10.1037/a0028616Park, S., & Catrambone, R. (2007). Social facilitation effects of virtual humans. Human Factors: The Journal ofthe Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 49(6), 1054-1060. doi: 10.1518/001872007X249910.Pekrun, R., Goetz, T., Frenzel, A., Barchfeld, P., & Perry, R. (2011). Measuring emotions in students’ learningand performance: The Achievement Emotions Questionnaire (AEQ). Contemporary EducationalPsychology, 36, 36-48.Veletsianos, G., & Russell, S. R. (2014). Pedagogical agents. In J. M. Spencer, M. D. Merrill, J. Elen, & M. J.Bishop (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and Technology (pp. 759-769).New York, NY: Springer.Winne, P. H., & Hadwin, A.F. (1998). Studying as self-regulated learning. In D.J. Hacker, J. Dunlosky, & A.Graesser (Eds.), Metacognition in educational theory and practice (pp. 277-304). Hillsdale, NJ:Erlbaum.Winne, P. H., & Hadwin, A. F. (2013). nStudy: tracing and supporting self-regulated learning in the Internet. InR. Azevedo & V. Aleven (Eds), International Handbook of Metacognition and Learning Technologies(pp. 293-308). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Springer.AcknowledgementsThe research presented in this chapter has been supported by funding from the National Science Foundation(DRL 1008282), the Institute of Educational Sciences (R305A120186), the Social Sciences and HumanitiesResearch Council of Canada (430–2011–0170 and 890–2012–0138), the Canadian Foundation for Innovation,and the Canada Research Chairs program awarded to the second author.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1056© ISLS