Analyzing University Students’ Participationin the Co-Design of Learning ScenariosIolanda Garcia, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, C/Roc Boronat, 117, Barcelona 08018, Spain,igarciago@uoc.eduAbstract: In this paper we report an ongoing research project that aims to develop, apply,assess and accurately document a method for co-designing learning scenarios in highereducation with the participation of teachers and students. The theoretical and empiricalbackground is described and a model for the study and analysis of students’ participation inco-design processes is proposed. Finally, the main implications, challenges and potentialcontributions of the application of this model are discussed.IntroductionThe study of student participation and consideration of their perspective in planning and curriculum design hasbeen approached from different perspectives. There is, first, a line of work on "student engagement", dedicatedto the analysis of proposals based on encouraging active involvement and commitment on the part of students. Itis assumed that offering opportunities for students to take control of their learning activities, reflect and becomeaware of what they do to learn, may favor the adoption of deeper learning approaches (Bain & Zimmerman,2009). Another line of work focuses on the study of "student voice". This is both a theoretical approach and a setof practices that place students as active agents in the analysis and review of teaching and learning proposals.From this perspective, students’ perception and experience about their learning is recognized as unique andessential to the improvement of education (Bovill, Cook-Sather & Felten, 2011). A third line of study, morerecent and more focused on the field of higher education, is framed under the expression "students as producers"also referred to as "students as researchers". Neary (2012) refers to this approach as way of turning students intokey agents of a radical transformation of higher education institutions. Although the approach may havedifferent concretions, one of those most widely taken is the use of academic research as a core undergraduatecurriculum, involving teachers and students as partners in academia’s function of knowledge production.The literature developed in the last decades around the issue shows that, although there is a clear streamof research that supports the need to address learning in universities from the shared responsibility of teachersand students, examples of transformation of concrete contexts of practice are almost anecdotal and confined tospecific projects. Although the literature puts forward a number of reasons for student involvement incurriculum design, there is still little systematic evaluation of their real impact and specific dynamics (Bovill,Cook-Sather & Felten, 2011).Moreover, several authors highlight the risks of participatory approaches, and even maintain a criticalstance regarding the way "student voice" has been interpreted and represented, particularly in the field of highereducation. According to Seale (2010), in the discourse of these approaches there is the implicit assumption thatthe students’ feedback will have a transformative impact on teaching practices and curriculum development.However, these expectations of transformation are not articulated or explicit, nor do they sufficiently describehow this type of participation can be realized to achieve the mentioned purposes. Finally, the same authorasserts that the lack of clarity about the real commitment towards students’ participation and empowerment isreflected in the way "student voice" is defined and the roles assigned to students in some projects. Based on herreview, Seale (2010) argues for the need to create a framework to connect theory and practice from which toarticulate the implementation of concrete actions so that the "student voice" can really have an impact onuniversities. According to this author, participatory research methods have this potential.In this paper we report an ongoing research project that aims to develop, apply, assess and accuratelydocument a method for co-designing learning scenarios with the participation of teachers and students, includingits articulation, roles, components, phases, conflicts and turning points. In the following pages the theoreticaland empirical background is described and a model for the analysis of co-design processes is proposed. Finally,the main implications, challenges and potential contributions of the application of this model are discussed, aswell as its relevance within the framework of the 2014 ICSL Conference.Contextualization and Rationale of the ProjectAlthough the idea of student participation in curriculum design is not new and has been developed mainly inprimary and secondary education especially in the USA, it continues to have a very modest and partial scope inthe field of higher education. Existing literature is limited and tends to focus on the description of variedexperiences rather than on the abstraction and evaluation of specific methodological parameters, so that progressin knowledge on the subject is still not evident (Bovill, Morss & Bulley, 2008; Seale, 2009). However, all thelatest pedagogical literature provides arguments in favor of the idea of actively involving students in curriculumICLS 2014 Proceedings1072© ISLSdesign, either from the perspective of enhancing the development of their critical judgment, increasing theircommitment and responsibility for their own learning, enabling more authentic and meaningful learningexperiences, improving the options to personalize learning, or understanding the very idea of curriculum as a cocreation task between teachers and students (Bovill, Morss & Bulley, 2009). Below we provide a summary ofsome of the most relevant results from the study of university students’ participation in curriculum design.Evidence on Students’ Participation in Curriculum DesignSeale (2009) carries out a comprehensive review and accounts for the heterogeneous ways of approaching andmaterializing the study of "student voice" in higher education. According to this author, there are two purposesthat are mainly linked to the student voice projects in higher education: quality enhancement and assurance andstaff or professional development, which, in turn tend to be aligned respectively with higher education policieson assessment (evaluation and feedback) and teachers’ reflective practice.The most widespread form of university students’ participation is through giving feedback on coursesthrough means such as staff-student liaison committees, questionnaires and surveys, focus groups and electronicvoting systems (Bovill, Morss & Bulley, 2009), although the real impact of this kind of procedures on the designof courses is not clear. Some authors have proposed methodologies in which students and teachers participate in"co-generative" discussions, aimed at sharing their views and reflecting together on how to improve the practiceof teaching and learning (Roth, Lawless & Tobin, 2000). There is less evidence of the procedures used in theexploration of the direct involvement of students as "co-designers" in the field of higher education. Cameronand Tanti (2011) report the methods utilized in a project where students were asked to take an active role inplanning and creating their own learning tasks through a problem-based learning approach supported by socialmedia tools. Bovill, Cook-­‐Sather and Felten (2011) describe a multiple case study of students’ participation incourse re-design conducted in different universities in the USA and UK. Those experiences involved differentstrategies such as the creation of small "course design teams" (CDT) formed of teachers and students that cocreate or re-create a course syllabus; the commissioning of a small group of students to design a new virtuallearning environment based on case studies, also including the production of written, audio and video resources;and engaging a whole group of students in decision making over the actual content of the course according towhat they considered they needed to learn. Finally, Bovill, Morss and Bulley (2009) propose as an alternativeway of participation, enabling students to participate in the design process at a later stage in order to capitalizeon their experience of a course.Regarding the conditions and factors that may determine or affect a co-design process, it seems clearthat time is a key factor. A sustained dialogue over time is required to generate the context of trust needed todeconstruct mutual prejudices between students and teachers and allow them to express their ideas clearly. Italso takes time and external facilitation for students to come to understand and use certain pedagogical concepts.There seems to be a turning point from which the co-design process becomes more fluid and rich, when studentsunderstand that their views will be taken into serious consideration (Bovill, Morss & Bulley, 2009).Cameron and Tanti (2011) highlight the role that technology and specifically social media can play infacilitating these processes, to enable students to create, discuss and publish new knowledge objects easily andquickly (Chang, Kennedy & Petrovic, 2008). In this sense, the OER movement offers plenty of opportunities toput into practice the concept of "students as producers" by involving them in activities to inform and enhancelearning designs and to produce and improve learning materials (Greaves, 2012).But the reviewed studies also found points of tension that may hinder the co-design process. Accordingto Cameron and Tanti (2011), for students to assume the role of co-designers, teachers must relinquish somecontrol. They need to be more self-aware, flexible and knowledgeable to respond to student learning needs andto accept their opinions and demands. There are also institutional factors that can constrain student participation,such as professional requirements or regulatory frameworks (Bovill, Morss & Bulley, 2009).Moreover, participatory approaches have a number of drawbacks if they are not genuine or notproposed in an appropriate manner. Sometimes student participation is treated as an aesthetic and superficialissue, limited to spaces too specific and timely to have a real impact on the learning design process. There is arisk of falling into the objectification and generalization of the perspective of students, ignoring their diversity ofprofiles and underlying motivations. Students used to maintaining a relationship under the authority of teachersmay show resistance, fears and even feel manipulated when facing such proposals (Bovill, Cook-Sather &Felten, 2011). According to Seale (2011), some student voice projects are teacher-centric, in the sense that theyput students in the role of teacher, rather than empower them from their position and enable equal andconstructive dialogue.Theoretical and Methodological ApproachThe project discussed here, based on the use of co-design methods, takes as a reference the revised work on"student voice", "student engagement" and "students as producers", to propose the direct and active participationof students in the process of co-designing learning scenarios they will take part in. In addition, it combines theICLS 2014 Proceedings1073© ISLSmethodologies and tools of the domain of learning design with those of the participatory design field. Roschelle,Penuel & Shechman (2006:606) describe co-design as "a highly-facilitated, team-based process in whichteachers, researchers and developers work together in defined roles to design an educational innovation, realizethe design in one or more prototypes, and evaluate each prototype's significance for addressing a concreteeducational need". According to these authors, the co-design process is not completely democratic –as it is inparticipatory design– because researchers often hold the ultimate responsibility for the quality decision-making.Many of the co-design practices in education are associated with the design and implementation of technologicaltools to support learning processes (Mor & Winters, 2006; Penuel, Roschelle & Schechtman, 2007). In general,it is about funneling educational innovations that currently involve the use of technological resources in theschool context. These experiences have typically involved teachers, researchers and often software developers,as partners in the process of co-designing educational innovation. This procedure ensures the connection and theorchestration of the theory, practice models, tools and participants’ insights.	  The project aims to study the development of learning scenarios that are more authentic, contextualizedand focused on learners, through a co-design process involving students and teachers in the negotiation of thedesign principles of such scenarios to assess the potential of this approach as a catalyst for change andinnovation in higher education. The study applies the methodology of design-based research. The design of theinvestigation is iterative, situated and intervention-led but underpinned by theory. The object of study istherefore the very process of co-designing, taking as key agents both the teachers and the students to whomthose practices are addressed. A mixed approach (quantitative and qualitative) is used for data collection,analysis and interpretation. The research design involves several cycles of iterations with the aim of refining theprocess of co-design. The research questions that address the issue of students’ participation are as follows:a.b.c.d.How are participants’ roles and levels of intervention negotiated, assigned and managed?What are the stages and critical issues to consider in the process of co-design?What are the effects of the co-design process on teachers and students’ perception of learning, teachingand learning design?How does context (university model, area of knowledge, profiles) influence the co-design process?The participants are a group of teachers and students from two universities with different models, oneof them blended (University of Barcelona) and the other virtual (Open University of Catalonia). Of the fourmentioned contexts reported in this study, two are from the blended university and two are from the virtual one.The four design contexts correspond to different disciplinary areas, such as medical informatics, economics,tourism and communication. The co-design of a learning scenario for each context of practice aims to ensurethat results are accessible, acceptable and useful to all participants, and can be effectively used to evaluate,report and improve practice in these and other contexts (Anderson & Shattuck, 2012).The co-design process takes place cyclically, through the following four main stages: exploration,envisionment, operationalization and assessment and reflection. The first phase of the co-design process consistsof a series of participatory workshops with six teachers from the four selected practice settings, along withmembers of the research team. These sessions have the function of introducing participants to the dynamics ofco-design and gaining a deeper understanding of the contexts of practice. They are also oriented to designinglearning scenarios based on inquiry-based learning and technology-enhanced learning principles, involving theprototyping of the designed learning scenarios. In the second phase of the co-design process, two studentsselected from each context join the design work groups (a total of eight students) with the aim of critiquing theprototypes of the learning scenarios designed by teachers, bringing their own ideas and perspectives and thusvalidating the final designs. This is done through the same dynamic of participatory workshops used in the firstphase but adding the implementation of the learning scenarios in the corresponding real contexts of practice. Inthis way the prototypes of the learning scenarios are tested and feedback is collected from the entire studentgroup. Implementation occurs in iterative cycles that enable the designed scenarios to be refined based oncollected feedback, reflection and discussion by the design teams. Thus, it addresses two levels of studentparticipation: a) students who are part of the co-design team of each context, b) students who make up each ofthe four student groups where learning scenarios are implemented.Throughout this entire process exhaustive data collection is performed using several researchinstruments: initial interviews with teachers and students, participant observation and audio recordings of jointwork sessions, short questionnaires addressed to both teachers and students after each work session, classroomobservation and field notes, a questionnaire to the whole student group, final interviews with teachers anddiscussion groups with students. The purpose is to thoroughly keep track of the co-design process, enabling theresearch questions that were posed to be answered. To do this, an analytical model has been developed thatintegrates all the meaningful dimensions for studying the co-design according to the literature review andresearch questions. Specifically, the relevant dimensions for the analysis of students’ participation reported inthis paper are: methodological aspects of co-design, roles, dialogue and negotiation, phases, conflicts and keyissues, student and teacher profiles, students and teachers’ change, institutional and curricular factors.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1074© ISLSThese dimensions are discussed from four perspectives or different viewpoints that reinforce eachother, as shown in Figure 1: joint work sessions, classroom implementation, perceptions and design product. Itis a holistic model of analysis of the co-design process, which in turn allows the triangulation of data andmethods, in order to preserve the research trustworthiness. For the analysis of qualitative data (interviews,observations, field notes and post-session questionnaire) the constant comparative method and grounded theory(Glasser & Strauss, 1967) is used, while for the quantifiable data collected with the post-session questionnaireand the general questionnaire applied to the whole students group, a descriptive statistical analysis is performed.Figure 1: Co-design process analysis frameworkDesign-based research is coupled with the use of participatory design methods. The principle ofperforming various iterations allows students to participate in all stages of the process even though they areincorporated into a second phase. Teachers and students work in close contact and are placed at the same levelthrough the entire process of co-design, although the former will have the ultimate responsibility for thescenarios designed. Similarly, teachers and students assume the role of co-researchers to engage in theproduction and analysis of collective research knowledge and enhancement of the group to solve the problemsidentified (Fielding, 2004). However, the research team is ultimately responsible for the co-design process.Discussion on Opportunities for Productive and Innovative InquiryThe research presented is intended to advance the study of participatory and collaborative learning designmethods that involve teachers and students in the field of higher education. With this goal, inquiry-based andtechnology-enhanced learning scenarios will be co-designed. It is considered that the design of learningscenarios –including the sociocultural context in which they are framed, the chosen pedagogical approach andthe objects that make up the learning situation– in which learning activities are inserted, can elicit the processesintended to be facilitated and promoted among students. Moreover, the co-design process itself is proposed as alearning experience. In the case of teachers it is viewed as an opportunity for professional development and inthe case of students it is expected to cause a change in their conceptions, understanding and attitude towardslearning from the perspective of learning design. Therefore, this research is based the following assumptions:a)students’ participation in the co-design process can integrate their perspective, interests and needs moreeffectively into the designed learning scenarios, ultimately promoting deeper learning by differentstudent profiles and in different learning contexts;b) participation in the co-design process can make students more aware of the processes involved inlearning and learning design, and become more autonomous in the direction of their learning activities;c) co-design processes involving students and teachers in collaborative negotiation of the designprinciples applied to learning scenarios can facilitate the adoption of an inquiry-based learning modelmediated by a more mature and autonomous use of technology by students;d) students’ participation in the co-design process is expected to encourage teachers to reflect on theirpractice. Similarly it is expected that the supporting co-design methods and instruments will helpparticipant teachers to develop awareness and skills as learning designers.Conclusions and Relevance of the TopicInvolving students in learning design processes is a complex task because it implies profound changes in how toapproach teaching and learning in higher education. However we consider it indispensable to walk this path inorder to offer learning scenarios that are more authentic, contextualized and meaningful to current students.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1075© ISLSWe have shown the positive implications of the adoption of this approach, both in terms of improvingthe quality of learning, changing roles and relationships between teachers and students, and as a catalyst forteachers’ professional development processes. The absence of clear and detailed references on theimplementation of such participatory processes hinders its application and its generalization. For this reason, webelieve that the adoption of a design-based research approach could be useful to faithfully capture the co-designexperience in a real context and simultaneously feed the knowledge in this field.If the goal of universities is to train autonomous, critical, creative students who are able to developthemselves throughout their lifes they must begin to adopt the vision of students as producers. To do this, itseems essential to empower students and to provide them with the agency to truly influence and bring aboutchange in the university. Models of inquiry-based learning combined with the use of social media offer manyopportunities in this regard, which we intend to explore in this research. In turn, teachers have a crucial role toplay in facilitating this process, as well as in the transformation of learning design proposals in higher education.From our point of view the subject of the reported research is closely related to the theme chosen forthe 2014 ICLS Conference and would be an appropriate and relevant contribution to it. The focus of the inquiryis in fact the learning experience of teachers and students based on the co-design process. We believe that codesign processes are of special richness because they are located at the intersection between different types ofpractices: sociocultural practices of collaboration between participants and the actual practices of teaching andlearning in institutional and epistemic contexts.ReferencesAnderson, T. & Shattuck, J. (2012). Design-Based Research: A Decade of Progress in Education Research?Educational Researcher, 41, pp. 16-25.Bain, K., & Zimmerman, J. (2009) Understanding great teaching. Peer Review, 11 (2), pp. 9-12.Bovill, C., Cook-Sather, A. & Felten, P. (2011) Students as co-creators of teaching approaches, course designand curricula: implications for academic developers. International Journal for Academic Development,16 (2). pp. 133-145.Bovill, C., Morss, K. & Bulley, C.J. (2009) Should students participate in curriculum design? Discussion arisingfrom a first year curriculum design project and a literature review. Pedagogic Research in MaximisingEducation, 3 (2). pp. 17-26Cameron, L. & Tanti, M. (2011) Students as learning designers: using social media to scaffold the experience.eLearning Papers, 27.Chang, R., Kennedy, G. & Petrovic, T. (2008). Web 2.0 and user-created content: Students negotiating shifts inacademic authority. Proceedings ascilite Melbourne 2008.Fielding, M. (2004) Transformative approaches to student voice: theoretical underpinnings, recalcitrant realities,British Educational Research Journal, 30(2), pp. 295–311Glasser, B. & Strauss, A. (1967) The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research,Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.Greaves, L. (2012) Feed-forward for Informed Learning (FfIL): learner-generated materials for personalisedlearning. Enhancing Learning in the Social Sciences 4(3).Mor, Y., & Winters, N. (2007), Design approaches in technology enhanced learning, Interactive LearningEnvironments, 15 (1), 61-75.Neary, M. (2012) Student as producer: an institution of the common? [or how to recovercommunist/revolutionary science] Enhancing Learning in the Social Sciences 4(3).Penuel, W.R., Roschelle, J. & Shechtman, N. (2007). Designing formative assessment software with teachers:An analysis of the co-design process. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1),pp. 51-74.Roth, W.M., Lawless, D.V. & Tobin; K. (2000) {Coteaching | Cogenerative Dialoguing} as Praxis of DialecticMethod. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 1(3), Art. 37.Roschelle, J., Penuel, W. R. & Schechtman, N. (2006). Co-design of innovations with teachers: Definition anddynamics. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Bloomington, IN.Seale, J. (2009) Doing student voice work in higher education: an exploration of the value of participatorymethods, British Educational Research Journal, 36 (6), 995-1015.AcknowledgmentsThe project is funded within the R+D National Plan, by the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness of Spain.We also would like to thank the professors and students participating in the research for their involvement andcollaboration.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1076© ISLS