Development of Integrated Physics Identity through PhysicsLearning Assistant ExperienceEleanor W. Close, Jessica Conn, and Hunter G. Close, Texas State UniversityEmail: eclose@txstate.edu, jmc225@txstate.edu, hgclose@txstate.eduAbstract: We propose that connections between persistence, career trajectory, andparticipation in a Physics Learning Assistant (LA) program can be explained using theconcept of the community of practice and its intimate relationship to identity. Preliminaryanalysis of written artifacts and interviews suggests that membership in the collaborativephysics education community of practice created through the LA program increases LAs’engagement in negotiation of meaning in both instructor and student roles and strengthenstheir physics identity.IntroductionThe Learning Assistant (LA) model, developed at the University of Colorado-Boulder and widely adopted (andadapted) at other institutions, provides undergraduate STEM students with coordinated experiences of contentand curricular learning, teaching practice, and pedagogical coursework. LAs meet weekly with faculty toprepare for instruction, and facilitate discourse over fundamental disciplinary concepts in small-groupinstructional settings (see Otero, Pollock, & Finkelstein, 2010, for a detailed description). This model has beendocumented to lead to a number of positive effects on both LAs and students in LA-served courses, and toincrease the number of STEM students choosing careers in teaching (Otero, Pollock, & Finkelstein, 2010). Weanalyze the experience of students in the Physics LA program at Texas State University in terms of the existingtheoretical frameworks of community of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998) and physics identity(Hazari et al., 2010; Lock, Hazari, & Potvin, 2013), and explore the implications suggested by these theories forLA program adoption and adaptation. Regression models from studies by Hazari et al. (2010) and Lock, Hazari,and Potvin (2013) show that the physics identity construct strongly predicts intended choice of a career inphysics; the goal of our current project is to understand the details of the impacts of participation in the LAexperience on participants’ practice and self-concept, in order to identify critical elements of LA programstructure that positively influence physics identity and physics career intentions for students.Theoretical FrameworkWe briefly describe the two theories named above, and build a correspondence between factors in the physicsidentity framework and community of practice theory. This blended theory is used to analyze video of LAinterviews and written artifacts for evidence of shifts in LA identity.Identity in PracticeLave and Wenger describe participation in communities of practice and development of identity as deeplyintertwined (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998). Participation in a community of practice shapes and isshaped by the ways in which members of the community engage each other around their shared practice. Overtime, the community develops a shared repertoire of resources for negotiating meaning, including language,stories, concepts, styles of interacting, and ways of accomplishing tasks. Identity, as shaped by this engagementin practice, is not an inherent or fixed quality of a person but rather a process of continuous re-negotiation – “aconstant becoming” (Wenger, 1998, p. 154). Within this framework, Wenger (1998) identifies fivecharacterizations of identity, four of which we find relevant to our current study: identity as negotiatedexperience, as community membership, as learning trajectory, and as nexus of multi-membership.Physics Identity Self-ConceptHazari and colleagues (2010) describe and empirically validate a theoretical framework for physics identitycomposed of four dimensions: personal interest, student performance, competence, and recognition by others.Assessment of physics identity is based on self-report, e.g., the dimension competence can be described as“belief in ability to perform required physics tasks.” In a subsequent study, Lock, Hazari, & Potvin (2013) foundthat the dimensions of performance and competence formed a single factor; the theoretical framework wastherefore simplified to three dimensions. We make use of this simplified framework in our analysis.Relating Self-Concept and PracticeIn order to relate the empirically tested physics identity framework to concepts from the more generalcommunity of practice theory, we build a correspondence between factors. The link between the two shouldhelp the physics community create effective interventions that positively influence physics identity and physicsICLS 2014 Proceedings1533© ISLScareer intentions for students. The dimension of (self-reported) recognition in the physics identity framework, asmeasured through survey items such as “My physics teacher sees me as a physics person” (Lock, Hazari, &Potvin, 2013), describes an element of identity as negotiated experience: the process of making meaning fromthe encounters and experiences of participation in a community of practice. The physics identity dimension ofcompetence/performance describes an aspect of community membership, which defines identity through theforms of competence developed and valued by participants in the community. Changes in identity over timebuild a sense of trajectory; identity as learning trajectory incorporates past identities and possible futures intomaking meaning of the present, encompassing the physics identity dimension of personal interest. Identity asnexus of multimembership is defined by the work of reconciling forms of membership in different communities.This blended identity theory is the basis for our analysis of the LA experience, described below.MethodsWe examine written data sources and video of LA interviews for evidence of whether participation in the LAprogram has affected elements of LAs’ identity, and if so, in what ways and through what program elements.Written data are drawn from multiple sources, including teaching reflections, program applications, and writtenprogrammatic feedback. A subset of experienced LAs (N=7 out of 18 LAs with more than one semester in theprogram) participated in loosely-structured clinical interviews; interview subjects were selected to includediversity of major, gender, career plans, and length of experience in the LA program. The interview protocolincluded questions probing both self-perceptions (e.g., What parts of being an LA are you particularly good at?Has being an LA made you more competent at other things besides teaching?) and practice (e.g., Do you use theHelp Center to study or hang out? Do you interact differently with faculty since becoming an LA?). Video datafrom interviews was examined using insight-oriented analysis (Scherr, 2009), in which the authors, informed bythe theoretical framework described above, collaboratively analyzed video episodes that we identified asproviding insight into the impact of the LA program on participants’ construction and perception of identity.Analysis of early interviews led to adjustments in the interview protocol based on emergent themes in the data.Preliminary Findings and ImplicationsOur preliminary analysis suggests that participation in the LA program impacts LAs in ways that support bothstronger “physics student” identity and stronger “physics instructor” identity, and that these identities arereconciled into a coherent integrated physics identity. Increased comfort in interactions with peers, near-peers,and faculty seems to be an important component of this identity development and reconciliation, and isfacilitated by the increased informal interactions between LAs, faculty, and peers provided by contentpreparation sessions and by the Physics Help Center (a resource for students staffed by LAs and near facultyoffices). These interactions also seem to support an expansion of LAs’ perception of what constitutescompetence: they learn to value and enjoy multiple ways of engaging in the physics community, includinginteractive examination of incorrect as well as correct reasoning, which re-purposes saying wrong things from aform of incompetence to an important component of competent engagement. Further work is planned to confirmthese findings, including systematic coding analysis of an expanded corpus of interview data, and social networkanalysis of the physics student community.ReferencesHazari, Z., Sonnert, G., Sadler, P. M., & Shanahan, M. (2010). Connecting high school physics experiences,outcome expectations, physics identity, and physics career choice: A gender study. Journal of Researchin Science Teaching, 47(8), 978-1003.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Lock, R. M., Hazari, Z., & Potvin, G. (2013). Physics career intentions: The effect of physics identity, mathidentity, and gender. In N. S. Rebello, P. V. Engelhardt, and A. D. Churukian (Eds.), AIP ConferenceProceedings 1513 (pp. 262-265). Melville, NY: AIP Press. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4789702Otero, V., Pollock, S., & Finkelstein, N. (2010). A physics department’s role in preparing physics teachers: TheColorado learning assistant model. American Journal of Physics, 78(11), 1218-1224.Scherr, R. E. (2009). Video analysis for insight and coding: Examples from tutorials in introductory physics.Phys. Rev. Special Topics – PER, 5, 020106. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevSTPER.5.020106Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.AcknowledgmentsThis work and the Texas State University Physics Learning Assistant Program are supported in part by NSFgrant DUE-1240036 and the Halliburton Foundation.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1534© ISLS