Being Mathematical Relations: Dynamic Gestures SupportMathematical ReasoningCandace Walkington, Southern Methodist University, 3101 University Blvd., Dallas, TX, 75205,cwalkington@smu.eduRebecca Boncoddo, Central Connecticut State University, 1615 Stanley Street, New Britain, CT, 06050,boncoddo@ccsu.eduCaroline Williams, Mitchell J. Nathan, Martha W. Alibali, University of Wisconsin–Madison, 1025 W. JohnsonSt., Madison, WI, 53706ccwilliams3@wisc.edu, mnathan@wisc.edu, mwalibali@wisc.edu,Erica Simon, Southern Methodist University, PO Box 750114, Dallas, TX 75275, ehsimon@smu.eduElizabeth Pier, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1025 W. Johnson St., Madison, WI, 53706, epier@wisc.eduAbstract: In mathematics classrooms, body-based actions, including gestures, offer animportant way for students to become mathematical ideas as they engage in mathematicalpractices. In particular, a type of gesture that we call a dynamic depictive gesture allowslearners to model and represent fluid transformations of mathematical objects with theirbodies. In this paper, we report on two empirical studies – one in which dynamic gestureswere observed, and one where these gestures were directed. We conclude that dynamicgestures are a key element in successful justification and proof activities in mathematics.IntroductionAccording to the embodied cognition perspective, body-based behaviors associated with intellectualperformance are not merely epiphenomenal, but are constitutive of the mental process (Wilson, 2002). One waylearning is enhanced is by grounding abstract and unfamiliar ideas through situated action and body states (e.g.,Barsalou, 2008). Some accounts proffer reciprocity between the action system and cognition such that cognitivestates and goals can lead directly (and unconsciously) to actions and actions can induce cognitive states (Nathanet al., under review); in this way, the very boundaries between thinking and acting become blurred. Suchembodied perspectives are particularly salient for the domain of mathematics. In effect, one way of knowing amathematical relationship is by being the relationship. In particular, learners can enact and therefore becomemathematical relations is by using gestures, an important type of body-based action.Recent empirical findings lend support to this view. Abrahamson Trninic, and Gutierrez (2012)explored how enactment of the covariation of two constant rates helped foster proportional reasoning. Gerofsky(2011) describes students’ accounts of how the ways in which they “become” the Cartesian graphs affects theirunderstanding of the mathematical relations represented. Petrick and Martin (2012) discuss how having highschool students physically enact rather than observe geometric relations improved learning gains on conceptualassessment items. As learners engage in the situated practice of mathematical reasoning, body-based actions arean important element of how they become competent members of a community of practice. The ICLS theme,Learning and Becoming in Practice, thus connects to our work. Our studies were inspired by observations ofteachers and students using gestures to represent dynamic mathematical ideas (Walkington et al., in press), andour research underscores the importance of body-based actions as a way of becoming in mathematical practice.Here we expand on current research by focusing on a subset of gestures and the utility of these gesturesfor supporting students’ reasoning abilities. Specifically, we explore the distinction between static depictivegestures, which display an unmoving, unchanging mathematical object in bodily form, and dynamic depictivegestures, which display a mathematical object being transformed using the affordances of the body. We reporton two empirical studies designed to explore the nature of mathematical reasoning in the form of proof practicesand how these practices are influenced by action. Study 1 uses an observational approach to examine howgestures that occur spontaneously relate to one’s justifying and proving. Study 2 uses an experimental paradigmto investigate whether directed gestures can improve proof practices. We explore the implications of thesefindings for theories of learning and instruction, with a focus on the enactment of mathematical relations.Theoretical FrameworkEmbodied CognitionTheories of embodied cognition posit that cognition is deeply rooted in action and perception (Wilson, 2002).This perspective rejects the view that cognition involves algorithmic processes that use amodal symbol systems,and identifies the body itself as a crucial element in cognition. This implies that mental representations ofobjects are experiential, perception-based, and multimodal. In mathematics, embodied theories stand in starkcontrast to a view of mathematics as an amodal, transcendental, objective feature of the universe. Instead,ICLS 2014 Proceedings479© ISLSembodied theories view mathematics as constructed of body-based experiences of human beings with the world(Lakoff & Nunez, 2000). For example, understanding of number is spatial and tied to bodily orientations(Dehaene, Bossini, & Giraux, 1993), and children approach arithmetic problems using modeling approaches inwhich they manipulate objects or count with their fingers (Carpenter & Moser, 1984). When learning fractions,actions coupled with interpretations serve as developmental precursors to general mathematical procedures,which can later be enacted mentally (Martin & Schwartz, 2005). Even when working with algebraic equations,students perceive symbols and equations as having concrete, spatial and perceptual qualities (Landy, Brooks, &Smout, 2012). Thus, we posit that all mathematical cognition is embodied. In this work, we study a particulartype of body-based action that provides evidence for the embodiment of cognitive processes – gesture.GestureGestures are an form of action (Goldin-Meadow & Beilock, 2010) that has been theorized to emerge fromembodied perceptual and motor simulations that underlie mental imagery and language processing (Hostetter &Alibali, 2008). Gestures can guide attention and communicate spatial, relational, and embodied concepts(Alibali, Nathan, & Fujimori, 2011). Gestures can also serve to link ideas and representations, with gesturalcatchments (i.e., repeated iconic gestures, see McNeill & Duncan, 2000) creating structural mappings betweendifferent entities to show relatedness (Alibali et al., 2011; Nathan, 2008). Recent research has begun to explorehow performing gestures can influence the gesturer’s thought processes (Goldin-Meadow & Beilock, 2010;Goldin-Meadow, Cook, & Mitchell, 2009). For instance, requiring students to to represent ideas through gesturesupports long-term retention of concepts (Cook, Mitchell, & Goldin-Meadow, 2008), and directing students togesture can instigate the creation of novel ideas (Goldin-Meadow et al., 2009).One important type of gesture is depictive or iconic gestures (McNeill, 1992). Here, speakers directlyrepresent objects or ideas with their bodies – e.g., they may form two crossing line segments with their hands, oruse their fingers to connect three sides of a triangle. Our research on gesture during mathematical problemsolving, as well as research of others (e.g., Goksun et al., 2013), suggests an important distinction between twotypes of depictive gestures. In static depictive gestures, problem-solvers represent an object (like a triangle orline segment), but do not attempt to directly act upon that object. The gesture shows a static representation of asingle object that is not interacting with other objects. In dynamic depictive gestures, problem-solvers firstrepresent an object, and then engage in fluid transformations of that object using the affordances of their body.For example, a problem-solver might “collapse” a triangle formed with their hands into two line segments ontop of each other, or create a rectangle with their hands that “grows” as they move their hands outwards. Froman embodied cognition perspective, physical action both results from and initiates cognitive states; thus,performing dynamic gestures with the body might both be a by-product of reasoning processes and also giverise to novel ideas. In this paper, we explore the idea of a dynamic gesture, and show how these gestures areimportant in two studies of students’ reasoning when engaging in justification and proof activities in geometry.Justification and ProofJustification and proof are challenging practices for students to master as they reach secondary mathematicsclasses, particularly high school geometry, which more heavily emphasizes this type of complex mathematicalthinking (Healy & Hoyles, 2000). Research has shown that students often test examples rather than engaging ingeneral justification (Knuth et al., 2002), and rely on description and perception rather than formal mathematicalreasoning (Jones, 2000). Proofs that are mathematically valid have three key characteristics: (1) they aregeneral and show that the argument is true for all possible cases; (2) they involve operational thought with aprogression through sub-goals that correctly anticipate the results of mathematical transformations; (3) theyinvolve logical inference in which conclusions are drawn from valid premises (Harel & Sowder, 2005). Hareland Sowder (2005) distinguish such valid proofs from other types of proof by naming them transformationalproofs. One tool that supports understanding of mathematical proofs with action is Dynamic Geometry Systems.These systems allow students to engage in action-based manipulations of objects on a screen, in order to supportstudents’ understanding and exploration of mathematical conjectures (Christou et al., 2004; Marrades &Gutierrez, 2000). Although these technology systems are powerful, we argue that dynamic depictive gesturescan provide some of the same affordances, while also remaining highly portable, flexible, and personalized.Research PurposeHere we report two studies of learners’ engaging in geometric proofs. As we observed learners’ proof activities,we discovered that there was a particular class of gestures – dynamic depictive gestures – that seemed importantin valid reasoning processes. Thus our overarching research purpose was to explore these dynamic gestures inthe context of mathematical conjectures. We examined the dynamic gestures that learners spontaneouslyproduce (Study 1) and we specifically directed learners to use dynamic gestures and tested the effects (Study 2).In Study 1, we identify and describe the characteristics of dynamic gestures and their association with differenttypes of reasoning practices. In Study 2, we seek to tease apart an important distinction regarding whetherICLS 2014 Proceedings480© ISLSdynamic gestures are simply the natural result or by-product of valid mathematical reasoning, or whether theyalso function to spur novel insights by allowing learners to experience geometric ideas in body-based form. Penand paper, critical resources typically used by students in mathematics class, were removed in both studies toencourage participants to use their bodies.Study 1Our research questions in Study 1 were: (1) What are the characteristics of the gestures that problem-solversspontaneously produce when justifying a set of geometry conjectures? (2) How are different types of gesturesrelated to production of valid proofs? and (3) How does freedom of gesture production (standing without writingmaterials vs. seated with writing materials) influence (a) the types of gestures participants produce, and (b) thenature of their mathematical reasoning and proof practices?MethodStudents were solicited to participate in a problem solving experiment on the campus of a selective privateuniversity in the South. Fifteen students (9 female, average age = 20.7 years) were asked to providejustifications for 7 geometric conjectures that were mathematically true or false (Table 1). Eleven of theparticipants had taken Calculus I or higher. Two conditions were alternated among participants. In bothconditions, participants were asked to read aloud the conjectures and generate concurrent verbal reports (i.e.,think alouds) while being videoed. Participants in the control condition were seated facing the conjecturesdisplayed on screen in front of them and were given a paper and pen. The interviewer sat off to the side butfacing the participants and gave only scripted prompts. Participants in the treatment condition were asked tostand within a defined area facing the screen. No paper or pen was provided. The interviewer stood in the sameplace facing the students and gave the same scripted prompts. Conjectures were presented in random order.Table 1: Geometric conjectures given to participants in Study 1If you double the length and width of a rectangle,then the area is also doubled. (False)The area of a parallelogram is the same as the area ofa rectangle with the same length and height. (True)The diagonals of a rectangle are always congruent(i.e., they have the same length). (True)All four-sided figures have angles that add up to 360degrees. (True)Given that you know the measure of all three angles ofa triangle, there is only one unique triangle that can beformed with these three angle measurements. (False)The sum of the lengths of two sides of a triangle isalways greater than the length of the third side. (True)The segment that joins the midpoints of two sides ofany triangle, called the midsegment, is parallel to thethird side. (True)Participants’ speech and gestures were examined from video. Justifications were analyzed to determineif a participant judged a conjecture to be true or false (T/F Judgment). Proofs were analyzed as to whetherparticipants constructed a valid, transformational proof of the conjecture (Proof). Gestures were coded into 4categories: (1) The participant made only static gestures that represented a stationary mathematical object(Static), (2) the participant made at least one dynamic gesture that involved a movement-based transformation ofa mathematical object (Dynamic), (3) the participant drew on their paper and potentially used pointing gesturesindicating positions on the paper (Drawing), or (4) the participant made no gestures or drawing actions (None).The Drawing code could co-occur with Static or Dynamic – for example, the participant may have begun theirjustification by producing a drawing and gesturing at it, but then abandoned that drawing to engage instandalone Static or Dynamic gestures that were not related to their drawing. Analyses were conducted based on15 participants generating 7 justifications each (15 × 7 = 105). One justification was missing due to a videomalfunction, and another due to a participants’ refusal to give a response, for a final count of 103 justifications.Results1. Characteristics of GesturesWe noted several different types of depictive gestures that occurred as students provided justifications for theconjectures, which are illustrated in Table 2 below. We coded whether the referent object of the gesture (e.g.,the triangle, rectangle, line segment, etc. the gesturer is modeling) was static (i.e., non-moving) or dynamic (i.e.,moving). We thus call a gesture that displays a static object to be a static gesture, and a gesture that displays adynamic object to be a dynamic gesture. This distinction is illustrated with the Static-Trace category in Table 2– although a trace gesture involves continuous dynamic movement on the part of the gesturer as they outline anobject, the object being depicted itself is static and non-moving, and thus this was classified as a static gesture.Among the seven conjectures, all had instances of participants using static gestures and drawing, while six of theICLS 2014 Proceedings481© ISLSseven had instances of participants using dynamic gestures. Of the 15 participants, 11 used dynamic gestures atsome point while justifying a conjecture, and 14 used static gestures.Table 2: Types of depictive gestures observedReferentObject is…StaticGestureTypeTraceDescriptionStaticRepresentDynamicRotate/Reflect/TranslateDynamicDilateDynamicTestInteractivityImageParticipant traces over the outline of astationary line or a shape in the air, similar todrawing on a page.(On right, participant traces triangle in the air)Participant uses hands or fingers to physicallyformulate a complete or semi-complete object.(On right, participant forms a right triangle)Participant “picks up” an object representedwith their hands/fingers, and then slides, rotatesor reflects to change its orientation or position.(On right, participant makes a parallelogramwith hands, and then slides the two consecutiveangles together to show they equal 180°)Participant begins by representing a staticobject with hands, and then moves handsoutwards and inwards to show the objectgrowing or shrinking.(On right, participant makes the triangle heforms larger then smaller)Participant modifies one element of an objectto predict impact on the rest of the object.(On right, participant shifts apex of triangle tosee what happens to midsegment)2. Relationship between Gestures and Valid ProofsWe hypothesized that the dynamic gestures in particular were an important way to engage with mathematicalrelationships during justification practices and to formulate transformational proofs. Indeed, this is the premisebehind dynamic geometry systems like Geometer’s Sketchpad and Cabri Geometry. Although this was a smalldata set, we looked at trends in the relationship between gesture types and valid proofs to see if this idea wasworthy of further investigation. Results are shown in Table 3. Dynamic gestures were associated with thehighest accuracy on both true/false judgments and production of transformational proof. Making no gestures ordrawings was associated with the lowest performance. Static gestures and drawing actions fell in between.Table 3: Associations between gesture codes and average accuracy, for each geometric conjecture (N = 103)Gesture PerformedDynamicStaticDrawingNone% Correct on T/F Judgment90.9%74.3%84.4%57.7%% Formulating Valid Proof63.6%34.3%27.3%11.5%Table 4: Associations between condition, gestures, and average accuracy, for each conjecture (N = 103)ConditionPenNo PenAccuracyon T/F76.4%75.5%Accuracyon Proof20.0%52.1%% of justifications involvingdynamic gesture(s)12.7%30.6%% of justifications involvingonly static gestures30.9%36.7%3. Relationship between Condition (Pen/No Pen) and Valid ProofsGiven that drawing gestures were associated with lower accuracy on formulating valid proofs than depictivegestures (static and dynamic), we also investigated how students’ accuracy and tendency to gesture varied byICLS 2014 Proceedings482© ISLSwhether or not they were given a pen and paper. Results are shown in Table 4. Participants in the “No Pen”condition had higher accuracy when formulating proofs, and were more likely to make dynamic gestures.DiscussionThis study suggests that dynamic gestures are an important component of formulating and communicating validproofs in geometry. Dynamic gestures may be promoted when learners are denied tools of pen and paper. Thesetraditional tools may in some cases be less productive for mathematical reasoning than simply encouragingstudents to use their bodies. This study also suggests some characteristics of dynamic gestures used in geometry,and illustrates different types of dynamic gestures used across a variety of conjectures. Dynamic gestures appearto be an important part of justification and proof activities, so their use should be encouraged by providingstudents with greater freedom to gesture. In Study 2, we investigate the potential of dynamic gestures further inan experimental paradigm, by explicitly directing participants to perform dynamic gestures prior to a proof task.Study 2Our research questions in Study 2 were: (1) Does explicitly directing participants to perform dynamic depictivegestures influence their accuracy when justifying a geometry conjecture? (2) Is there a significant associationbetween learners generating their own dynamic gestures during the process of proof and justification, and theiraccuracy when justifying a geometry conjecture?MethodParticipants were 80 undergraduates (44 female, average age = 19.5 years) enrolled in a Psychology course at alarge Midwestern university. Sixty of the participants had taken Calculus I or higher, and their averageACT/SAT math percentile was 87. Participants provided a justification for the triangle conjecture (“For anytriangle, the sum of the lengths of any two sides must be greater than the length of the remaining side.”) whilebeing video-recorded. They key idea was that if the two sides were shorter they would not be able to reach theendpoints of the remaining side to close the triangle. Of the 80 participants, 40 were first explicitly directed toperform relevant dynamic gestures related to the triangle conjecture (Table 5), and were directed to use theirbodies to form changing versions of the referent object (a triangle). In effect, they formed possible andimpossible triangles with their arms or hands, with one side of the triangle dynamically “growing” until atriangle could no longer be formed. They were not told these gestures were related to the conjecture. The other40 were directed to enact irrelevant gestures (Table 5). Of the 40 participants in the relevant condition, only 4reported that they saw a connection between the directed gestures and the conjecture, and the results weresimilar with or without those participants. As Study 1 suggested dynamic gestures were facilitated in absence ofpen and paper, no participants were allowed to use these tools. Participants were asked to think aloud.Table 5: Dynamic gestures that participants were directed to performDirected Relevant Dynamic GesturesDirected Irrelevant Dynamic GesturesParticipants touched concentric pairs of circles withoutstretched arms, with the last pair being too far apart totouch. (A second version involved hands instead of arms,not shown here.) In pilot work, we found participantsspontaneously using gestures similar to these.Participants were asked to walk back and forth infront of concentric pairs of circles, touching onecircle at a time. (A second version involved smallercircles that were closer together, not shown here.)Analyzing video records, we coded each participant’s judgment of the conjecture as true or false (T/FJudgment), and coded whether they generated a valid transformational proof (Proof). A kappa reliability of 0.82was obtained by 3 coders on a list of proof categories adapted from Harel and Sowder (2005) that also includedthe T/F judgment. We then coded the gestures participants spontaneously made while justifying the conjecture.Gestures were coded into 3 categories: (1) The participant made no gestures (None), (2) The participant madeonly static gestures that represented a stationary triangle or triangle part (Static), and (3) The participant made atleast one dynamic gesture that involved a movement-based transformation of a triangle (Dynamic). This codingrepresented only self-initiated gestures that participants produced while justifying the conjecture, not gesturesthat participants were directed to perform; inter-coder reliability was kappa = 0.78. We fit logistic regressionICLS 2014 Proceedings483© ISLSmodels predicting a correct T/F Judgment or Proof (coded as 0/1). Predictor 1 was whether the participant hadbeen directed to perform relevant dynamic gestures prior to being given the conjecture (ConditionExperimental) or whether they had been directed to perform irrelevant gestures (Condition-Control). Predictor 2was whether the gestures participants spontaneously produced during justification were Not Dynamic orDynamic. We controlled for math achievement using self-report ACT/SAT math percentile as a covariate.Results1. Effects of Dynamic Gestures that are Explicitly DirectedWe first examined whether the relevant dynamic gestures we directed participants to perform prior to beinggiven the triangle conjecture affected their subsequent accuracy when justifying the conjecture. Althoughparticipants who were directed to perform relevant gestures constructed a valid proof of the conjecture moreoften than participants who were directed to perform irrelevant gestures (50% vs. 40%), this difference did notreach significance (z = 0.095, p = 0.924). Likewise, participants who were directed to perform relevant gesturescorrectly judged the conjecture was true more often than participants who were directed to perform irrelevantgestures (92.5 vs. 82.5% of cases), but this difference also did not reach significance (z = 1.317, p = 0.188).At the end of the session, all participants who had performed directed relevant gestures (n = 40, firstcolumn of Table 5) were informed of the relevance of these gestures to the triangle conjecture. During thisdebriefing these participants were then given an opportunity to provide a second justification for the triangleconjecture based on this information. The 40 participants were more likely to give a correct proof on this secondattempt (z = 2.190, p = 0.0285), with their chances of obtaining a correct proof increasing from 50% to 70%.Directed relevant gestures may only be effective when the learner is explicitly made aware of their relevance.2. The Impact of Dynamic Gestures produced during Justification and Proof ActivitiesAlthough all participants were explicitly directed to perform some gestures prior to being shown the triangleconjecture (Table 5), we were also interested in the gestures that participants spontaneously produced as theyengaged in the proof and justification activities. Figure 1 gives an example of a dynamic gesture sequence thatwas spontaneously used to prove the triangle conjecture. The participant gives a specific example of anequilateral triangle and then generalizes to all triangles. She moves her thumbs apart, representing the bottom ofthe triangle as she says that “it wouldn’t connect,” and then moves her thumbs together as she says “make ‘em atriangle.” Finally, she collapses the triangle into a line as she says, “they would be like flattened out.” Thisparticipant produces gestures where she is dynamically modifying one aspect of the triangle (the side lengths)using her body, and then using gestures to see what would happen to the rest of the triangle as a result.Figure 1. Participant uses dynamic representation gestures to justify triangle conjectureMany participants in both conditions made their own spontaneous dynamic gestures, and we wereinterested in whether these gestures were associated with correct T/F judgments and proofs. Participants whoproduced dynamic gestures were more likely to correctly judge the conjecture to be true than participants whodid not produce dynamic gestures (100% vs. 75%). This trend was similar acrossconditions(experimental/control). However, this difference did not reach significance in the models due to the error termICLS 2014 Proceedings484© ISLSassociated with the ceiling effect. Participants who spontaneously produced dynamic gestures were also morelikley to provide a correct justification than participants who did not spontaneously produce dynamic gestures(57.5% vs. 32.5%). This difference was significant in the regression model (z = 2.90, p = 0.00375, d = 1.0).However, being directed to perform relevant dynamic gestures prior to being given the conjecture did notinfluence whether participants actually used dynamic gestures to justify the conjecture. In both condictions,exactly 12 of the 40 participants (30% of participants) made spontaneous dynamic gestures.DiscussionStudy 2 highlights the importance of learners’ generating their own dynamic gestures as they spontaneouslyengage in justification and proof activities. These spontaneous gestures may simply be outward evidence of astronger understanding of the geometric relations, or they may also indicate that giving dynamic imagery bodybased form can support and enhance mathematical reasoning. In other words, spontaneous dynamic gesturesmay simply be a by-product that is often seen with advanced reasoning, or alternatively students may actuallylearn from “being” the geometric shape as they generate spontaneous gestures. Given episodes like Figure 1, inwhich a participant seems to be actively attending to and experimenting with geometric ideas using her body,we believe the latter is a strong possibility. However, Study 2 also cautions that directing participants to performthe physical action of dynamic gestures may not, in isolation, be useful to formulating valid proofs. If dynamicgestures are directed, the learner may need to pay explicit attention to and reflect on the gestures for them to beuseful. Asking the learning to “become” a triangle may be of limited usefulness to proof generation if the learnerbelieves they are simply making meaningless, non-mathematical motions. Thus, giving students prompts thatrelate directed dynamic gestures to the task at hand is important to facilitating valid proof generation.General Discussion and ConclusionsThe current studies support the idea that the dynamic gestures that learners spontaneously produce allowlearners to utilize the affordances of their body to ground their understanding of mathematical relationships.Thus, the findings suggest that complex reasoning in a challenging area of mathematics can be fostered byrecruiting body-based resources. Study 1 showed that participants who spontaneously used dynamic gesturesdemonstrated superior mathematical reasoning. The findings suggest that when people enact the keymathematical relations of a task in dynamic, body-based form, they are better able to accurately assess thevalidity of mathematical conjectures and are more likely to generate valid mathematical proofs to warrant theirjudgments. Study 2 reinforced the important relation between dynamic gestures and valid proofs, but alsosuggested that those who were directed to enact relevant relationships through dynamic gestures were morelikely to construct valid proofs, provided the purpose of the directed gestures was made explicit.Although further study is needed to clarify these findings, the studies corroborate the view thatreasoning through enactment is associated with conceptual development in an area of study that students findquite challenging. In a recent study, Goksun et al. (2013) found that the gestures of adults with high spatialreasoning abilities were more likely to contain dynamic information about mental rotation. Similarly, Ehrlich etal. (2006) found that children who produce dynamic gestures performed better on a mental rotation task. Ourfindings further suggest that behaviors such as writing may inhibit dynamic gesture production and impairmathematical reasoning. In similar fashion, Martinez (2012) found that participants who had to type theirresponses to a science test made fewer relevant inferences than participants who instead spoke their responsesand were consequently free to gesture. Both that study and the current one raise questions about whetherassessment practices that impinge on people’s ability to freely produce gestures may have the unintendedconsequence of impairing their abilities to generate inferences. Dynamic gestures offer a unique way forlearners to “become” a mathematical idea as they engage in learning mathematical practices. Our work seeks tomake explicit the importance of identifying, analyzing, and facilitating the dynamic gestures in the classroom.AcknowledgementsThank you to Alyssa Holland, Dan Klopp, and Jessica Waala for their contributions. This work was madepossible through grants from the National Science Foundation (DRL-0816406), the Institute of EducationSciences (R305B100007), and the Department of Teaching and Learning at Southern Methodist University.ReferencesAbrahamson, D., Trninic, D., & Gutiérrez, J. F. (2012). You made it! From action to object in guided embodiedinteraction design. In P. Freebody, T. de Jong, E. Kyza, & P. Reimann (Eds.), Proceedings of theInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences: Future of Learning: University of Sydney.Alibali, M. W., Nathan, M. J. & Fujimori, Y. (2011). Gestures in the classroom: What’s the point? In N.L. Stein & S. W. Raudenbush (Eds.), Developmental Cognitive Science Goes to School (pp. 219234). New York: Routeledge.ICLS 2014 Proceedings485© ISLSCarpenter, T., & Moser, J. (1984). The acquisition of addition and subtraction concepts in grades one throughthree. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 15(3), 179-202.Christou, C., Mousoulides, N., Pittalis, M., & Pitta-Pantazi, D. (2004). Proofs through exploration in dynamicgeometry environments. Proceedings of the 28th Conference of the International Group for thePsychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 2, pp. 215-222). Bergen, Norway.Cook, S., Mitchell, Z., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2008). Gesturing makes learning last. Cognition, 106, 1047-1058.Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental representation of parity and number magnitude.Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371-396.Ehrlich SB, Levine SC, Goldin-Meadow S (2006). The importance of gesture in children’s spatial reasoning.Developmental Psychology, 42, 1259–1268Gerofsky, S. (2011). Seeing the graph vs. being the graph: Gesture, engagement and awareness in schoolmathematics. In G. Stam & M. Ishino (Eds.), Ingrating gestures (pp. 245-256). Amsterdam: JohnBenjamins.Göksun, T., Goldin-Meadow, S., Newcombe, N., & Shipley, T. (2013). Individual differences in mentalrotation: what does gesture tell us?. Cognitive processing, 14(2), 153-162.Goldin-Meadow, S., & Beilock, S. (2010). Action’s influence on thought: The case of gesture. Perspectives inPsychological Science, 5(6), 664-674.Goldin-Meadow, S., Cook, S., & Mitchell, Z. (2009). Gesturing gives children new ideas about math.Psychological Science, 20(3), 267-272.Harel, G., & Sowder, L. (2005). Toward comprehensive perspectives on the learning and teaching of proof. In F.Lester (Ed.), Second Handbook of Research on Mathematics Teaching and Learning, NCTM.Healy, L., & Hoyles, C. (2000). A study of proof conceptions in algebra. Journal for Research in MathematicsEducation, 31(4), 396-428.Hotstetter, A., & Alibali, M. (2008). Visible embodiment: Gestures as simulated action. Psychometric Bulletin& Review, 15(3), 495-514.Knuth, E., Choppin, J., Slaughter, M., & Sutherland, J. (2002). Mapping the conceptual terrain of middle schoolstudents’ competencies in justifying and proving. In S. Mewborn, P. Sztajn, D. Y. White, H.G. Wiegel,R.L. Bryant, K. Nooney (Eds.), Proceedings of the 24th Meeting of PME-NA, Vol. 4, (pp. 1693-1700).Athens, GA.Jones, K. (2000). Providing a foundation for deductive reasoning: Students’ interpretations when using dynamicgeometry software and their evolving mathematical explanations. Educational Studies in Mathematics,44(1/2), 55-85.Lakoff, G., & Nunez, R. E. (2000). Where mathematics comes from: How the embodied mind bringsmathematics into being. New York: Basic Books.Landy, D., Brookes, D., & Smout, R. (2012). Modeling abstract numeric relations using concrete notations. The33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Boston, MA.Marrades, R., & Gutierrez, A. (2000). Proofs produced by secondary schools students learning geometry in adynamic computer environment. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 44, 88-125.Martin, T., & Schwartz, D. L. (2005). Physically distributed learning: Adapting and reinterpreting physicalenvironments in the development of fraction concepts. Cognitive Science, 29(4), 587-625.Petrick, C., & Martin, T. (2012). Learning Mathematics: You’re It vs. It’s It. In P. Freebody, T. de Jong, E.Kyza, & P. Reimann (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences:Future of Learning (ICLS 2012). Sydney: University of Sydney / ISLS.Martinez, C. V. (2012, August). Manipulations of Gesture Production Indicate the Role of the Body in SituationModel Development: Implications for Computer-based Assessment. Dissertation to the University ofWisconsin-Madison. (ProQuest Publication No. 3522569).McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and Mind: What Gestures Reveal about Thought. Chicago: Chicago University Press.McNeill, D., & Duncan, S. D. (2000). Growth points in thinking-for-speaking. In D. McNeill (Ed.). Languageand gesture: Window into thought and action (pp. 141-161). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Nathan, M. J. (2008). An embodied cognition perspective on symbols, grounding, and instructional gesture. InDeVega, M., Glenberg, A, M. & Graesser, A. C. (Eds.) Symbols, Embodiment and Meaning: A Debate(pp. 375-396). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.Nathan, M., Walkington, C., Boncoddo, R., Pier, E., Williams, C., & Alibali, M. (under review). Actions SpeakLouder with Words: The Roles of Action and Pedagogical Language for Grounding MathematicalReasoning.Walkington, C., Nathan, M., Wolfgram, M., Alibali, M., & Srisurichan, R. (in press). Bridges and barriers toconstructing conceptual cohesion across modalities and temporalities: Challenges of STEM integrationin the precollege engineering classroom. In J. Strobel, S. Purzer, & M. Cardella, (Eds.), Engineering inPre-College Settings: Synthesizing Research, Policy, and Practices. Purdue University Press.Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9, 625-636.ICLS 2014 Proceedings486© ISLS