What’s Happening in the “Quantified Self” Movement?Victor R. Lee, Utah State University, 2830 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT 84322-2830, USA, victor.lee@usu.eduAbstract: Rapid adoption of wearable tracking devices and motion sensitive apps has led tothe development of the “Quantified Self” movement (QS). Some in the learning sciencescommunity have begun to take notice and incorporate ideas from QS into the research anddesign of new learning environments. Yet the QS movement is still new enough that very littleis known about it, and there are many open questions about how QS might be of value to thelearning sciences. This paper provides some history of the movement and through a qualitativeanalysis of a public video corpus of QS presentations, identifies the variety of participants, thereported motivations driving individuals to self-quantify, and the data analysis activities ofsome individuals active in the movement. Opportunities for future research and design effortsin the learning sciences are also discussed.IntroductionThe reduced cost and increased availability of wearable devices and tracking apps has led to the development ofwhat the popular press has called the “Quantified Self” (QS) movement. QS centrally involves extendedtracking and analysis of personally relevant data. Given the emphasis on data and new technologies, QS is nowstarting to be discussed with research associated with the learning sciences. For example, QS tools andtechniques appear in new frameworks for supporting learners in their own reflections on their learning processes(e.g., Rivera-Pelay, Zacarias, Müller & Brown, 2012), as a personal and consequential data source for input intoeducational games (Ching & Junicke, 2013) and in new designs for learning activities that turn everyday schoolexperiences, such as recess or a walk to the library, into objects for students to study (e.g., Lee & Thomas, 2011;Lee & Drake, 2013).These are all new developments. If QS is to continue to grow and overlap with work in the learningsciences, there is a fundamental question that should be asked of a movement that is still so new. Namely: Whatis happening in the Quantified Self movement? More specifically, who is involved in QS, what leads to thembeing involved, and what are some of the specific data collection and analysis activities undertaken by these“Quantified Selfers” (QSers)? Secondarily, what should the LS community seek to gain from understanding theQS movement? One goal of this paper is to identify a few features of the QS movement that we may wish toexamine, leverage, or modify so that we can better understand and design for technology-supported learning thatinvolves people having frequent encounters with data.A Brief Background on QS: Origins, Growth, and InteractionsWhile there have been longstanding efforts to develop and promote wearable technologies, the past decade hasseen a more aggressive effort among businesses to produce and distribute consumer-level wearables thatemphasized physical activity tracking (Lee & DuMont, 2010). For example, in 2006, Apple announced anactivity sensor and iPod kit that ultimately led to the Nike+iPod system. This incorporated a sensor embedded inthe sole of a running shoe that could communicate wirelessly with an iPod. Around the same time (2007, to beexact), Kevin Kelley and Gary Wolf, two editors with Wired magazine who were credited with coining the name“quantified self”, were meeting informally with a number of entrepreneurs and technology enthusiasts inCalifornia’s Silicon Valley. Kelley and Wolf proceeded to report on new technologies and opportunities beingexplored through major periodicals (e.g., The New York Times) and presentations (e.g., TED Talks). As wordabout QS spread, informal local QS interest groups comprised of technology enthusiasts, hobbyists, and othersinterested in personal data began to coordinate face-to-face, regionally-based “meetups”.Rapidly growing popular interest in self-quantification led to the formation of a support organization,Quantified Self Labs (QS Labs). QS Labs launched a website (quantifiedself.com) with online guides andrecommendations for how people in even remote locations could start their own QS meetup group. QS Labs alsoestablished an online discussion forum with over 2300 registered accounts, as of late 2013. The number of QSmeetup group members expanded rapidly from one California-based group to 96 groups distributed across sixcontinents. In early 2013, membership in QS meetup groups was already over 10,000 (Lee, 2013).Face-to-face meetups typically occur every 1-2 months and feature volunteers giving ten-minute “Show& Tell” (S&T) talks, followed by a brief interactive discussion. These talks usually feature reporting of apersonal self-data project followed by a personal reflection on what the presenter learned as a result. A numberof these S&Ts are voluntarily recorded and uploaded to an online video repository, where they are then curatedby QS Labs and posted publicly on the main quantifiedself.com page. In 2011, an international conference serieswas established. In its upcoming sixth iteration, the conference features keynote addresses related selfquantification, volunteers presenting refined versions of their regional S&Ts, and informal “breakout” sessionsICLS 2014 Proceedings1032© ISLSfor QSers to meet together in a separate room to discuss common interests and help push the QS movementfurther.Theoretical PerspectivesWhile QS can be understood from a number of theoretical perspectives. I opted to view participation in QS as aninstance of participation in an affinity space (Gee, 2005). An affinity space refers to a social affiliationorganized around a common endeavor that involves variable degrees of discretionary participation and highlydistributed, multidirectional exchanges of knowledge across various media. The canonical example of anaffinity space is the social affiliation associated with a video game. Video games do not exist in isolation butrather are part of a set of practices that involve knowing and doing in particular ways with particular tools. Assuch, a number of ways exist for one to become an active participant in the affinity space associated with avideo game that go beyond strictly playing the game. This can include posting in message boards, readingpublished strategy guides, or even getting verbal referrals and recommendations related to the game fromknowledgeable peers. These pathways are designated as portals. In the case of QS, the quantifiedself.comwebsite, the discussion forums, the meetup groups, public news media, and the new tracking devices and appsthat one can purchase are all portals into QS.Also important to the maintenance of an affinity space are generators. Generators are the entities thatproduce content and representations against which participants create meanings. In a video game affinity space,the game itself is a generator, as it has embedded in it many signs and representations that participants interpretand act upon. Portals can also be generators as well, as would be the case with a message board about a videogame that mediates participants’ understandings of what representations are meaningful in the game while alsoserving to generate new representations itself. Within QS, the S&T talks and the international conference aregenerators, as are discussion boards, and various other tools created and shared by QSers for producing noveldata representations.Self-quantification can take the form of a highly tailored set of data practices that build upon (and arealso constrained by) the specifics associated with one’s lives and circumstances (Azevedo, 2011). The canonicalQS device may be something like a FitBit activity tracker or Zeo sleep monitor and involve tracking activity orsleep in the interest of improving health, but QSers also engage with self-data that collected in a range of waysfrom diverse activities. One goal of this paper is to illustrate some of that diversity.Research Approach, Data Sources, and Analysis ProcessIn an ongoing effort to understand some of activities and participants in the QS affinity space, I have beenengaged in roughly a year’s worth of participant observation. This included interacting with QSers in a numberof capacities, including attending meetups in my region, speaking on the phone or in person with personnel atQS Labs about their backgrounds and their current activities, attending the annual conference and talking withattendees and presenters, participating in QS discussion boards, and purchasing and using self tracking devicesto examine data about my own activities. From these activities, I have obtained a number of artifacts foranalysis, such as conference programs, field notes, message board exchanges, and transcriptions. For the currentpaper, I am drawing primarily the user-contributed online videos of S&R presentations (N = 220 and spanningfrom 10/2008-09/2013). This particular data source has inherent limitations and biases associated with how thevideos were captured and which ones were ultimately selected for public dissemination (Hall, 2000). Still, itserved as a useful and public source for understanding who participates in QS and what activities QSers pursue.Demographic information such as gender, approximate age range, and ethnicity were identified basedon appraisal of immediate information such as short video snippets, names of the participants, and commentsposted with all the videos. A subset of 12 videos (a little over 5% of the entire set of videos) representing arange of topics and self-data projects was selected for transcription and further analysis. The transcripts of thesevideos were coded iteratively. The first round of codes served to flag all statements in the presentations thatinvolved descriptions or motivators driving the collection or analysis of data. These codes were then refined bycross-case comparisons and through code frequency analysis. The videos were then re-reviewed and then recoded. Following that step, codes were organized into major categories induced from this second review andanalysis of the coding scheme. This process yielded a set of common features associated with the use of selfdata and a set of specific examples to share, presented below.Findings from Show and Tell Video AnalysisThe age of the presenters appeared to be normally distributed, based on visual appraisal. There were clearmajorities for specific genders and ethnicities. With respect to age, there were estimated to be 58 presenters(26.9%) in their mid-20s to mid-30s, 93 (43.1%) in their mid-30s to mid-40s, 49 (22.7%) in their mid-40s tomid-50s, 16 (7.4%) in their mid-50s to mid-60s, and 4 who were unclassified. For gender, there were 174(82.5%) male presenters, 37 (17.5%) female presenters, and 9 joint presentations that had a male and female.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1033© ISLSFor ethnicity, there were 185 presenters (84.1%) who were categorized as White or of European descent, 24(10.9%) Asian, 6 (2.8%) Hispanic or Latino, and 5 (2.2%) who were unidentified.Through the coding process described above, I settled upon a coding scheme with 50 codes, fromwhich 7 categories emerged. For this paper, I discuss three of those categories: Motivations for pursuing selfquantification, Enabling conditions that could build on initial motivation and supported the presenter’s ability topursue self-quantification and Analyses of self-data that had been collected.MotivationsThe primary identified motivations among the analyzed presentations included ties to ongoing personal interests(9 out of 12), a need articulated in part by a family member (3 out of 12), a concern for personal health (5 out of12) and, a professional or commercial interest (3 out of 12). In addition, there were ways in which being aparticipant or attendee at QS gatherings helped to provide inspiration for doing some self-quantification. Toillustrate, consider how Rajiv described at the beginning of his Show & Tell presentation (entitled “Papa, whatshould I read?”) what led to his quantification of reading:Rajiv: Ok so I love to read, I’ve read all my life…I have all these memories of leaving thelibrary with armloads of books…A few years ago I started tracking my books, not for aproject, but simply because I couldn’t remember. My little girl is growing up and interested inreading my books, not just hers. She always asks me, “what can I read?” and I couldn’tremember the name of the title or the author. So I started a simple spreadsheet of the name,the author, when I started, when I finished it, I gave it a star rating based on how much I likedit…A few years ago at a QS [meetup] a person gave a presentation on an information diet. Itstruck me, maybe there is something worth understanding from my tracking of books.There are several features to note from this short excerpt. One is that Rajiv characterized reading as alifelong pursuit tracing back to his youth, which suggests that while the quantification of reading was arelatively new endeavor, it was also built upon a longstanding preference (Azevedo, 2011) he had maintainedthroughout his life. His reading was done for his enjoyment but was not something he formally quantified untilhis daughter asked for recommendations on what to read, and he discovered that he could not recall what bookshe had read. That ultimately led him to produce a spreadsheet to keep track of what he had read and when. Laterin his presentation, Rajiv discussed that he had kept these records for four years. He then saw another selfquantification project at a meetup, and was intrigued enough to see if he could find out anything new from hisown records of his reading. This appropriation of how others work with self-data into his own project is aninstance of knowledge being distributed and appropriated by individuals (Gee, 2005). Taken together, theconvergence of personal interest, a need stated by a family member, and a model from a more experienced QSerall jointly supported the pursuit of his self-quantification project to examine his own reading patterns.As a second example of convergence, consider how Jules explained his motivation to analyze snoring.Jules: I am a snorer. This didn’t really bother me because after all I couldn’t hear my snoring.The same wasn’t true for my wife who would let me know by means of an elbow in myribs…So I went and took my phone and thought surely there is an app for that and looked andthere were a few snoring apps, but there was nothing [good]… Hence, as I was looking at allthese not very good apps, I could envision something much better which might be able toquantify things…to track your snoring through time and then be able to test if certain thingsaffected your snoring…I’ve had loads of bad business ideas, and I thought, “hold on, maybethis is actually a good one!”…So I went to my wife and I said “Darling, darling I’ve got anamazing idea. You know all that money we’ve got saved up for a house deposit, why don’t weemploy a developer to build an app to measure snoring!”In this example, Jules was both responding to a need to respond to the concerns of a family member(his wife, who was being awoken), and he also had hopes for developing a new app for a mobile phone as abusiness idea. In fact, one of the things Jules was doing through his S&T was advertising the app he haddeveloped, “SnoreLab”, while also describing his experiences with different snoring aids and how they affectedhis snoring. Also, as suggested by his past of having ‘loads of bad business ideas’ the decision to develop thisapp also seemed to flow from an ongoing preference for entrepreneurial pursuits. The convergence of thisentrepreneurial streak along with an immediate need to deal with a snoring problem both help to explain whatled to his engagement with the QS affinity space and why it took the form that it did.Examples like those of Rajiv and Jules suggest that the motivations behind pursuing a self-data projectare multi-faceted. It is not simply that someone abruptly decides to track some aspect of their life. Rather therecan be several influences from many different spheres of one’s life that leads to self-quantification. AmongICLS 2014 Proceedings1034© ISLSQSers, it is well known that many people new to the space will excitedly initially try a tracking app or device fora few days but then cease using it. The exact reasons for this discontinuation has not been discussed heavily, butthe experiences of those individuals who have gone beyond initial excitement with a tool and pursued a self-datatracking project suggest that motivation for self-quantification relies on the convergence of multiple personaland social forces, rather than general capabilities built into a tracking tool.Enabling ConditionsQS participation is enabled by meetup groups and other physical and virtual QS knowledge exchanges(mentioned by 6 of 12), as well as the increased commercial availability of mobile and wearable technologies.The ease of use of a given tool or device or the automatic data transfer of data to another service were cited asbeing important for enabling self analysis (4 and 2 out of 12, respectively). Also of note was that half of thepresenters highlighted how important seamless integration of data collection into daily activities was to theirprojects. While ease of use and automatic data transfer both helped in this regard, the high degree of integrationwas not an inherent feature of any given technology. Rather, seamless integration built upon ease of use orautomatic data transfer along with some very small modification to existing routines. For example, inMatthew’s comments during his presentation on how he lost 50 pounds by self-tracking illustrated howimportant he perceived that small modification could be:Matthew: I picked up a Wi-Fi Withings scale and started stepping on it everyday. Everyday,before even saying “hi” to my wife in the morning, I just stepped on the scale… This[accompanying app data display] is a screen that I interact with a lot every day. Obviously thescale feeds into the weight…I can’t say enough about the scale. It is the beginning of my day.While Matthew ultimately tracked a number of other things, such as some of his exercise and caloricintake, the scale and his ritualized use of it was key. The perceived prominence of ritualization appeared in howhe titled his entire presentation (i.e., “One small step on a scale”), and also when he explicitly stated at the endof his presentation how important it was for him to take that initial ‘step’ and look at that data as a form offeedback so that he could successfully lose that amount of weight. The way in which tracking technologies aretypically promoted is in a way that suggests the user needs to do little to nothing to obtain their data. Ultimately,experiences like Matthew’s helps show that QSers are interested and willing to do just a little bit of extra workto obtain data about their activities, but it the amount of work really has to be very little. It appears from this andrelated cases that for QS activities to take hold, the data collection technology needs to fit easily into existingroutines of everyday life rather than demanding some routine in life adapts to fit with the technology.Analyses of Self DataWhile there was one individual who used a moderately advanced statistical technique (i.e., performing linearregressions), the approach to analysis as shown in the presentations most often involved identifying changesover time (7 out of 12), finding central tendencies (6 out of 12), and comparing across conditions (5 out of 12).Change over time was an important feature for presenters like Matthew who had a goal in mind and needed tosee how well they progressed on their goal. This often tied into finding central tendencies, although centraltendencies could also operate outside of an immediate goal related to the modification of some behavior. Forexample, Robby was interested in seeing how much time and money he spent on various forms oftransportation. He logged a month of his transportation using his mobile phone with some hacks he developedand then determined average speeds and costs to facilitate comparing across conditions (including walking, carrental, bus, driving his own vehicale, taxi, and Zipcar car sharing).In discussing his results, Robby had some suspicions confirmed, such as the relatively high averagecost of a taxicab and also that cabs tended to be the fastest mode of transportation. However, he was surprisedby how much it cost to use Zipcar and how slow it was, especially relative to other means of automotive transithe had used. To explain this, he proceeded to verbally reconstruct the situation that generated the data:Robby: The least represented thing is the Zipcar…because it makes it look horrible with this data. Irented a Zipcar right when they had Hemp Fest downtown, so traffic was just awful and I got stuck init. I was just trying to get away from it, and I ended up sitting in traffic for like 30 minutes and…I justtook it back so I have a whole bunch of travel time that I was paying for. If you just look at Zipcar’srates by the time you are traveling it looks terrible.Engaging in this kind of data reconstruction when looking at a data representation appeared in half of thepresentations. This may ultimately speak to one of the unique and attractive features of participation in the QSaffinity space: there is an inherently intimate relationship with the data that are collected because they are about‘the self’. As such, the ability to look at some of the resulting representations, tendencies, or changes over timeICLS 2014 Proceedings1035© ISLSleverages familiarity. The patterns or trends that are identified are not always taken immediately at face value.Rather, they are subject to additional scrutiny because the history of the data are known and the meanings of thedata can also be consequential for how people live their lives because the data already come from their lives.Parting Thoughts: What might LS Take from a Snapshot of QS?The work in this short report is preliminary, but as learning scientists work on issues of practice, design,participation, and learning, there are some aspects of the QS movement in its current form that could stir futureresearch interest and pose new research questions of consequence to LS. These include:• QS models how technical and social infrastructure can leverage personal knowledge and interestrelated to the self to motivate learning. Among the things that LS can uncover through study of QSpractices and participation is how the emergent combination of infrastructure, physical and virtualknowledge support, and space for individuals to customize and share their knowledge pursuits all worktogether to mobilize intimate knowledge and curiosity about the self in service of learning. Whatcombinations of support, technical infrastructure, and know-how are necessary for QS to work?• QSers encounter disciplinary content and participate in versions of valued disciplinary practices. QSrepresents a unique, emerging hobby in which QSers identify trends over time, look for centraltendencies, and compare differences across conditions. They touch upon mathematical, statistical, andscientific ideas such as variability, correlation, and experimental design. What is the nature of QSersunderstanding of this content? Is QS an effective model for how learners in other settings couldmeaningfully participate in scientific and mathematical inquiry practices?• QS currently lacks heterogeneity in its participants. The bulk of the QS participants appear to bemiddle-aged white males of European descent. While LS is often recognized for its work in areas ofdesign, cognition, and modeling of learning, issues of equity still figure prominently in the field. If QSis a promising model for designing learning experiences, could the model work with different focalpopulations (e.g., young women from underrepresented ethnic groups)? If not, what supports would beneeded to enable equitable participation? Are the gains from doing self-quantification with populationsdifferent from that most commonly associated worth the investment?ReferencesAzevedo, F. (2011). Lines of practice: A practice-centered theory of interest relationships. Cognition &Instruction, 29(2), 147-184.Ching, C. C., & Hunicke, R. (2013). GETUP: Health Gaming for "the Rest of Your Life". Paper presented atGames, Learning & Society 9.0, Madison, WI.Gee, J. P. (2005). Semiotic social spaces and affinity spaces: from The Age of Mythology to today’s schools. InD. Barton & K. Tusting (Eds.), Beyond communities of practice: Language, power and social context(pp. 214-232). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Hall, R. (2000). Videorecording as theory. In R. Lesh & R. Lehrer (Eds.), Handbook of Research Design inMathematics and Science Education (pp. 647-664). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Lee, V. R. (2013). The Quantified Self (QS) movement and some emerging opportunities for the educationaltechnology field. Educational Technology, 53(6), 39-42.Lee, V. R., & Drake, J. (2013). Quantified recess: Design of an activity for elementary students involvinganalyses of their own movement data. In J. P. Hourcade, E. A. Miller & A. Egeland (Eds.),Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children 2013 (pp. 273276). New York, NY: ACM.Lee, V. R., & DuMont, M. (2010). An exploration into how physical activity data-recording devices could beused in computer-supported data investigations. International Journal of Computers for MathematicalLearning, 15(3), 167-189. doi: 10.1007/s10758-010-9172-8Lee, V. R., & Thomas, J. M. (2011). Integrating physical activity data technologies into elementary schoolclassrooms. Educational Technology Research and Development, 59(6), 865-884. doi:10.1007/s11423-011-9210-9Rivera-Pelayo, V., Zacharias, V., Müller, L., & Braun, S. (2012). Applying Quantified Self approaches tosupport reflective learning. In S. Dawson & C. Hathornwaite (Eds.), LAK '12 Proceedings of the 2ndInternational Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge (pp. 111-114). New York, NY: ACM.AcknowledgmentsRalph Trumble, Kylie Williamson, Mary Briggs, and Michelle Berry all provided valuable support. DeborahFields offered thoughtful comments on earlier drafts and championed ‘affinity spaces’. This work was supportedby NSF grant DRL-1054280. The opinions in this paper are those of the author and not necessarily of NSF.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1036© ISLS