Understanding Data Variability in Ecosystems: Blending MUVE andMobile Technologies to Support Reasoning with Real World DataAmy Kamarainen, New York Hall of Science, akamarainen@nysci.org,Shari Metcalf, Tina Grotzer, and Chris Dede, Harvard Graduate School of Education,Shari_metcalf@harvard.edu, tina_grotzer@harvard.edu, chris_dede@harvard.eduAbstract: Inquiry-based instruction is a focal point of recent research and Next GenerationScience Standards, but students have difficulty connecting evidence to claims, especiallywhen data are highly variable. We explore a blended curriculum that supports inquiryactivities in a virtual world, followed by inquiry activities in the real world with first-handcollection of authentic, variable data supported by mobile devices. This study characterizeshow students use and interpret data across these two instructional contexts.IntroductionBoth research findings and the Next Generation Science Standards advocate for using inquiry-based instructionto reach learning goals related to science content, practices and understanding the nature of science (Wilson,Taylor, Kowalski, and Carlson, 2010; Achieve, 2013). At the same time, it is recognized that careful scaffoldingof inquiry activities (Quintana et al., 2004; Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007) and reflection upon scientific practices(White & Frederiksen, 1998) are necessary to reach these learning objectives. Here we report on a pilot projectin which we use a multi-user virtual environment (MUVE) in the classroom and augmented reality experiencesduring a field trip to scaffold student engagement in inquiry activities and to promote reflection on the role ofvariability in data collection, synthesis, and interpretation.Across domains, students have difficulty relating evidence to claims (e.g., Krajcik et al., 1998), andthis problem can impede students’ attempts to meaningfully connect inquiry activities and science concepts.This is a particular challenge in the field of ecosystem science, because (1) the temporal and spatial scale ofobservable patterns in ecosystems are difficult to represent within the bounds of classroom instruction, and (2)environmental data tend to be inherently “messy” – meaning that it may be difficult to detect the ecologicallyrelevant signal among the noise, or variability, in the data. While first-hand data collection has been shown topromote student motivation (Hug & McNeill, 2008), students struggle to reason using data in which variabilityfrom both measurement error and meaningful natural processes plays an important role (Kanari & Millar, 2004).Thus, evidence of ecosystem phenomena is difficult for students to apply for scientific reasoning.In this study, we explore a blended approach in which students begin with a structured classroomexperience conducting inquiry activities with a fixed and simplified data set (EcoMUVE), followed by mobilebroadband device supported inquiry activities in the real world with first-hand collection of highly variable data(EcoMOBILE). Augmented realities (AR) for learning utilize mobile, context-aware technologies (e.g.,smartphones) that enable participants to interact with digital information embedded within the physicalenvironment. The AR technology supports extending student learning by allowing field data to be more easilyshared and analyzed back in the classroom. We show how students’ experiences across these instructionalcontexts enhance their ability to make sense of messy real world data.MethodsEcoMUVE and EcoMOBILE provide complementary exposure to data and variability in the context of a largerinquiry problem. EcoMUVE (http://ecomuve.gse.harvard.edu) is a two-week immersive virtual ecosystemrepresenting a pond and its surroundings. Students explore the pond via avatars, traveling in time over a virtualsummer, and discovering a fish kill. Working in teams to solve this mystery, students collect data on watermeasurements such as temperature, dissolved oxygen, phosphates, pH, and turbidity, explore at microscopic andeven atomic levels, and use tables and graphs to view and analyze data over time.EcoMOBILE (http://ecomobile.gse.harvard.edu) provides a complementary experience to the use ofEcoMUVE in the classroom because students have an opportunity to apply their ideas about pond ecosystemsduring a field trip to a local pond. EcoMOBILE employs two technologies: MBDs (mobile broadband devices)running augmented reality software and note-taking applications, and probeware to collect measurement data.The pilot study included one teacher and four classes (N=90) of seventh grade students from asuburban school district in the northeastern U.S. Students worked with the EcoMUVE curriculum during a twoweek period, followed by one week of experiences associated with EcoMOBILE, including the pond field trip.Research data collected for this study included video and audio recordings of students, worksheets, and pre-postsurveys around the EcoMOBILE portion of the activity. Students worked in pairs to collect data measurements– temperature, dissolved oxygen (DO), or turbidity. They chose measurement locations around the pond,documenting the spots using Evernote. Map and number line visualizations prompted students to compare andICLS 2014 Proceedings1581© ISLSreflect on reasons for different measurement results. During post-field trip class discussion of data, notes andphotos, students shared hypotheses about the variations they had observed.FindingsPre-post survey: The pre-post survey, pre-administered after EcoMUVE but before EcoMOBILE, andpost-administered after EcoMOBILE, included questions related to interpretation of variability. Students werepresented with two similar questions involving hypothetical variable dissolved oxygen (D.O.) data from a pond.Within EcoMUVE, students observed D.O. measurements between 4mg/L to 10.2 mg/L. The survey itemscontained three data sets with measurements in this range (between 7.2 to 8.8 mg/L) and a fourth data set thatranged from 22.9 to 23.1 mg/L, values that are far outside the normal range. After selecting a closed-responseoption, students were asked to explain their reason for choosing that option. When considering small differencesbetween two data sets, students’ written explanations shifted to include significantly more ecologicalmechanisms (paired t-test, p = 0.032) that could contribute to the observed differences, like decomposition,plants, and water depth. When considering a data set with large differences, a marginally significant number ofstudents (paired t-test, p=0.06) used personal experiences to help explain the observed differences.Field trip experiences: Brief field interviews indicated that students had many ideas about the reasonsfor variation they observed in the field, identifying factors like sunny or shady spots, depth of the probe, andmuddiness of the water. They also made distinctions between slight or insignificant variations, compared tolarger, significant differences. For example, one student described a cluster of shady-location temperaturemeasurements ranging from 14-16°C as “all pretty much the same,” then pointed at the map to show a highermeasurement of 20°C “over here where I think there’s more sunlight.”Post-field trip discussion: Looking at the combined class data in the classroom, students commented onclusters and outliers in the number line, and groupings on the maps. Students recalled and felt connected to theirexperience, sharing details of their collection experience. Students’ photos and notes were highly useful incontextualizing the data; for instance, students noticed in temperature photos whether the location was sunny orshady, or whether the spot was insulated by fallen autumn leaves.Prior EcoMUVE experience: In post-discussions, students’ hypotheses frequently referred to conceptshighlighted in EcoMUVE, which grounded their understanding of processes such as photosynthesis anddecomposition. One student said that “photosynthesis can produce oxygen in the water and I got the 12.5 righton the bottom right corner there and that was a more plant filled area.” Another student suggested that “all theleaves blew over to there, so that means they will decompose and bacteria and cellular respiration.”These initial findings suggest that students were applying ideas about variability to the data they hadcollected and were able to connect their claims about the cause of variability with reasoning that includedknowledge they had gained through using the EcoMUVE curriculum in the classroom. This study offers initialsupport for the idea that using a blended curriculum that scaffolds inquiry activities, situates variability inpersonalized, real-world contexts, and offers structured exposure to increasingly variable data can aid studentability to connect evidence to claims.ReferencesAchieve, Inc. on behalf of the twenty-six states and partners that collaborated on the NGSS (2013). NextGeneration Science Standards, Cross-Cutting Concepts, Washington D.C.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., & Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaffolding and Achievement in Problem-Basedand Inquiry Learning : A Response to Kirschner , Sweller , and Clark ( 2006 ), 42(2), 99–107.Hug, B., & McNeill, K. L. (2008). Use of First-hand and Second-hand Data in Science : Does data typeinfluence classroom conversations?Kanari, Z., & Millar, R. (2004). Reasoning from data: How students collect and interpret data in scienceinvestigations. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(7), 748–769.Krajcik, J., Blumenfeld, P. C., Marx, R. W., Bass, K. M., Fredricks, J., & Soloway, E. (1998). Inquiry inProject-Based Science Classrooms : Initial Attempts by Middle School Students. The Journal of theLearning Sciences, 7(3/4), 313–350.Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., Kyza, E., et al. (2004). Ascaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. Journal of the LearningSciences, 13(3), 337–386.White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (2010). Inquiry , Modeling , and Metacognition : Making ScienceAccessible to All Students, 16(1), 3–118.Wilson, C. D., Taylor, J. A., Kowalski, S. M., & Carlson, J. (2009). The relative effects and equity of inquirybased and commonplace science teaching on students’ knowledge, reasoning, and argumentation.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 47(3).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1582© ISLS