Shifts in Identification in a Hybrid SpaceKok-Sing Tang, National Institute of Education, Singapore, koksing.tang@nie.edu.sgAbstract: In a hybrid space where people enact multiple identifications across time and space,this paper examines the question of why and how students shift from one identification toanother in school. Through a design-based research in a high school physics classroomenacted to bring about a convergence of students’ out-of-school discourses and school-baseddiscourse, I analyzed the nature of identification undertaken by some students as theynavigated multiple discourses. Using Bakhtin’s work as an analytical frame, I suggest thatshifts in identification should be seen as a temporary appropriation of a dialogic other’s voice(or ideological stance) and suppression of one’s preferred voice that is performed strategicallyaccording to one’s situated interest at any particular point in time.IntroductionIn today’s pluralistic and digital age, we are living in a hybrid world where we interact with multiple culturalsystems and worldviews. We enact certain identifications (actions or behaviors that signal a recognizableaffiliation; Lemke, 2009) within one discourse community and others within another community almostseamlessly in our daily life. In education, the tenet of exposing children to various disciplinary subjects is inessence expecting them to adopt multiple identifications affiliated to certain socially privileged communities.Yet, by the time most children enter formal schooling, they have already formed other identifications, some ofwhich may present obstacles to their learning of a school-oriented identification. For example, to learn science islargely learning to be a scientist, and this involves learning its unique discourse (Gee, 1990), or way ofinteracting with or talking about the natural world (Lemke, 1990). However, there are also other ways of seeingand interacting with the natural world throughout human culture and history that constitute a different set ofidentifications (e.g., religion, sports). Given these multiple (and sometimes conflicting) identifications, how dostudents’ shifts in identification take place?This paper explores the above-mentioned question of identification shift in a hybrid space. Through acurricular intervention, a hybrid space in a classroom environment was fostered whereby the students’ out-ofschool discourses were directly juxtaposed with the official school science discourse. As explained by Bartonand Tan (2009, p. 52), a hybrid space in a school setting is one where different discourses “coalesce todestabilize and expand the boundaries of official school discourse. Within this hybrid space, attention was givento the nature of identification undertaken by a group of students as they navigated multiple discourses, andexamined why and how did some of them shifted one identification to another.Theoretical PerspectivesConventional thinking about identity tends to postulate a stable “essential self” (Erickson, 1968) with a durableset of psychological conditionings and social categories. This sets up an either-or distinction (e.g., expert vs.novice, scientist vs. non-scientist) that is problematic to our understanding of how people enact multipleidentifications. Instead, the idea of plural shelves, which is increasingly more common, lends itself to ourunderstanding of individuals enacting a range of identities in different contexts and for different purposes(Holland, Lachicotte, Skinner, & Cain, 1998; Lemke, 2009). While holding on to the latter model of identity, Iam also interested in identity or identification shifts that occur in the moment and across timescales (Lemke,2008) under the condition of hybridity. In this regard, I turn to Bhaha’s hybridity and Bakhtin’s voices to informmy work.In his work on hybridity during colonialism, Bhabha’s (1994) observes that whenever the colonizersought to impose an essentialist discourse to shape the identity of the colonized (the Other) to become one ofitself, it ended up producing something new to both the colonizer and colonized. Thus, he proposes theconstruction of a political hybridized subject that is “neither One nor the Other but something else besides, inbetween” (p.219). Recontextualizing in educational setting, when a hegemonic disciplinary discourse likescience is introduced in a classroom, Bhabha’s insight provides a dynamic way of diffusing existing boundariesof established discourses and identities, and describes new possible spaces emerging from the interaction ofmultiple discourses.While Bhabha’s broad framework provides a new way of thinking about hybrid identities in theory, Iturn to Bakhtin’s social voice as a discursive lens for analyzing hybridity in practice. A voice is an ideologicalstance toward a discourse that is populated within an utterance. According to Bakhtin (1981), no utterance iscompletely unique and ideologically-neutral as people borrow and adapt others’ voices in order to constructtheir own. The mixing of others’ voices thus gives rise to heteroglossia, or the existence of speech diversitywithin a text or speech conversation. In other words, in any conversation, people inevitably mix the dialogicICLS 2014 Proceedings434© ISLSother’s voices into their own utterances as they respond to the preceding utterances and anticipate futureresponses from this dialogic other. As such, “all our utterances are filled with others’ words [with] varyingdegree of otherness or varying degrees of ‘our-own-ness’” (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 89).MethodologyThe data for this analysis are taken from a larger design-based research (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004) inan Honors Physics classroom of a public high school, located in a predominantly white suburban community. Inthis research, a hybrid space was created through the enactment of a specially-designed curricular approach.Informed by the New London Group’s (1996) pedagogy of multiliteracies, this curricular approach was enactedin the following procedure:1.2.3.4.Before the start of a major curricular unit (e.g., mechanics), every student selected a text (henceforthchoice text) he/she had read or was likely to read. While there was no restriction on the media (e.g.,video, website) of this text, its content had to be related to both the student’s interests and the physicsunit they would learn shortly.After collecting these texts, several strategies to harness the resources in the choice texts and addresstheir differences with school-based texts were designed and implemented.An assignment was then designed to guide the students in connecting their choice texts with thephysics unit. The requirement was a four-page essay, which included two components. The firstcomponent was to explain a peculiar phenomenon behind the student’s choice text “like a physicist”(i.e., using the language and concepts they had learned in class). The second component was to write acritical evaluation of how science was represented in their choice text in comparison to their textbook.These procedures were then repeated for the next curricular unit (e.g., electricity).Ethnographic methods (Spradley, 1980) were used to collect data in the classroom with the first authortaking on the role of a participant-observer (e.g., co-teacher). The major data sources included daily videos andfield-notes of classroom observations (70 lessons in total), 24 videos of student interviews, 3 teacher interviews,63 students’ choice texts, and 59 students’ out-of-school texts/media. Qualitative data were analyzed usingconstant comparative analysis (CCA) and multimodal discourse Analysis (MDA). CCA is an inductive methodthat generates broad patterns and categories through a systematic comparison of specific incidents in the data(Glaser, 1965), and was used as preliminary method to organize and categorize the corpus of texts andinterviews through the three stages of open, axial, and selective coding processes. This was complemented bythe use of MDA to go in-depth into the discursive use of language and symbol systems in the textual, interview,and interactional data sources. The MDA approaches were informed by the traditions of SFL and socialsemiotics (Halliday, 1978; Lemke, 1995). Specifically, I used Lemke’s (1990, 1995) semantic analysis tounderstand how different experiences and perception of phenomena are textually produced, Kress and vanLeeuwen’s (1996) “grammar of visual design” to examine how meanings are made with photographs andimages, and critical discourse analysis (Fairclough, 1992) to relate intertextually these semiotic designs to largersocietal and ideological underpinnings.Findings and AnalysisFrom the analysis, I assert that shifts in identifications are necessary for students to navigate multiple discoursesin a hybrid space. This identification shift involves an appropriation of a dialogic other’s voice (or ideologicalstance) and a temporary suppression of one’s preferred voice. However, the shift only occurs momentarily andthe students perform this shift strategically in order to fulfil short-term goals.For this paper, I present two cases to illustrate and support the above assertion. The first case involves afifteen-year old girl whom I call Naomi. At the time of the research, not only was Naomi a high school physicslearner, she was also a fan of science documentaries, a typical “A” student, an aspiring cardiothoracic surgeon, acheerleader, and a devout Christian. For the curricular unit of electricity, Naomi selected an article from thewebsite answersingenesis.org, which was introduced to her during a bible study class in her church. This articlewas written by an electrical engineer with a degree in Bible Theology to explain the electrical function of thehuman body (e.g., neural transmission) from a creationist perspective (see Savige, 1999). In a separate analysis,I have analyzed the multifaceted voices in this article, and how the voice of creationist design is dialogicallyopposed to that of random evolution.In Naomi’s evaluation of this article, she recognized the differences between the expectation of thearticle’s targeted audience and that of scientists in general. Her dual identifications as a Christian and sciencelearner were important in getting her to point out the different purposes and the “different angles” and ways of“presenting information” between the article and a science textbook. Interestingly, in her writing, despite beingthe targeted audience of the article, Naomi constantly referred to a generic “reader” and did not identify herselfas a believer, as shown here:ICLS 2014 Proceedings435© ISLSThe author was trying to convince the reader that there was a creator behind the entirenervous system in humans, God... The author did a great job of supplying a simpleexplanation and opinion for an average reader who wants to know that there is a creatorbehind the electrical design in humans (italics added).This deliberate shift in identification from the subjective position and immediacy of a limited firstperson perspective to a seemingly objective position of a distant third person perspective allowed Naomi toevaluate the differences between the creationist article and scientific texts, and was necessary in order for her toconsider the point of view from scientific practices, which is an alternative voice in juxtaposition with thecreationist voice she was comfortable with. Through this, Naomi wrote an explanation of neural transmissionusing the language and representations of physicists and biologists.However, Naomi’s appropriation of a scientific voice in her essay writing does not imply that she hadpermanently formed a new identification, and consequently resolved her personal conflict of evolution. In aseparate interview with her, Naomi provided a telling example of how she managed the conflict and thedifferent identifications expected of her. Despite Naomi’s conviction that evolution was wrong, she managed to“pass evolution test with flying colors” and obtain an A overall for Biology. She explained that she needed an Abecause she “badly wanted” to be a doctor in the future. She also narrated that during the evolution test, she wasfrustrated and critiqued every question in her mind, while simultaneously giving the “correct” answer to eachquestion. This suggests that in her identification shift to become an “A” science student and a prospectivedoctor, she suppressed external representations of her preferred voices (of creationism) consciously andtemporarily for strategic reasons. Furthermore, it is unlikely that in this process, she would have to give up herreligious beliefs and practices. In other words, in her dynamic negotiation of multiple discourses, she enactedher identification momentarily according to a calculated alignment between the situated circumstances and herprojected goals.In the second case, I focus on the identification shifts of two colorguard girls who were required toexplain the phenomenon of colorguard tossing using the language of physicists. Colorguard is a popular extracurricular activity in American schools and colleges where the participants use props such as poles, flags, andrifles to express dynamic movement in synchronization with the music from a marching band. An integralmovement in a colorguard performance is a toss, which involves the spinning and throwing of a prop into the airwith synchronized timing. This example includes a micro-genetic development of their talk with the researcher,and as such, illustrate more clearly the dynamic real-time appropriation of a dialogic other’s voices in thestudents’ utterances, and the identification shifts that ensued.In a discussion between Evelyn and Lucy, the focus was on how physics principles were involved in acolorguard toss. The students started by explaining the process of tossing a colorguard flag and rifle into the air.In particular, Evelyn and Lucy wanted to explain how tossing a rifle and a flag were different. This explanationwas mediated heavily through the situated use of their gestures (Roth, 2004), which is an important feature ofcolorguard Discourse. After listening to their explanations, the researcher asked them to explain in a differentway by using a visual system:Excerpt 1: Initial TensionTurnSpeakerUtterance & Non-verbal Actions36ResearcherOkay, you know what will help me a lot, and. and I think will help you as well is to.draw what you just said. And so I'm going to give you some pieces of paper.3738LucyResearcherRightI want you to draw. whether is it a rifle or flag and. draw some arrows and. talk toeach other, and I want to see how it goes. Okay?3940LucyEvelynRight.Okay.As the researcher had difficulty in understanding the students’ initial explanations, he asked them to “draw what[they] just said” (turn 36). This in essence was a bid for them to “textualize” (Bloome & Egan-Robertson, 1993)their embodied gestural actions into a free-body diagram, which is a specialized visual system of physicsdiscourse. Two minutes later, the researcher left the group momentarily and Evelyn and Lucy made theirsketches and commented on their drawings. At the same time, the video camera that was mounted in front ofthem continued recording.ICLS 2014 Proceedings436© ISLSWith the discussion of colorguard removed from its typical event setting and situated in the physicsclassroom and recorded for the purpose of learning physics, Lucy in particular demonstrated an awareness of theneed to employ terminology common to physics such as “height” and “rotation” instead of what is typicallyused in colorguard such as “gas” and “steering” to identify in with this new social ecology (Lemke, 2008).Excerpt 2: Phenomenological identifications with new social ecology.TurnSpeakerUtterance & Non-verbal Actions57EvelynOkay. So.. this is my gas.58LucyYour gas?59EvelynWell, that's how I start (inaudible) right?60LucyRight. So essentially.. say which hand is the gas and which hand is the..61EvelynOkay, well. my push down is the gas (pushed left hand downwards), and this is mysteering (raised right hand), so.62LucyYour height.63EvelynMy.. (laughed) okay.64LucyOh no, I'm like I'm explaining it to the video. (pointed at camera)65EvelynOh.6667(Evelyn drew an arrow up on left side and arrow down on right side of her figure; seeFigure 1, as Lucy watched.)EvelynOkay, this is.. my HEIGHT.. This is my. rotation.(wrote height and rotation next to her sketch; see Figure 1)In this excerpt, a critical moment took place when Lucy demonstrated her keen awareness of the Bakhtiniandialogic other, even when this “other” was an inanimate camera directed at them. Due to the “presence” of thisdialogic other, Lucy made a conscious effort to translate Evelyn’s colorguard term (e.g., steering) into one thatthe teachers could understand (turn 62). In turns 66 and 67, Evelyn then self-corrected her own choice of wordsfrom a colorguard lexicon (e.g., gas, steering) to words more commonly used in physics (e.g., rotation, height).She then included those words in her sketch (see Figure 1).Figure 1. Evelyn’s sketch of her bodily actions taken during a flag toss.Immediately after this, Lucy, who had been watching her sketching, continued her momentary role asthe teacher-facilitator in getting Evelyn to explain her actions for someone outside their colorguard discourse:Excerpt 3: Momentary shift toward the expectation of the dialogic other.TurnSpeakerUtterance & Non-verbal Actions69Lucy70EvelynRight, so which hand uses more.. (shook her head)which hand. has more force.. if you are throwing a double?(Uttered a long sigh) The height.ICLS 2014 Proceedings437© ISLSTurnSpeakerUtterance & Non-verbal Actions71LucyYah. (smiled at Evelyn)72EvelynYah.7374LucyEvelynYah.Yah. (laughing)7576LucyEvelynYah(Uttering to herself as she looked at her sketch)This hand has.. more force.. (wrote more force on right side of diagram)(whispering) I don't know why..77EvelynCos if I. if it doesn't, then it’s just gonna.. be too low78LucyOr.. Going to the ground if you use too much of the.. left hand than the other hand79EvelynRight.Lucy’s momentary role as the teacher-facilitator was evident from the I-R-E (Initiate-Response-Evaluation) shewas enacting with Evelyn in the above excerpt. In turn 71, Lucy’s followed up response of “yah” shows that theanswer to her earlier question in this exchange structure (turns 69-71) was something that was already obviousto both of them. Evelyn’s sigh in turn 70 and their back-and-forth strings of “yah” and smiles from 71 to 75further show their mutual awareness that they were simply enacting this exchange for the dialogic other. This IR-E exchange subsequently prompted Evelyn to say in (76) and write down “more force” next to the sketchedright hand (see Figure 1). She then pondered why that was so and subsequently postulated a reason. After 8seconds of looking at her drawing, she started to answer her own question by stating a possible outcome that itwould “be too low” if less force was exerted (77). This was then followed by Lucy suggesting another probableoutcome in turn 78. Throughout these two exchanges of I-R-E sequences (from 69 to 75) and self-question-andanswer (from 76 to 78), it was as though they were anticipating what the teachers would say to them if theywere present. In other words, they dynamically shifted their identifications as they appropriated the voices andexpectations of the dialogic other in their momentary utterances.After the discussion and the completion of the essays, Evelyn and Lucy were interviewed to trace thedevelopment of their ideas to their essay writing. A key finding was how they were also able to momentarilysuppress their preferred voices, styles, or stances in exchange for some incentives (e.g., academic grades). Acase in point could be seen in how Lucy and Evelyn, in the course of fulfilling their assignments, had to adopt areductionist stance to simplify their elaborate and colorful sport into abstract terminologies, symbols, dots,arrows, and numbers. Lucy for instance deliberately made her writing “boring” despite her self-identification asa creative writer as she desired a good grade for the assignment:It's boring because I just needed to like. I knew I have to get my point across without sayinglike. without getting into like describing. like it doesn't matter what color it is. It doesn't matterif it is fun or not. Like it's just. the information, and um... I was just being very basic like.. if Iwas to read this out loud, I will read this in a monotone… like even in the text I was using, shewas like a little more fun with it, like ‘she drops, the band director would commit murder’ thatsort of thing. But I was trying to avoid that, just because I know it was an educational text(italics added).In Evelyn’s case, she deliberately included more mathematical equations because she saw herself as“really good at math” and knew that one of the criteria for an A was to use relevant and accurate equations:When I think, I think very math-like, so this class is kinda hard for me because I know themath part, I do know pretty good the math, but the concept of it, it kinda trip me up. So likethe scientific explanation, mine has a lot of equations in it, and it was mostly math, and I felt. Ithought he [Brian] was going to be more like grade me a little bit higher because I knew I didso much math (italics added).These examples highlight the active resourcefulness of the students in strategically shifting theiridentifications by momentarily appropriating a dialogic other’s stance and temporarily suppressing one’s own.Furthermore, they did so in order to fulfil their short-term goals as they navigated across the different discourseswithin a hybrid space.ICLS 2014 Proceedings438© ISLSConclusionThis paper provides insights into how young people enact multiple identifications in a hybrid space. Contrary toa stable “essential self”, my findings suggest that some youths could easily form hybrid identities that cater tothe various discourses they find themselves in. I also found that such hybrid identities are not stable entitiescomposed of a permanent concoction of two or more initial forms of identity. Instead, they are fluid states thatare performed strategically according to one’s situated interest at any particular point in time. Thischaracterization is also supported by Gee’s (2000) argument that today’s well-off teens, whom he described as“shape-shifting portfolio youths”, pick up a variety of experiences, skills, and achievements, (and I would add,voices and identifications), and are able to rearrange them dynamically and creatively for differentcircumstances.One implication of this study is that instead of seeing identity or identification as a categorical framethat describes and confines people according to various social categories, it may be useful to consideridentifications as resources or “toolkits” that people use to get by in their everyday life of negotiating multiplediscourses. In this regard, our findings show that adolescents, by a certain age, have developed the ability torecognize and harness the appropriate identification toolkits to deal with the various discourses in schools.Nevertheless, an important qualification in this study is that these are relatively privileged suburban youths whohave the social conditioning and dispositions (Bourdieu, 1984) to do well academically. What this would meanfor other youths who lack the cultural capital and who may resist the identification shifts expected of them needsto be further explored.This study raises several fundamental questions for future study and re-thinking of what is learning.First, how does a dynamic view of identification shift for strategic purposes inform or challenge current viewsof how people learn, particularly those that postulate learning as the exchange or transition from one stable formto another? To what extent is the calculated exchange of socio-economic goods (e.g., grades, careeropportunities) lacking in constructivist theories of learning, and needs to be taken into consideration? Lastly,how can we change classroom research and practice as educators foreground students’ agency in usingidentifications as dialogic resources to get by their everyday life, instead of seeing students as passiveconformers of certain stereotypical social categories? These questions could help us reexamine our work ofidentifying how students identify themselves through an essential but daunting process that we call schooling.ReferencesBakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: four essays. Austin: University of Texas Press.Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays (1st ed.). Austin: University of Texas Press.Barton, A. C., & Tan, E. (2009). Funds of knowledge and discourses and hybrid space. Journal of Research inScience Teaching, 46(1), 50-73.Bhabha, H. K. (1994). The location of culture. London ; New York: Routledge.Bourdieu, P. (1984). Distinction : a social critique of the judgement of taste. Cambridge, Mass.: HarvardUniversity Press.Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge, Mass.: Polity Press.Gee, J. P. (1990). Social linguistics and literacies : Ideology in discourses. London [England] ; New York:Falmer Press.Gee, J. P. (2000). Teenagers in new times: A new literacy studies perspective. Journal of Adolescent & AdultLiteracy, 43(5), 412-420.Glaser, B. G. (1965). The constant comparative method of qualitative analysis. Social problems, 12(4), 436-445.Halliday, M. A. K. (1978). Language as social semiotic : The social interpretation of language and meaning.London: Edward Arnold.Holland, D., Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. London:Harvard University Press.Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: language, learning and values: Norwood, NJ: Ablex.Lemke, J. L. (1995). Textual politics : discourse and social dynamics. London ; Bristol, PA: Taylor & Francis.Lemke, J. L. (2008). Identity, development, and desire: critical questions. In C. Caldas-Coulthard & R. Ledema(Eds.), Identity Trouble: Critical Discourse and Contestations of Identification (pp. 17-42). London:Macmillan/Palgrave.Lemke, J. L. (2009). Multimodality, identity , and time. In C. Jewitt (Ed.), The Routledge Handbook ofMultimodal Analysis (pp. 140-150). New York: Routledge.New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard EducationalReview, 66, 60-92.Savige, C. (1999). Electrical Design in the Human Body. Creation, 22(1), 43-45.Spradley, J. P. (1980). Participant observation. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.ICLS 2014 Proceedings439© ISLS