Characterizing Teachers’ Analysis of Student WorkJason Silverman, Valerie Klein, Wesley Shumar, and Cheryl FricchioneDrexel University, 3141 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia PAsilverman@drexel.edu, valerie@mathforum.org, shumarw@drexel.edu, cls75@drexel.eduAbstract: We report on our analysis of teachers’ investigation of student work on open-endedmathematics tasks and present an emerging framework for explaining the variety of waysteachers engage with and attempt to analyze and organize conversations about student work.This emerging framework will provide potential starting points for professional developmentfocusing on student-centered instructionWhile the importance of instruction that builds on student thinking and understanding has been advocated byboth research and policy documents, this type of instruction is often challenging for teachers to design and enact(Sherin, 2002). We argue that before we can effectively support teachers’ sustained focus on student thinkingand understanding as part of their instruction, we must better understand their current views and practices withregard to the role of student thinking in instruction. Building on the teacher “noticing” research (Sherin, Jacobs,& Philipp, 2011), we explore 24 mathematics teachers’ participation in investigation of student work on openended mathematical tasks. We report on our examination and present an emerging framework for explaining thevariety of ways teachers engage with and attempt to analyze and organize conversations about student work.Theoretical BackgroundWe follow Sherin et al. (2011), who note that analysis of student work is a key component of teaching expertiseand can support teachers implementation of a variety of reform-oriented pedagogical practices. Instruction andfeedback that is grounded in student thinking and understanding (i.e. using formative assessment) has beenshown to significantly accelerate learning, when compared to students who receive traditional grades onassignments (William, 2011). Despite the importance of student thinking in instruction, mathematical noticing –“attending to particular events and making sense of events in an instructional setting” (Sherin et al., 2011, p. 5) –has only become a focus in mathematics education research in the past decade. While numerous recent havedocumented the importance of mathematical noticing and analyzing teachers’ attempts to notice specific aspectsof student thinking and classroom events and interactions, there is little known about the specifics of supportingteachers’ ability to engage in productive mathematical noticing. Our current work is focused specifically on thatissue and the proposed poster will explore a foundational question: When tasked with engaging with studentmathematical thinking, how do teachers interpret and enact that task? We argue that any efforts to supportteachers’ productive mathematical noticing must be grounded in their current beliefs, understandings, andpractices and the results of this study will increase our understanding in this area.Setting and MethodData for this poster comes from a three-day professional development institute focused on supporting teachers’ability to collaboratively develop and use formative assessment. We report on 24 teachers who were tasked withindividually reviewing, analyzing and describing student solutions and explanations to open ended problems andthen discussing that analysis as in small groups. The task was purposefully left open to allow the teachers to useexisting experiences to individually construct and then as a group co-construct the task. Participants’ writtennotes from the individual analysis and video recordings of the group discussion that followed were the primarysources of data for the current study. Members of the research team reviewed the data corpus and theoreticallysignificant excerpts of audio/video were identified and transcribed. These excerpts were coded by at least twomembers of the research team using an open coding system and common themes and patterns within and acrossthe groups were identified and noted. These conjectures about common themes and patterns were reviewedchronologically against the entire data corpus and contradictory and corroboratory evidence were identified.Empirically verified characterizations of the ways in which teachers’ interpret and enact tasks that focus onanalyzing student thinking were the result of the iterative process of conjecturing, testing, and revision ofconjectures.Analysis and ResultsThree primary characterizations of the groups’ activity with the student work emerged from our analysis: focuson instruction, focus on calculation, and focus on strategy. Below, we present an abbreviated analysis of twocharacterizations– focus on instruction and focus on calculation. In the proposed poster session, we will presentdetailed analysis of all three characterizations.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1631© ISLSFocus on InstructionOne common way of interpreting the role of student thinking was to focus on instruction. For example, membersof the Green group described the task that they were assigned as focused on “identify[ing] the big ideas of whatis going on with the student work.” While evidence and examples from the group’s analysis of student workserved to anchor the conversations, the exchange led to discussions about their own instructional practicesand/or struggles rather than the student work and underlying student interpretations. For example, Samcommented on how well Fran’s students explained their thinking and Fran described the instructions she gaveher students:Fran: “Make sure you write a story. I kept using the work story a lot. You know, you write apaper with a beginning, middle, end, and just support your ideas and your thinking becausewe can’t just tell. I don’t know if that’s reflected in what they do or not.”Sam: Oh absolutely, if I had classes of kids that put out papers like this on a consistent level, Iwould be in heaven.This group’s conversation quickly became decontextualized from the student work, however, the taskitself seemed to provide an opportunity to discuss the teachers’ own practice. In particular, the importance ofcommunication of mathematical ideas came up repeatedly (e.g. showing ones work, neat handwriting,identifying key variables, etc.). It is worth noting that this group neither solved nor discussed the mathematics ofthe problem nor did they look closely at the actual student work to unpack the mathematical thinking.Focus on CalculationRather than collaboratively defining the task, “calculation” groups just dove into it. For example, the indigogroup focused on a close analysis of one student’s work and sought to understand what the student did bycollectively piecing together their selections and discussing questions they had about the student’s work. Forexample, consider the following extract:Leila: What first intrigued me about this...was the box because the first time, I thought they weregoing to factor it and then I realized they were multiplying out that way…but didn’t finishit. It’s like they gave up when they had to multiply…-29 by -20.Linda: Well, they didn’t finish it up in the box, but they actually wrote it down at the bottom. Sothe x3 minus…is still in the box.Blake: I noticed that they were using variables and I was trying to infer what they were letting theirvariables represent, so I thought that they were saying x was equal to the number of studentsand then k was the dollar amount that each would pay, so like cost per student, I guess, oradmission per student.Leila: Which they set up a great equation.The group worked collaboratively to make sense of what the student did – step by step – and where onthe paper he did it. However, their analysis is very “surface level,” focusing only on being able to describe andnarrate the solution path this student chose to pursue, much like how a student would describe the steps he orshe took presenting a solution to the class.DiscussionIn this poster, we will describe three characterizations of the way teachers interpret and co-construct thepresented task (focusing on instruction, focusing on a calculations, and focusing on strategy). Thesecharacterizations provide potential starting points for professional development focusing on student-centeredinstruction; without recognizing the various understandings and interpretations various teachers bring toprofessional development, it is likely that teachers will not interpret instructions in the way they are intended.Further, it is likely that teachers with different interpretations may encounter communication challenges andhave difficulty successfully completing the task, engaging in productive argumentation, or coming to consensus.In addition to presenting the characterizations, we will also present a preliminary version of customdesigned software that will scaffold productive mathematical noticing and provide opportunities to surfaceteachers’ current beliefs, understandings, and practices with regards to the role of student thinking in instructionand make them explicit topics of conversation.ReferencesSherin, Miriam Gamoran. (2002). When teaching becomes learning. Cognition and Instruction, 20(2), 119-150.Sherin, Miriam Gamoran, Jacobs, Victoria R., & Philipp, Randolph A. (2011). Mathematics teacher noticing :seeing through teachers' eyes. New York: Routledge.William, Dylan. (2011). Embedded formative assessment. Portland, OR: Solution Tree Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1632© ISLS