Enrollment of Higher Education Studentsin Professional Knowledge and PracticesCrina Damșa, University of Oslo, Norway, crina.damsa@iped.uio.no (organizer)Hanni Muukkonen, University of Helsinki, Finland, hanni.muukkonen@helsinki.fi (organizer)Sten Ludvigsen, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway (discussant)Monika Nerland, University of Oslo, Norway, monika.nerland@iped.uio.noMinna Lakkala, University of Helsinki, Finland, minna.lakkala@helsinki.fiAuli Toom, University of Helsinki, Finland, auli.toom@helsinki.fiKari Kosonen, University of Helsinki, Finland, kari.kosonen@helsinki.fiLiisa Ilomäki, University of Helsinki, Finland, liisa.ilomaki@helsinki.fiLina Markauskaite, The University of Sydney, Australia, Lina.Markauskaite@sydney.edu.auPeter Goodyear, The University of Sydney, Australia, Peter.Goodyear@sydney.edu.auAgnieszka Bachfischer, The University of Sydney, Australia, Agnieszka.Bachfischer@sydney.edu.auAbstract: In this symposium, we discuss students becoming “enrolled” and appropriate theknowledge and practices of their prospective profession. This discussion and the relatedresearch are anchored in the acknowledgement that education programs should provideopportunities for learning and development of competencies required for knowledge-basedwork. We present empirical studies that examine learning in higher education courses in threedifferent countries. These studies focus on student engagement, participation, and experiencesin learning activities emphasizing knowledge practices that resemble professional work, andanalyze how enrollment takes place and is facilitated by curriculum design and instruction.The findings show the nature and complexity of the knowledge practices embedded in thecurriculum and how students become involved in these activities. The symposium delineateschallenges for designing learning scenarios that support such enrollment. Ultimately, thesymposium contributes to the ongoing discussion on how enrollment and curriculum designcan stimulate and support knowledge-driven learning.IntroductionThis symposium addresses the processes through which higher education students become enrolled in learningactivities that resemble knowledge structures and practices that are characteristic of their prospectiveprofessions. Furthermore, it examines the way the education programs assist and support students in thisprocess.In recent years, the expansion and increasing complexity of each domain’s body of knowledge, and theuse of state-of-the-art technologies that bridge geographically dispersed knowledge and resources have alsoprofoundly influenced higher education. It is already widely acknowledged that profession-oriented highereducation programs should provide opportunities for learning that match the professional knowledge practicesand the competencies required to deal with knowledge-based work in general (Nerland, 2012). Workplacesettings expect future employees to be proactive and capable to generate knowledge and collaborate with others,to use advanced tools, and to adopt epistemic modes of practice (Goodyear & Zenios, 2005). Accordingly,higher education is challenged to design dynamic and open learning environments with an emphasis onknowledge-driven activities (Healey & Jenkins, 2009). While there is agreement that such activities arebeneficial, they remain complex and challenging for students. This highlights the necessity for facilitating theway students conceive knowledge-driven activities and their enrollment in the epistemic practices specific toeach profession.The main focus of this symposium is two-fold. First, it aims to unveil what characterizes studentsbecoming enrolled in the knowledge culture and practices of their prospective profession, through thecorresponding higher education programs. Second, it attempts to provide insights into how instruction andcurriculum design in higher education supports such enrollment in education programs in three countries.Ultimately, the symposium aims at contributing to the ongoing discussion on how various knowledge practicescharacteristic to professional domains can be stimulated and facilitated.Empirical and Theoretical BackgroundResearch on knowledge practices has examined how professionals devise and develop epistemic strategies foraddressing open-ended problems, arguing that they need to conceive new knowledge, capitalize on collectiveexpertise, and demonstrate inquiring skills and proactive behavior (Kerosuo & Engeström, 2003). Thisepistemification process (Knorr Cetina, 1999) that characterizes the dynamic changes in knowledge stems frommodes of practice associated with those of science communities, in which knowledge production is one of theICLS 2014 Proceedings1283© ISLScore values and skills. Simultaneously, research on other professional practices, such as new productdevelopment or cross-functional units (e.g., Hyysalo, 2005), has shown that work is similarly artifact andtechnology-mediated. From a sociocultural perspective, human actions, including learning and interaction withothers and their environment, are mediated by various means and tools (Wertsch, 1991). Knowledge objects aremeditational means that can accumulate collective knowledge and experience and can represent resources forlearning and activity. Objects are important because they represent and embody past learning and knowledgeand, due to their functional complexity, are addressed to externalize existing understanding, but also tonegotiate, design or test new ideas and solutions (Miettinen & Virkkunen, 2005).Few studies have focused on the challenges students encounter when entering professions and thecorresponding knowledge practices. Research examining practices of inquiry in higher education by Muukkonenand Lakkala (2009), and Stankovic (2009), and Damşa, Andriessen, Kirschner, Erkens and Sins (2010) pursuedresearch that conceived learning as an activity that involves addressing complex knowledge-based problems,which requires collaborative inquiry and knowledge construction to reach appropriate solutions. Such complexprocesses involve a focus on shared understanding, joint actions at the epistemic level, and a good balancebetween work with knowledge and the management of the process. In addition, the research-based learningmodel brings aspects of the scientific knowledge culture and practice into educational settings, in an effort toorganize learning that supports students in developing “epistemic fluency” (Goodyear & Zenios, 2007). Studieswith this focus have provided some insights into how research-like activities have the potential to transform(undergraduate) students from course-takers to producers of knowledge (Shaw, Holbrooke, & Burke, 2011), oron the acceptance within disciplines that students can contribute to research and knowledge production (Brint,Cantwell, & Sazena, 2012). Lambertʼs (2009) study showed how this type of learning has the potential toreconfigure students as intellectual producers through their active engagement and participation in the researchcultures of their departments and disciplines.Relevance and Contribution to the ConferenceIn this symposium, we build on the aforementioned insights to better understand the knowledge culture andpractices relevant to learning in higher education. Two aspects are of importance here: how studentsʼengagement in knowledge practices emerges and what is used and constructed, in terms of knowledge andknowledge objects. We use the notion of enrollment (Nespor, 1994), as an overarching concept depicting howknowledge structures and practices are mobilized, but go beyond the original conceptualization, by assigningstudents an active, participative, and sense-making position in this process.The contributions in this symposium report on research that examines learning activities ofundergraduate students in three different countries, highlighting the epistemic dimensions of the process.Common denominators for the three studies are the higher education settings, methodologies that attempt indepth exploration of rich sets of data, and shared notion that students learn knowledge practices through activeengagement and participation.The first study examined how students from two Norwegian undergraduate programs, teacher education andcomputer engineering, respectively, become enrolled in and adopt the knowledge practices of their futureprofession through collaborative projects. The analyses of discursive interaction and of the use and constructionof knowledge objects by student groups show that students’ knowledge practices reflect valued practices intheir prospective profession, respectively, the sharing of personal knowledge in teaching and distributedproblem solving, mediated by procedural standards in computer engineering. The second study explored howthree Finnish undergraduate courses, i.e., development of business ideas and multimedia products, advancedthemes in project management within the financial domain, and customer projects in the field of biosciences,were set up to engage student teams in the processes that simulate workplace practices in knowledge intensiveorganizations. It specifically investigated the participating students’ expectations of and learning experiences,and the assessment of collaborative outcomes and processes. The findings suggest that the students were eagerto explore work-life and the knowledge of expert practices for customer projects by engaging in initiating andsustaining multidisciplinary collaboration, and by advancing the shared objects. The third study exploredfunctional epistemic games for knowledgeable action and learning in professional education, with a focus on thenature of epistemic games embedded in tasks that aim to prepare students for externships in workplace settings.The participants were enrolled in professional practice courses in pharmacy, nursing, social work, schoolcounseling, and education at an Australian university. The analyses focused on collected artifacts and interviewsand depicted the characteristic patterns of situated inquiry that students were expected to learn. The findingssuggest that learning for knowledgeable action is underscored by ways of knowing that weave traditionalepistemic games with situated problem-solving actions and discourse into embodied assemblages of functionalepistemic games.The findings of these three studies shed light on the domain-specificity of practice and led to a betterunderstanding of the processes students undergo to “become professionals”. From the perspective of learningthrough interaction and mediated by knowledge objects, students’ activities in the collaborative projectsICLS 2014 Proceedings1284© ISLSdemonstrate that knowledge work can be designed in higher education contexts. But, while students find waysto navigate through the complex knowledge of the various domain and practices, as shown in Study 1, theyreport discrepancies between their initial expectations and the actual experiences during the projects, as pointedout in Study 2. The in-depth look by Study 3 into the mechanisms of functional games that characterize thecomplexity of professional epistemic practices, underscores the general conclusion that facilitating theenrollment of students into knowledge practices is not necessarily a straightforward endeavor. It requires asubtle understanding of the nature of knowledge practices and strategies that are expected to be learned andtaught, and a sophisticated array of pedagogical design alternatives and instructional strategies that havesufficient potential to address the challenges encountered in this context both by students and by thosefacilitating their learning.This symposiumʼs contribution to the conference is two-fold. First, the symposium attends to issues ofrelevance to the conference theme in the context of learning in higher education. Second, the symposium setupaims to stimulate interaction between the presenters and the audience by: 1) presenting the theoretical andpractical frameworks of each of the three studies; 2) depicting the methodology and, especially, the analyticapproaches that support the understanding of the examined practices; and 3) by inviting a focused discussionthat addresses these three themes and the theoretical, methodological, and practical implications of the presentedstudies. We intend to engage the audience in the discussion of the contributions, using the three themes tostructure the interaction.Collaborative Knowledge Practices in Higher Education: A ComparativeAnalysis of Student Learning in Two Undergraduate ProgramsCrina Damşa and Monika Nerland, Department of Education, Faculty of Education, University of OsloIntroductionThis paper examines how students from two higher education programs, teacher education and computerengineering, respectively, become enrolled in and adopt the knowledge practices of their prospective professionthrough collaborative projects. The study focuses on understanding how students engage in these knowledgestructures and practices and how the study programs facilitate the students’ participation in these processes.In recent years, learning in professional domains has been profoundly influenced by developmentstaking place in a rapidly evolving knowledge society. An essential aspect hereof is the movement to makeprofessional practices more knowledge-based. While a more dynamic relationship between professional fieldsand higher education brings to the latter the emerging developments of the former, it also brings accompanyingchallenges. Following the dynamic developments in the work field, characterized by ongoing knowledgeproduction, sharing, and assessment, learning environments are becoming increasingly complex (Nerland,2012). In the higher education context, this brings about the necessity of introducing students to the knowledgepractices of their prospective profession and of supporting them in this process. Students are expected to adoptepistemic strategies and to become actively engaged in profession-specific, knowledge-driven activities.Specifically, students are expected to display active engagement, collaborate with each other, and develop theability to generate knowledge.While it is important to understand both the mechanisms by which professional knowledge domains aretranslated into curriculum and instruction and how students understand and enroll in these practices, few studieshave addressed these aspects. This empirical study examines how computer engineering and pre-service teacherstudents learn and engage in complex learning situations that resemble the knowledge practices of theirprofessional domain. As part of a larger research project, the analyses in this explorative study focus on: a) howstudents understand and appropriate knowledge structures and strategies specific to their prospective profession;b) how they use and co-construct the knowledge objects that are characteristic to the domains, and c) how theymobilize knowledge resources to inform their projects.Empirical and Theoretical BackgroundRecent developments in the knowledge field and new requirements that graduates must fulfill when enteringprofessions have emphasized the need to prepare students for the challenges of knowledge-driven professionalwork (Healey & Jenkins, 2009; Nerland, 2012). Toward this end, a number of empirical studies (Damşa et al.,2010; Muukkonen & Lakkala, 2009; Zimbardi & Myatt, 2012) have pursued research that conceives of learningas an activity focused on complex problems and distributed project work that resembles professional settings.While these studies provided valuable insights, further research is needed to develop a better understanding ofstudentsʼ immersion and active involvement as participants in processes of knowledge production.The theoretical framework we build upon follows sociocultural and sociomaterial perspectives onpractice and learning. The former emphasizes the social, constructive nature of learning and the fact thatactivities are mediated by various tools (Valsiner & Van der Veer, 2000; Wertsch, 1991). The later depicts theICLS 2014 Proceedings1285© ISLSmechanisms and arrangements through which knowledge is produced and circulated within expert communities,comprising material aspects (i.e., tools, artifacts, resources), but also procedures, ideas, and attitudes (KnorrCetina, 1999). In Knorr Cetinaʼs terms, these form the machineries of knowledge construction, which ʽmakeup how we know what we knowʼ (1999, p. 9) within a given domain of expertise and serve to constructknowledge. Emerging from these perspectives, two concepts inform our theoretical and analytic framework.Epistemic practices and action emerge in this social context in which interaction is paramount. Hence,discursive interaction facilitates the sharing of knowledge and the transformation of meaning potential (Linell,2009) into “frozen” meaning and traceable knowledge in the context of the collective process. It also allows oneto identify the way professional culture is conceived by the participants through their talk. The notion ofepistemic (or knowledge) objects is linked to the content of the knowledge practice. These objects can be“material entities or processes” (Knorr Cetina, 1999), which are question-generating and complex entities thathave the potential to open lines for inquiry and research. According to Nerland (2012), such objects embody theknowledge of the domains and represent points that students and novice practitioners can use to access therelevant expert cultures and collective knowledge structures. Examining the knowledge objects students engagewith or create in collaboration permits the identification of the emerging knowledge; it also allows for theidentification of how knowledge within a particular domain is explored and enacted in different contexts.MethodsThe study was conducted at two bachelor’s degree programs in Norway, Teacher Education (TE) at a largeuniversity and Computer Engineering (CE) at a university of applied sciences, respectively. These studyprograms were selected because of their orientation to specific professions and because, at the moment, theprograms are undergoing a reform to strengthen knowledge-oriented and research-based learning (Healey &Jenkins, 2009). The TE program is a five-year teacher education program that offers a masterʼs degree andteaching qualification, and it recently introduced curriculum elements aimed at strengthening students’ scientificreasoning and analytic competencies. The CE program offers bachelor’s degree and masterʼs degree programsin the engineering and information technology field, and it has recently implemented a research-based learningcurriculum.In this research project, the strategy for the empirical investigation considers the gradual immersion ofstudents into the knowledge and practice of the domain. Following this idea, the project started by observing anddocumenting the instructional and learning practices in a first year bachelor’s degree introductory course withineach of the two programs: the “Expaed” (TE) and “Web project” (CE). Both are introductory courses andcontain varied activities (e.g., lectures, assignments, and individual and group work). The six participatingstudent groups from the Expaed course were required to analyze a case of a pupil displaying learning difficultiesby a applying the knowledge about learning theories they had gained during the course and by writing a casereport. The four participating student groups from the Web Project course were required to design and develop awebsite, using the programming languages learned during the course (i.e., HTML, CSS, PHP, Java), and towrite a project report. Through comparative case studies (Yin, 2003), this first explorative iteration examinedlearning activities with a focus on existing processes and practices, which will feed into the research design ofsubsequent iterations.The dataset reflects the nature and distribution of the activities across the length of the study units andsupports an understanding of the interconnections that exist across levels (individual, group, and institutional).The following data categories were collected: a) interaction data (video recordings of group meetings, onlinediscussions and correspondence, and field notes); b) knowledge objects (documents, comments, and meetingnotes); and c) course documents and lecture materials. The data analysis attempted to capture the complexity ofthe knowledge work, and it examined the resources and strategies in various contexts. To understand howstudents engage with and act towards appropriating the knowledge practices of their domain, and the way theymobilize and use various resources, we analyzed the groups’ discursive interactions within the collaborativework. We employed a technique building on the interaction analysis method, which focused on identifyingepistemic actions and object-oriented interaction (Damşa et al., 2010). A document analysis of the groups’knowledge objects and knowledge resources was performed to examine what the groups used and constructed interms of disciplinary knowledge.Preliminary Findings and DiscussionThe analyses revealed different ways of organizing the collaborative activities at the program level and at thegroup level. While the TE groups were organized within the context of larger seminar groups and were providedwith some incidental guidelines for the collaborative process, the CE groups were organized by the courseleader based on their expressed interest, and they were provided with more detailed project work procedures.The TE groups organized their work mainly as face-to-face discussions with some support from onlinediscussions. Their discussions were more explorative, based on experience-based knowledge and localknowledge sources (exclusively course material and teachers’ feedback), and they tended to divide the tasks andICLS 2014 Proceedings1286© ISLSthe writing responsibilities among the members. The CE groups followed more structured procedures forcollaboration and their knowledge construction took place through a series of iterations by way of trial-and-errorstrategies; they used a validation tool recommended by the teacher to check their produced scripts. These groupsaccessed and mobilized a range of programming resources available online, and they used online spaces activelyto share and discuss their work.These analyses only allow for preliminary conclusions, but they provide an insight into the specificityof each domainʼs knowledge and strategies, with differences concerning both the content-related joint work andthe procedural aspects of the collaboration. The TE students used rather explorative strategies in approachingthe group assignment and they worked towards defining and clarifying the knowledge needed to address thecase. The discussions were often focused on how to frame the analysis and report according to the academicstandards. Their collaboration appeared to be rather loosely organized and the resources they accessed weredomestic to the program. The CE students worked through their collaborative task by employing a structured setof steps and phases, which built on strategies used by software development project teams. In a sense, their workwas more organized and thorough, but the use of these prescribed procedures and of the validating tool had arestrictive effect on the exploration potential of the collaboration. In the use of resources, these groups exceededinstitutional boundaries and accessed external sources of information. The way TE the studentsʼ knowledgeobjects were developed showed a prevailing strategy of division of labor, while the CE studentsʼ objects were,in most cases, developed iteratively, in close collaboration and in an incremental fashion.To conclude, we consider that these results open up a line of investigation that provides a betterunderstanding of how students enroll in the knowledge structures, practices, and culture of the domain, but witha clear focus on the details that allow them to undergo the process of “becoming professionals”. It is interestingto note how the students’ knowledge practices resemble characteristics of the two professional cultures,highlighting local embeddedness and the sharing of personal knowledge in teaching and distributed problemsolving mediated by procedural standards in computer engineering (Nerland, 2012). The findings show that it isimportant to capitalize on the domain procedures and structures, but also to find a balance between what anovice student can and must know. Furthermore, the way students participate in the process is influenced by theprogram that facilitates their interaction with the strategies and objects that are considered to be essential forbecoming a knowledgeable professional.Simulating Epistemic Practices of Knowledge Work in Higher Education:Students’ Expectations and ExperiencesHanni Muukkonen, Minna Lakkala, Auli Toom, Kari Kosonen, and Liisa Ilomäki, University of HelsinkiIntroductionCurrent university education faces new challenges in answering the requirements of society to provide studentswith the competencies that are necessary in the changing work life, such as solving open-ended problems,networking, collaborative creativity, epistemic agency, and digital competencies (Broussard, La Lopa, & RossDavis, 2007; Klusek & Bernstein, 2006; Muukkonen & Lakkala, 2009). The present study explored how threecourses in university education were set up to engage student teams in the processes of new application andconcept development that simulate the workplace practices they would encounter in knowledge intensivecompanies and organizations. We investigated the kinds of expectations that students have about such coursesand how they evaluated their learning experiences. Furthermore, the research contributes by presenting examplecases of how teachers assessed the epistemic practices of teams working on open-ended tasks.Learning as Collaborative Knowledge CreationA key characteristic present in various models that describe knowledge creation appears to be that collaborationis organized around long-term efforts for developing shared objects, such as articles, models, and practices; forinstance in Engeström’s (1987) expansive learning, Nonaka and Takeuchi’s (1995) organizational knowledgecreation, and Bereiter’s (2002) knowledge building. Building on previous theories, the trialogical learningapproach (TLA; Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2005) combined three metaphors of learning: the acquisition and theparticipation metaphors put forward by Sfard (1998) and the knowledge creation metaphor introduced inPaavola, Lipponen, and Hakkarainen (2004). The acquisition metaphor of learning addresses the assimilation ofprevailing knowledge and an individual’s mental models and strategies of learning. Such practices are familiarto anyone taking part in traditional higher education courses, i.e., attending lectures, working on individualtasks, and reading for exams. The participation metaphor highlights the adaptation to existing dialogue and tocultural and communal practices. These may be exemplified by a field-training period, where students becomefamiliar with the practices, tools, and cultural knowledge of a particular working community. The knowledgecreation metaphor and the TLA highlight the object-centered aspect as being central in collaborative learning.The presence of knowledge artifacts, practices, and products—objects—is the rationale for the term “trialogic”.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1287© ISLSThis approach emphasizes the interaction between collective and individual efforts in working on shared objectsas well as on the iterative and sustained character of this process, similar to epistemic objects in professionalpractices (Knorr Cetina, 2001).For higher education, this presents the need to promote particular types of competencies, specifically byemphasizing the shared knowledge objects and their iterative development resulting from the interplay betweenepistemic and regulative efforts during collaboration. In general, teachers have expressed a concern about howthe assessment of an individual student’s performance can be conducted while the coursework is carried out inteams. This concern stems from a framework of assessment in which the individual is expected to master all theaspects of the assignments, i.e., necessary knowledge and skills as a solo performance. In knowledge creationpractices, the process necessitates intensive collaboration, because the participants are required to havecomplementary skills and knowledge or expertise from different disciplines.Aims of the StudyWe investigated three higher education courses organized as project work in which multidisciplinary teams ofstudents were assigned to work on open-ended and complex tasks for customers. Such settings are novel to mostundergraduate and master’s degree students. We examined how students perceived these educational settingsand how they described their experiences of collaborating with members of their teams and with the customers.Furthermore, the paper addresses questions about how to evaluate collaborative outcomes and processes.Specifically, the research examined the following questions: 1) What kinds of expectations did the studentsexpress for the course and its learning outcomes? 2) What kinds of experiences did the students report after thecourse? and 3) How did the teachers set up the assessment of the collaboration efforts and the outcomes?MethodsThree courses were designed by the teachers and their collaborators from professional organizations (coursecustomers) to engage undergraduate students in complex knowledge creation processes in multi-disciplinaryteams. Case 1, the “Application Development Project” (ADP) course was organized at the MetropoliaUniversity of Applied Sciences, Finland, and it ran from September 2009 to March 2010. The study participantswere undergraduate students (n=50) and teachers (n=4) from three training programs: media engineering,industrial management, and media and communications. In addition, four customer organizations were involved.The course was purported to teach students about the development of business ideas and related services, andmultimedia products. The students worked in 11 multidisciplinary teams of three-to-six members to developbusiness plans, user stories, marketing strategies, and software architecture in order to come up with operationalbusiness application. Teams’ working documents, based on templates pre-structured with domain specificconceptualizations, were presented and discussed during weekly steering group sessions.Case 2, the “Tax Office Exercise” (TAX), was a course on advanced themes in project management thatran from March 2010 to May 2010. It involved students in business and psychology domains (n=30) andacademic staff (n=5) from the University of Helsinki and the Aalto University School of Economics. Thestudents were asked to analyze the characteristics of different groups of taxpayers and to create, on the basis ofthis analysis, concepts for future research projects for the Finnish Tax Administration (the customer). Thecourse aimed to be a practical way of learning virtual project management practices: managing a subcontractingnetwork, team building, coordinating tasks and responsibilities, managing a complete project in a shorttimeframe, and using collaboration technology. The students worked in eight multidisciplinary teams (three-tofive students per team).Case 3, the “Project Work Course” (BIO), was held at the Faculty of Biological and EnvironmentalSciences, University of Helsinki. Students (n=15) were divided into three teams, each of which worked on acustomer project in the field of biosciences. The course, tutored by teachers (n=3) lasted from September toDecember 2012. The aim was to learn to plan, manage, and report on a project work for a customer. Initialproject training provided models for organizing the process. During joint meetings the teams presented theirwork results and received feedback.Data for the study consisted of the students’ responses to open-ended reflective questions as well as theteachers’ assessments of teams (and individuals). At the onset of the course (pre), the students were asked toanswer the following questions: 1) What thoughts and expectations do you have about the course, its forms ofstudying, and its goals? and 2) What do you want to achieve by participating in the course? After the course, thestudents were asked to evaluate their experience by answering the following questions: 1) How would youcharacterize your overall experience(s) in the course? 2) How would you characterize your own participationand activity during the course? Please justify your answer. 3) What has been positive or impressive about thecourse? and 4) What has been challenging or disturbing in the course? The students were also prompted forother comments.The qualitative data was analyzed inductively (Chi, 1997; Muukkonen, Lakkala, Kaistinen, & Nyman,2010) by segmenting the responses into ideas. Several rounds of category development with the ATLAS.TIICLS 2014 Proceedings1288© ISLSsoftware were carried out. A categorization of expectations and experiences was first data-grounded and thenaligned with the TLA, when applicable.Results and ConclusionsStudents’ pre-course reflections (f=303) indicated that the students expected to learn collaboration practices,independent teamwork and planning, new knowledge, and knowledge about the nature of work-life and expertlike practices. By taking the course, they hoped to gain contacts with employers and secure an employmentadvantage, and knowledge, practices, and skills for work-life; they also hoped to gain experience with projectwork and to strengthen their management competencies.After the courses (f=401), the students reported that they had gained various kinds of knowledge andcompetencies. Further, they reflected to have learned how to take initiative, create new ideas and practices inteams, and project management and coordination. They especially valued that the courses included interestingassignments and outcomes, teamwork, projects, and real customers. Students critiqued the high complexity ofthe course assignments and the unclear initial goal framing and schedule; some of them criticized the virtualcollaboration environment. Teamwork, in particular, generated numerous reflections. When teamwork had notadvanced optimally in the team, the members reported frustration, problems with team coordination andscheduling, and uneven participation; when teamwork had advanced well, the students reported achievingcreative outcomes.We identified three foci in teachers’ assessment frameworks: regulative documentation-based (e.g., teamformation, management, participation), collective engagement-based (e.g., peer review entries, communication),and knowledge-based assessment (e.g., quality, innovativeness, and customer feedback).A comparison of the expectations and experiences suggests that, before the course, the students wanted togain knowledge of expert practices in real projects with customers. After the course, the students reporteddetails about the dimensions of initiating and sustaining multidisciplinary collaboration and advancing theshared objects. Furthermore, several teams would have benefitted from more support for initial goal framing andteam formation. The findings highlight that students valued the engagement in these types of learning practices,but the findings also call for more research on the ways to pedagogically design the complex assignments and toscaffold and assess the development of corresponding competencies.Epistemic Games for Knowledgeable Action in Professional LearningLina Markauskaite, Peter Goodyear and Agnieszka BachfischerThe University of Sydney, Centre for Research on Computer Supported Learning and CognitionIntroductionThis paper reports research in the field of professional education and professional expertise that combinesepistemic practice and epistemic fluency perspectives (Goodyear & Zenios, 2007; Knorr-Cetina, 1999; Morrison& Collins, 1996) to uncover characteristic ways of knowing that future professionals learn to enact when theyare performing complex knowledge-demanding professional tasks. We extend epistemic forms, frames andgames theories (Collins & Ferguson, 1993; Perkins, 1997; Shaffer, 2006) into the area of situated professionalwork. We identify six categories of epistemic games for knowledgeable action and learning in professionaleducation. These emerge from our investigation of the nature of epistemic games that are embedded in tasks thatuniversity students complete in professional practice courses. Our findings show that such tasks go beyondformal epistemic games and the construction of mono-professional knowledge. Rather, these tasks requirestudents to engage in new kinds of inquiry that enhance their situated understanding and inform the actions ofothers. These situated and distributed ways of knowing weave traditional epistemic games with professionalproblem solving, various modes of discourse and socio-material practices - making embodied assemblages offunctional epistemic games.BackgroundResearch in such diverse fields as sociology, anthropology, cultural studies, psychology and informationtechnologies has acknowledged that some important aspects of human behavior can be characterized by certainstructures and patterns that appear repeatedly in their discourse and actions, including human “ways to think”.Collins and Ferguson (1993) and others (Perkins, 1997) have argued that almost every domain of human activityhas a set of such characteristic forms of knowledge and ways of knowing, which guide skillful investigations inthose domains. They refer to these schematized kinds of knowledge as “epistemic forms”, and the ways ofworking with specific epistemic forms as “epistemic games”. As an example, they showed that science andhistory have a set of epistemic forms and epistemic games for conducting structural, functional and processanalyses, including such forms as diagrams for spatial decomposition, tables for comparing and contrasting, andflowcharts for identifying causal relationships. They argued that these specialized but shared ways of knowingICLS 2014 Proceedings1289© ISLSconstitute important domains of expertise. People who are good at recognizing and participating in a range ofepistemic games are said to possess “epistemic fluency”: they are flexible and adept with respect to differentways of knowing about the world (Morrison & Collins, 1996). As Collins and Ferguson (1993) suggested,“Systematic analyses of theories and inquiry strategies in the different disciplines are needed to build a detailedtheory of the different epistemic forms and games <…> and to identify other forms and games that sophisticatedinquirers use.” (40).Epistemic games are rarely taught explicitly and little is known about the variations across disciplines.Professions are inherently multidisciplinary fields. They construct their epistemological foundations by adoptinggenerative frameworks from multiple academic disciplines, and also by creating their own ways of representingknowledge, structuring inquiries and validating claims (Goodyear & Steeples, 1998).In the learning sciences, analyses of epistemic forms and games have focused on generic structures andways of knowing that are recognized in various disciplinary discourses as tools for generating the community’sknowledge. As Perkins (1997) argued, epistemic games must have explicit epistemological agendas ofdiscovery, verification and knowledge sharing. In short, these games should lead to what Greeno (2012) called,“formal knowledge.” However, formal knowledge is not the same as the functional knowledge that professionalsuse to make sense of the world (Greeno, 2012) and formal ways of knowing do not necessary correspond tofunctional ways of knowing that professionals use when they “read” an encountered situation and decide how toact (Hutchins, 2012). In fact, the nature of the functional epistemic games, which professionals play when theygenerate the situated knowledge that informs their actions, is little understood.MethodOur study included two stages. In the first stage, we investigated 20 professional practice courses that aimed toprepare students for externships in workplace settings in five professional fields: pharmacy, nursing, socialwork, school counseling and education. The dataset included interviews with 16 academics (faculty)coordinating these courses (up to 3 interviews per course) and a comprehensive collection of course materials,including tutorial handouts, specifications of assignments, and samples of completed tasks. The interviewsfocused on course designs, with particular attention to the design of tasks in which students were expected tolearn and demonstrate certain workplace-related capacities. In total, we analyzed 24 tasks. Most includedenactments of professional knowledge and skills (e.g., medication-dispensing role plays, children’s behavioralassessments, and teaching various lessons) and the production of related artifacts (e.g., assessment reports andlesson plans). To elucidate the epistemic games that students were expected to master, we adopted acombination of cognitive task analysis (Crandall, Klein, & Hoffman, 2006) and epistemic interviewingtechniques (Brinkmann, 2007). We used the course resources as prompts for interviewing the academics and,through detailed questioning of how and why various artifacts were used and produced, we aimed to depictgenerative frameworks that students were expected to use for completing the tasks. During the analysis, wesimultaneously re-analyzed collected artifacts and interviews, and recreated the main features of characteristicpatterns around which students were expected to structure their situated inquiries. In the second stage, wecomplemented and corroborated the outcomes from the first stage by conducting observations of tutorials in apharmacy course (3 tutorial groups taught by 3 academics over a 6 week period) and observing students’independent group work in a teacher education course (2 groups).Results and DiscussionOur findings revealed six main classes of functional epistemic games that we call: propositional games, situatedproblem-solving games, meta-professional and trans-professional discourse games, translational publicdiscourse games and weaving games. Propositional games are most like the epistemic games alreadydocumented in the literature, so we do not describe them here (see Markauskaite & Goodyear, forthcoming).Situated problem-solving games are played during the investigation and solution of specificprofessional problems, such as conducting reviews of medications used by patients with multiple diseases inorder to identify possible issues, with an aim of proposing better medication plans (pharmacy), or designinglessons for classroom teaching (education). Elaborated problem-solving games could combine different aspectsor stages of problem solving or design, which by themselves could be quite complex epistemic games. Forexample, a typical medication review includes investigation of a situation; processing of coded informationusing various conceptual tools; prioritization of findings using various professional heuristics and developmentof a reasonable, knowledge informed, practical solution. Overall, problem-solving games resemble professionalpractices that Goodwin (1994) calls “professional vision”. The guiding epistemological purpose is to enhancesituated understanding of the specific problematical situation by structuring things and events in a particularprofessional ways and, consequently, offering feasible solutions.Meta-professional discourse games are usually played with other professionals within a broaderprofessional field, in order to evaluate various professional products, actions or events. They involve variousdeconstructions, evaluations and reflections, such as analyses of new medications, evaluations of teachingICLS 2014 Proceedings1290© ISLSresources, and reflections on one’s practices. In contrast, trans-professional discourse games are played whenprofessionals from different fields jointly work on complex problems. These games range from simple sharingof relevant information, such as writing a referral for a specialist consultation, to engaging in joint problemsolving conversations, such as medical case conferences for discussing identified issues and deciding aboutpossible interventions. The primary epistemological function of such multi- and trans- professional discoursegames is to re-describe professional knowledge from the perspective of others who (epistemologically) areoutside the game that produced this knowledge. These games do not always produce new knowledge, butenhance joint knowledgeable action by creating links between different professional knowledges and actions.Translational public discourse games are played when professionals engage in interactions with peoplewho broadly could be described as “clients”. Such games involve common patterns of discourse thatprofessionals find effective for collecting relevant information and communicating their reasoning to nonprofessional audiences. For example, these games are evident in pharmacists’ communication strategies withclients – e.g. when they gather relevant information about health conditions before dispensing a newprescription and characteristic ways of writing instructions on a box with medications. Such games are informedby the epistemological agenda of extended knowledgeable action (Clark, 2011). They transverse the boundariesbetween professional and everyday ways of knowing and thereby extend professional knowledgeable actions tothe actions of others in the everyday world.Weaving games are played in dynamic action and involve continuous intertwining of meaning-making,social interaction and skilled performance. They range from very specialized games that can require fine-tunedphysical skill - such as strategies for capturing all the spelling mistakes in a literacy test - to quite generic gamesthat require complex coordination of various general and specialized strategies and skills - such as a teacher’sweaving of various strategies for identifying students’ learning challenges, choices of appropriate translationalgames, and continuous fine-tuning of voice pitch and movement in the classroom. Weaving games usually blendmultiple epistemological goals, which are adjusted and remixed in response to the unfolding situation.ConclusionsThe findings show that functional epistemic games for knowledgeable action and enrolment extend beyond thestandard epistemological agendas of formal epistemic games that generate propositional knowledge. Theseprofessional inquiries follow patterns of pragmatic problem-solving, sensible decision-making and embodiedsituated action. They weave various games into larger assemblages of characteristic epistemic practices. Suchweaving games involve continuous adjustment of actions in response to emerging situations and require fluentcoordination of professional perception, problem solving, bodily skill, and discourse. Further, intelligentprofessional behavior relies on ways of knowing that not only expand one’s perception of the problematicsituation and improve one’s personal understanding, but also on ways of knowing that extend one’s epistemicactivity to the environment, including social others, and enhance overall micro system’s capacities forknowledgeable action. Meta- and trans-professional discourse and translational games play important roles insuch extended knowledge activity. These discourse games require re-articulation of professional knowledge invarious professional and non-professional epistemological frameworks, the capacity to recognize and switchbetween various traditional kinds of discourse, and also a professional capacity to play skillfully special kinds ofgames for translating knowledge.ReferencesBereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Hillsdale: Erlbaum.Brinkmann, S. (2007). Could interviews be epistemic? An alternative to qualitative opinion polling. QualitativeInquiry, 13(8), 1116-1138.Brint, S., Cantwell, A. M., & Saxena, P. (2012). Disciplinary categories, majors, and undergraduate academicexperiences. Research in Higher Education, 53(1), 1-25.Broussard, S. R., La Lopa, J. M., & Ross-Davis, A. (2007). Synergistic knowledge development ininterdisciplinary teams. Journal of Natural Resources and Life Sciences Education, 36, 129-133.Chi, M.T.H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the LearningSciences, 6, 271-315.Clark, A. (2011). Supersizing the mind: Embodiment, action and cognitive extension. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.Collins, A., & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic forms and epistemic games: Structures and strategies to guideinquiry. Educational Psychologist, 28(1), 25-42.Crandall, B., Klein, G., & Hoffman, R. R. (2006). Working minds: A practitioner's guide to cognitive taskanalysis. Cambridge: The MIT Press.Damşa, C. I., Kirschner, P. A., Andriessen, J. E. B., Erkens, G., Sins, P. H. M. (2010). Shared epistemic agency:An empirical study of an emergent construct. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(2), 143-186.Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding. Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-Konsultit.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1291© ISLSGoodwin, C. (1994). Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.Goodyear, P., & Steeples, C. (1998). Creating shareable representations of practice. ALT-J, 6(3), 16-23.Goodyear, P., & Zenios, M. (2007). Discussion, collaborative knowledge work and epistemic fluency. BritishJournal of Educational Studies, 55(4), 351-368.Greeno, J. G. (2012). Concepts in Activities and Discourses. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 19(3), 310-313.Hutchins, E. (2012). Concepts in Practice as Sources of Order. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 19(3), 314-323.Healey, M., & Jenkins, A. (2009). Developing undergraduate research and inquiry, York: Higher Ed. Academy.Hyysalo, S. (2005). Objects and motives in a product design process. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 12, 19-36.Kerosuo, H., & Engeström, Y. (2003). Boundary crossing and learning in creation of new work practice.Journal of Workplace Learning, 15, 345-351.Klusek, L., & Bernstein, J. (2006). Information literacy skills for business careers: Matching skills to theworkplace. Journal of Business & Finance Librarianship, 11(4), 3-21.Knorr Cetina, K. (1999). Epistemic cultures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Knorr-Cetina, K. (2001). Objectual practice. In T. R. Schatzki, K. Knorr Cetina, & E. von Savigny (Eds.), Thepractice turn in contemporary theory (pp. 175-188). London and NY: Routledge.Lambert, C. (2009). Pedagogies of participation in higher education: A case for research-based learning,Pedagogy, Culture and Society, 17(3), 295-309.Linell, P. (2009). Rethinking language, mind and world dialogically: Interactional and contextual theories ofhuman sense-making. Charlotte, NC: Information Age.Markauskaite, L., & Goodyear, P. (forthcoming). Epistemic fluency and professional education. Dordrecht:Springer.Miettinen, R., & Virkkunen, J. (2005). Epistemic objects, artifacts, and organizational change. Organization, 12, 43756.Morrison, D., & Collins, A. (1996). Epistemic fluency and constructivist learning environments. In B. Wilson(Ed.), Constructivist learning environments (pp. 107-119). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: EducationalTechnology Publications.Muukkonen, H., Lakkala, M., Kaistinen, J., & Nyman, G. (2010). Knowledge creating inquiry in a distributedproject management course. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 5(2), 1-24.Muukkonen, H., & Lakkala, M. (2009). Exploring metaskills of knowledge-creating inquiry in higher education.International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(2), 187-211.Nerland, M. (2012). Professions as knowledge cultures, In K. Jensen, L. C. Lahn, & M.Nerland (Eds.), Professional Learning in the Knowledge Society, pp. 27-48. Rotterdam, theNetherlands: Sense Publishers.Nespor, J. (1994). Knowledge in motion: Space, time and curriculum in undergraduate physics andmanagement. Philadelphia: Falmer.Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge-creating company: How Japanese companies create thedynamics of innovation. New York: Oxford University Press.Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). The knowledge creation metaphor – An emergent epistemologicalapproach to learning. Science & Education 14, 535-557.Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., & Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Models of innovative knowledge communities and threemetaphors of learning. Review of Educational Research, 74(4), 557-576.Perkins, D. N. (1997). Epistemic games. International Journal of Educational Research, 27(1), 49-61.Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational Researcher,27,4-13.Shaw, K., Holbrook, A., & Bourke, S. (2011). Student experience of final-year undergraduate research projects:An exploration of 'research preparedness. Studies in Higher Education, 36,(6), 711-727.Shaffer, D. W. (2006). Epistemic frames for epistemic games. Computers & Education, 46(3), 223-234.Stankovic, N. (2009). Single development project. Journal of Systems and Software, 82(4), 576-582.Valsiner, J., & Van der Veer, R. (2000). The social mind: Development of the idea. New York, NY: CambridgeUniversity Press.Wertsch, J. V. (1991). Voices of the mind: A sociocultural approach to mediated action. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research, design and methods (3rd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.Zimbardi, K., & Myatt, P. (2012). Embedding undergraduate research experiences within the curriculum: Across-disciplinary study of the key characteristics guiding implementation. Studies in HigherEducation, 1, 1-18.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1292© ISLS