Local Ground: A Toolkit Supporting Meta-representationalCompetence in Data ScienceSarah Van Wart, University of California, Berkeley, vanwars@ischool.berkeley.eduTapan Parikh, University of California, Berkeley, parikh@ischool.berkeley.eduAbstract: Local Ground is an online data collection, mapping and visualization platform thatallows youth to learn and use data skills in support of local projects. Local Ground is uniquein its ability to display and translate between a variety of representations of spatialphenomena, starting with drawings. In our studies, we have found that students have usedLocal Ground to combine and translate between different representations for sense-makingand communication.IntroductionThe term data science has been coined to describe the mindset and skills one must possess to acquire,manipulate and use data to understand and predict real-world phenomena, and to communicate thatunderstanding for decision-making. Data scientists play increasingly important roles in a variety of fields including public health, climate science, governance, the social sciences and for study of the Internet andtelecommunications networks. Researchers have observed that data scientists require a unique combination ofskills - including statistical reasoning, information organization, and algorithmic thinking (Kandel, Paepcke,Hellerstein and Heer, 2012).Local Ground is an online data collection, mapping and visualization platform that provides youth withan opportunity to learn and use data skills in support of local civic engagement and citizen science projects (vanWart, Tsai and Parikh, 2010). Local Ground allows learners to 1) collect locally relevant data, including ashand-drawn map annotations, unstructured audio and images and handwritten tables, 2) enter, tag andgeoreference this raw data into a usable digital format, 3) explore and visualize this data, including as heatmaps,tag clouds, graphs and charts and 4) create compelling narratives from data and multimedia, to be presented andshared with others. We have applied this process of data-driven inquiry across subjects and age groups, fromelementary to high school, while working on projects of local civic significance - what Freire calls “generativethemes” (Freire, 1970).Meta-Representational Competence and Data ScienceLocal Ground is a type of "auxiliary stimulus" - a cultural form that is wedged between students' naive ways ofthinking about spatial phenomena and their spontaneous inclinations to represent this thinking. Local Ground isunique in its ability to display and translate between a variety of distinct representations of this phenomena,starting with and-drawing on existing maps. Drawing has been referred to as “probably the biggest and mostobvious pool of competence” in children (diSessa, 2004, p. 309). Researchers have also observed that usingdrawing, students are able to reinvent a number of canonical representations, including graphs and maps(diSessa, Hammer, Sherin and Kolpakowski; Enyedy, 2005). Enyedy refers to this process as progressivesymbolization, progressively refining representations of the world to develop a deeper (and more operational)understanding of a domain (Enyedy, 2005).Data scientists must also create and translate between representational formats as they manage dataacross the pipeline - from collection, to entry, to modeling, to programming, and finally to communicatingresults (Kandel et al., 2012). They must integrate data and visualizations into compelling narratives, in the formof presentations, videos and graphics, that can influence decision-makers, the public and even themselves (Segel& Heer, 2010). Enyedy observed how students in a 2nd and 3rd grade class reinvented topographical lines as asolution to representing height in a 2D map (Enyedy, 2005). He describes “how the invention of representationalforms by individuals occur as part of a larger social process of creating cultural conventions” (Enyedy, 2005, p.427).Case StudiesParticipating in Urban PlanningY-PLAN is a design studio based at the Center for Cities and Schools at UC Berkeley. Y-PLAN facilitated apartnership between Berkeley students (mentors), the City of Richmond, and an eleventh grade U.S. historyclass, to support youth involvement in creating a design plan for a local park. The students went through atwelve week design process, using Local Ground to collect data about existing assets, hazards and risks; createdmodels, and used this information to advocate for a future neighborhood design plan.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1589© ISLSMonitoring Air QualityEBAYS (East Bay Academy for Young Scientists) is a summer science program for low-income youth,sponsored by the Lawrence Hall of Sciences. Working with E-BAYS, students gathered, analyzed, visualized,and summarized air quality data using Local Ground and other tools, and presented their data and findings totheir parents, community members, the Port of Oakland, the transit commission, and at the AmericanGeophysical Union (AGU) conference.Ground-Truthing Civic DataI-SEEED is a community organization supporting youth involvement in economic, environmental andeducational design. Working with I-SEEED, a local school district and other community organizations, youthfrom different neighborhoods in Oakland used Local Ground to ground truth an existing “grocery store” dataset.Local Ground enabled young people to submit and geo-reference photos, audio clips, comments, and ratings ofthe stores they visited, and communicate to the school district that only about a third of the stores in the “grocerystore” data set provided even moderately healthy food options.Preliminary Findings and Future WorkIn all of these projects, we have found that students have leveraged different representations of data for sensemaking, analysis and communication. In the case of EBAYS, when students presented their findings to parentsand community members, they used a Local Ground map to represent the spatial coverage of their study; a timeseries plot to represent how air quality changed over the course of a train ride; a comparative chart series torepresent the striking difference in Air Quality between the Pittsburg and Embarcadero stations, a photograph ofthe train station to demonstrate dust accumulation, and finally some summary statistics using tabular formats. Inthe Y-PLAN, when students presented their park design plan at City Hall, they used Local Ground as a way toshow future visions of the neighborhood, juxtaposed with a photograph in which an existing methadone clinicwas sited next to a proposed playground. These representations were later combined in a PowerPointpresentation that also included poetry, spoken word, graphic posters, etc. In the case of I-SEEED, youth used acombination of drawings, pictures and tables to collect data about grocery stores. Based on this data, mentorshelped students to create a visualization that colored store locations based on their categories. Later, they made amultimedia presentation combining audio and images to communicate their qualitative findings.We plan to conduct further studies of the use of representations to collect and understand empiricaldata. Working with students in grades 4-8 at two local schools, we will be observing how students appropriatethe affordances of the tool to create new representations of space and spatial phenomena. We are also interestedin how students convert these representations into more usable and communicable forms, how and if thoseforms are appropriated by others, and how that process supports youth’s understanding of core mathematical,statistical and computational constructs. We also want to understand the importance of locally collected data onyouth motivation and identity.ReferencesdiSessa, A., Hammer, D., Sherin, B., & Kolpakowski, T. (1991). Inventing graphing: Meta-representationalexpertise in children. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10, 117-160.diSessa, A. (2004). Metarepresentation: Native competence and targets for instruction. Cognition andInstruction, 22(3), 293-331.Enyedy, N. (2005). Inventing mapping: Creating cultural forms to solve collective problems. Cognition andInstruction, 23(4), 427-466.Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Continuum Publishing Group.Kandel, S., Paepcke, A., Hellerstein, J. M., & Heer, J. (2012). Enterprise data analysis and visualization: Aninterview study. Proc. IEEE Visual Analytics Science & Technology.Segel, E., & Heer, J. (2010). Narrative visualization: Telling stories with data. IEEE Transactions onVisualization and Computer Graphics, 16(6), 1139-1148.Van Wart, S., Tsai, K. J., & Parikh, T. (2010). Local Ground: A paper-based toolkit for documenting local geospatial knowledge. Proc. of the First ACM Symposium on Computing for DevelopmentAcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank I-SEEED, Lawrence Hall of Science, E-BAYS, Y-Plan, the UC Center for Cities andSchools, all of our other collaborators and especially all of the students that have participated in our work. Thismaterial is based in part upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Number IIS1319849.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1590© ISLS