Engaging in Educational Design Processes forSustainable Learning: Learning and Becoming in PracticeMona Holmqvist Olander and Clas OlanderUniversity of Gothenburg, IDPP, Box 300, SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Swedenmona.holmqvist@gu.se, clas.olander@gu.seAbstract: The aim of this study is to describe in what way the students’ learning outcomesand theoretical assumptions are used by teachers to enhance the design of lessons with a focuson development of sustainable learning over time. Seven teachers and 71 students in an uppersecondary school participated, along with one researcher. Three lessons were designed andimplemented in three different student groups (N=24, 23, 24), with one intervention for eachgroup. The interventions were designed in an iterative process: the result of the first lessonformed the base for the development of the next, and so on. A multi-case analysis wasconducted within and between each intervention. The results of the study describe correlationsbetween teachers’ deepened theoretical knowledge, changes in lesson design, and impact onstudents’ learning outcomes in a long-term perspective. We found students’ learning outcomesincreased during the three interventions in three different groups of students (A +0.17, B+0.87 and C +1.54). At the delayed post-test, the learning gain in the third group sustained tobe higher than in the previous two groups of students (A -0.08, B +0.26, C +0.75).Survey of the FieldThis study addresses a general issue in educational research, developing sustainable learning. Transfer isfocusing how the things we learn in one situation affect our ability to handle other and new situations, related towhat we have previously learned. Marton (2006) questions the assumption that transfer always builds onsimilarities (instead of differences) between different situations, that the similarity is defined by the researcher(not the participants), and that the relation is between two specific situations (rather than between “fields” ofsituations) should be questioned. Engle (2006) describes generative learning as the ability to appropriate theapplication of something in a new situation which differs from the first even when the first and second situationsas such in some ways are related to each other. Our definition differs as we do not think it is enough to examineonly two situations or to evaluate the learning in only one post-unit assessment activity. The design of assessinggenerative learning (learning that generates further learning) in our definition, means that we assess students’knowledge immediately before and after the intervention, which may be seen as one occasion (pre-test,intervention, post-test) because it results in a single analysis of the effect of the initial intervention. The weeksafter the intervention, students participate in several different contexts, and they have the opportunity to discernthe object of learning in other situations, depending on the degree to which the intervention has developed theirpotential generative learning. This can be seen as a second activity, which means we imply that the context thestudents meet after the intervention contributes to their learning. If their ability to learn further is enhanced bythe initial lesson, their learning increases or sustains during the weeks and will be possible to assess in a newtest several weeks after the initial intervention. As Carraher and Schliemann (2009) suggest, we have taken intoconsideration how prior knowledge plays a role in transfer; seeing transfer as a theory of learning there is a needto develop a hypothesis about what it takes to learn. This means that the instruction in the initial learningsituation have an impact on the learning beyond the immediate learning situations if it is designed based ontheoretical assumptions about learning. As the lesson forms students’ prior knowledge in a new situation andopens up their ways of thinking about the content, different ways to design the lessons might have differentimpact on the learning outcome beyond the lesson, and that is what is studied in this project.PurposeThe aim of this study is to describe in what way theoretical assumptions about learning and the students’learning outcomes are used by teachers to enhance the design of lessons with a focus on development ofsustainable learning over time. Teachers’ developed skills to design lessons in and by practice to enhancestudent learning is in focus. The design of the lesson plans are analysed together with the results of the students’learning outcomes in three different groups. By the use of an iterative process called learning study (Marton &Tsui, 2004; Holmqvist, 2011; Lo & Marton, 2011), three teachers teach three different lesson designs in threegroups of students about the same content at three different lessons (one lesson in each group of students). Theanalysis of the learning outcomes and the design of the lessons are made collaborative in the whole team ofteachers.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1087© ISLSTheoretical BackgroundVariation theory (Marton & Booth, 1997; Runesson, 1999; Holmqvist, Gustavsson & Wernberg, 2008) has beenused as the theoretical framework to design and analyse how students’ generative learning is developed. In thisframework, learning is seen as a qualitatively changed understanding of a phenomenon in the environment. Thismeans that learning is an ongoing process where the learner gradually experiences instances in a more and moredeveloped way. Learning is thus not seen as either correct or incorrect, for in all misconceptions there are somecorrect assumptions that can be developed. Variation theory is based on three corner-concepts: discernment,simultaneity, and variation. They all require each other in a learning situation and are intertwined. To learnsomething new, you have to discern this new part from a previously discerned background. This means youcompare and see the new thing in contrast with other phenomena you have previously experienced. Thisvariation makes it possible to suddenly experience something new in a former, familiar situation. In a verysimplified way – you might not experience one particular house in a street that you travel every day until oneday the owners repaint the house in a new colour. The variation of colour (once red and now yellow) makes youdiscern the house in a new way as you simultaneously remember what it looked like before and what it lookslike right now. This theory has been used to develop learning in several different countries (Marton & Tsui,2004), a number of different school subjects (Lo & Marton, 2011; Holmqvist Olander & Sandberg, 2013;Ljung-Djärf & Holmqvist Olander, 2013; Holmqvist Olander & Bergentoft, 2014), and beyond the bounds ofthe ordinary school (Holmqvist, 2009).Multiple-Case studyThe development of lessons designed for generative learning was studied in a multiple-case study (Stake, 2006),with three cases, called “learning study cycles” consisting of five steps each: design of one lesson, pre-test,intervention, post-test, and post-test session. The teachers’ aim in the learning study was to develop learningdesigns in science education dealing with a general issue concerning students’ learning of the “nature ofscience” (Lederman, 2007) with a specific object of learning, “What constitutes a scientific theory?” When theteachers discussed what topic to choose before the learning study, they agreed that the nature of science was atopic that was both challenging for them to teach and for students to learn; furthermore, it is a vital part ofscience subjects in Sweden (biology, chemistry, and physics). The learning study was enacted as part of acourse in biology, where the idea of the nature of science is emphasised in the syllabuses, especially under theheading of “Character and working methods of biology,” that is, “Models and theories as simplifications of theworld – How they change over time” and “The importance of the experimental working process in testing, reevaluating, and revising hypotheses, theories, and models.”Methodology, Participants, and ImplementationA learning study is a kind of action research; the learning study in this case was part of a school developmentproject in an entire upper secondary school, where different subject-based teams of teachers chose differentobjects of learning. The participants were seven teachers, one researcher, and 71 students (approximately 17years old) in three groups (N=24, 23, 24) in upper secondary school. Two group interviews about the contentwere conducted with equivalent students (N=8) who should not participate in the multiple-case study. Theinterview focused on probing students’ views of how science could make claims and how you could judgewhether a theory is scientific or not. It turned out that the students could rather easily spot whether a theory wasscientific or not, but they were very vague when it came to reasons for their conclusions. The result of thescreening was discussed at a meeting between the researcher and the teachers; the object of learning wasformulated as “understanding what constitutes a scientific theory,” instead of the previous focus on what ascientific theory is.Data consisted of three videotaped research lessons in three different groups of students (taught byteacher A, B and C), pre-, post-, and delayed post-tests seven weeks after each intervention. There were alsomeetings (in total, six) before and after each lesson where teachers and researcher evaluated the previous lessonand suggested ways of communicating identified critical aspects in the next lesson. The data source for theteachers’ experiences consisted of notes and minutes from six 2-hour meetings: 11/9, 27/9, 4/10, 9/10, 16/10and 11/12 at the school. Between the meetings, the whole team of teachers assessed students’ tests and, ifpossible, watched videos taken during the lessons. At least two teachers were also present during the researchlessons, in that one was teaching and another was videotaping. The video-recordings represent an important datasource since they point out in what way the teachers could become more skilled in designing the lessons basedon students’ previous knowledge.Tests and AssessmentsThe teachers decided to teach about the nature of science. The idea of including the nature of science (NOS) inthe science curricula is a worldwide phenomenon; however, there seems little agreement on what NOS is; AbdEl Khalick (2012) concludes that we currently “have no well-confirmed general picture of how science works,ICLS 2014 Proceedings1088© ISLSno theory of science worthy of general assent” (p. 354). However, some components seem inevitable, e.g.definitions and relationships between concepts, laws, models, and theories. Suggestions of constituents of ascientific theory include such aspects as being testable, replicable, and/or leading to predictions (p.737); they arefallible human constructions but have substantive evidence that supports them (Dagher, Brickhouse, Shipman &Letts, 2004, p. 739). This definition was the point of departure for teachers in this study, and the lesson designsare used as data to describe in what way the teachers develop their lesson design based on theoretical knowledgeand the students’ learning outcomes.The pre-test, post-test, and delayed post-tests were identically articulated, although some studentsanswered with paper and pencil while others logged on to a Web platform to enter and submit their answers.The analysis of results shows no difference in the way students answered regardless of response method. Tokeep the answers anonymous, students were given a three-digit code to be used on all three tests. The questionwas presented to students as shown in Figure 1.Code:What constitutes a scientific theory?I claim that the following examples are scientific theories.(a) gravitation(deals with the attraction of bodies to each other)(b) telepathy(deals with the transmission of thoughts)(c) astrology(deals with the influence of astronomical bodies on the life of humans)(d) astronomy(deals with the structure and motion of astronomical bodies)Argue, i.e. give reasons, as to whether they are or are not scientific theories.Figure 1. Pre-, post- and delayed post-test.When assessing students’ answers, we searched for the following criteria: A theory …1) may be investigated/tested and/or be falsifiable.2) is supported by previous findings.3) may be used to make predictions.4) may be modified and developed and/or the formulation is a human constructTaking into consideration all four aspects of what a theory is would count as 4 points on the test, onepoint for each aspect. However, the assessment was not primarily based on a quantitative scoring; rather, theresponses were analysed qualitatively to see in what way the students had developed understanding or not.Table 1 shows excerpts from one student’s answers at pre- and post-test. The student has answered correctly asto whether the examples are scientific theories or not; however, the aspects she used to make these decisionsresulted in different scores and showed (on the post-test) a deeper understanding that was beyond merelyanswering the direct question correctly.Table 1: Answers from student #330(a) gravitation(b) telepathyPre-testYes, because the scientific argumentssupport the theory. (It is most likely, thereis “evidence.”)No, because there are no scientificarguments that support the “theory.”Post-testGravity is consistent with experiments and so on. You cantry to contradict the theory but with no success. That iscorrect!Experiment is not consistent with this hypothesis. There isno evidence that it is correct/there is evidence that it iswrong because the experiments are not consistent with thehypothesis. It’s wrong!ResultsDifferences in Teachers’ Handling of the ContentEach lesson started with a brief introduction by the teacher and a framework of some aspects defining ascientific theory (hypothesis – testing – theory). After the introduction came a group activity where students ingroups of three or four were given a “black box’ (a large sealed box filled with unknown objects). The studentswere to figure out what was inside and give reasons for their assumptions (hypothesis). After that, the teachermade a PowerPoint presentation on the work of Ignaz Semmelweis and his hypothetic deductive method whentrying to discover the cause of puerperal (childbed) fever. This part of the lesson resulted in a change of focus,as students became occupied in finding out why mothers died of puerperal fever instead of develop anunderstanding of what a scientific theory is. The teacher aimed to build a structure of relevance, but instead thestudents in lesson A and B became very focused on finding out why doctors in the 19th century could not stopICLS 2014 Proceedings1089© ISLSthe incidence of puerperal fever. The theory was kept in the background and the disease in the foreground. Afterthis presentation, the framework was further developed on the whiteboard and related to the Semmelweis case.This was presented sequential in all three lessons, one at a time, instead of simultaneously or integrated.However, in lesson C the teacher made simultaneous references to the Semmelweis case when she drew theschedule on the black board.At the end of the each lesson, the students were supposed to contrast what a scientific theory is withwhat it is not. In the first lesson (A), the example used was whether the theory of a flat earth could beconsidered as scientific; in lessons B and C, the contrast presented was between Semmelweis’s theory andnumerology. The flat earth theory was, however, all too clearly inaccurate to be a good example to find out if itis a scientific theory using the model drawn at the black board. This resulted in the teachers changing theexample, in that way offering students a contrast between two phenomena from different areas. The strategywas to sharpen the contrast (Semmelweis versus numerology) even further in lesson C by also letting studentsdo an online numerology test (http://www.twice.se/astro-numerologisk-kalkyl.html#.UhFRDD9YW2k).Except for the difference in the examples of contrasts (flat earth and numerology); the main differencebetween the lessons lay in which aspects the teacher offered students when explaining what constitutes ascientific theory. This only took a few minutes of each lesson (five minutes in lesson B and eight in lesson C),but was the crucial part of the learning opportunity to understand what a scientific theory is, as the rest of thelesson was mainly about building a structure of relevance or background. In lesson A, there were few aspects ofthe structure devoted to the teacher explaining what a scientific theory is; the teacher mainly pointed out thatobservations lead to a hypothesis that could be tested and falsified or supported. During the post-lesson sessionafter lesson A, the teachers decided to offer the students more aspects. This resulted in new dimensions of avariation of ways to reinforce a conclusion (experiments, earlier models, and predictions) which would lead to ageneralisation and, finally, a theory. In lesson C, the pattern of variation was changed again, keeping thedimension of variation regarding the reinforcement but also opening up a dimension of variation regarding whata theory is (possible to develop, testable, and predictive). Thus, the analysis of teachers’ intentions graduallyincludes all four aspects that constitute a scientific theory: (1) may be investigated/tested and/or be falsifiable,(2) is supported by previous findings, (3) may be used to make predictions, and (4) may be modified anddeveloped and/or the formulation is a human construct. In lesson A, the aspects offered were about aspect (1),while the rest were not offered and therefore could not be discerned. The dimensions of variation opened up inlesson B, also concerning aspect (2) and (3); while in lesson C students had the opportunity to explicitly discernall four aspects and the teachers’ intended or planned object of learning was thus closer to the enacted object oflearning offered the students in lesson C than in lessons A and B.Results of Students’ LearningStudents’ responses to pre-tests and post-tests (Table 2) show that students’ learning gains in lesson A were low(and not significant, measured with paired t-test, 5%-level). However, their responses in lessons B and C weremore in line with the scientific view after the lesson than before. This change is significant in both lesson B andC, but in lesson B the only category that the students seem to have discerned was “Scientific theories may beinvestigated/tested” (20 out of 23). After lesson C, the results show that the students in this group were able togive a more varied view; for example, 7 out of 24 argued with the help of three or four criteria, and another 10students used two criteria (six students used only one criterion, and one failed to use any). Lesson C was alsothe lesson where students were able to retrieve developed knowledge after seven weeks; these students retainedthe knowledge over time and thus evidenced a more sustainable learning.Table 2: Mean scores, differences, and range (0–4) in testsPre-testPost-testDelayed post-testPre-test / Delayed posttestResearch lesson AMeanRange+/0.250–10.420–1+ 0.170.170–1- 0.25- 0.08Research lesson BMeanRange+/0.000–00.870–1+ 0.870.260–1- 0.61+ 0.26Research lesson CMeanRange+/0.540–22.080–4+ 1.541.290–4- 0.79+ 0.75In the results of the delayed post-test, we found a recession in all groups (from post-test to delayedpost-test), but in lessons B and C there is an increased mean score in number of criteria mentioned whencomparing pre-test and delayed post-test – specifically 0.26 in lesson B and 0.75 in lesson C (both significant).The students in lessons A and B did not retrieve more than one of the assessment criteria, however notnecessary the same after as initially (as the student in Table 1). This was the same at the pre-test in lesson C,however in the post-test 10 students mentioned two criteria, four students mentioned three and three studentsmentioned all four criteria. At the delayed post-test, nine students mentioned two criteria and one studentICLS 2014 Proceedings1090© ISLSmentioned three criteria. The students in this group did develop a more differentiated knowledge then thestudents in the two other lessons.DiscussionIn this study, teachers’ use of students’ learning outcomes and gradually more developed theoretical knowledgeabout what it takes to learn have been studied. The design of the lessons became, over time, more and moreexplicitly focused on the aspects critical to discern for the students to enhance knowledge. The iterative process;plan, implement, assess, analyze and new planning based on the previous findings, enables a cumulativelearning process for the teachers. When enacting the third lesson and making the contrast between Semmelweisand numerology; teachers opened up a dimension of variation where the two contrasting theories were offeredto discern simultaneously. The increase of the students’ learning outcomes was highest in the third lesson,supporting the hypothesis that teachers’ developed understanding of what it takes to learn the defined content,and by that meeting the students’ needs in a more powerful way, enhances student learning. When participatingin a learning study, the first step is to articulate what you intend to teach and how (i.e. the intended object oflearning), then put your knowledge into action in the classroom together with the students (i.e. enacted object oflearning), and finally analyse the classroom practice through students’ learning outcomes (i.e. lived object oflearning). We argue that these steps are most effective if undertaken in authentic practice (Brown, 1992) and ina collegial context where in-depth discussions of teaching strategies are grounded in observation or videorecordings. In that respect, learning study as an in-service training model has potential for developing teachers’learning and becoming in practice regarding how to stimulate students to develop sustainable learning.ReferencesAbd-El-Khalick, F. (2012) Examining the Sources for our Understandings about Science, International Journalof Science Education, 34(3), 353-374Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments': Theoretical wild duck methodological challenges in creatingcomplex interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2 (2), 141-178.Carraher, D., & Schliemann, A. (2009). The transfer Dilemma. Journal of the Learning sciences, 11(1), 1-24.Dagher , Z., Brickhouse, N., Shipman, H., & Letts, W. (2004). How some college students represent theirunderstandings of the nature of scientific theories, International Journal of Science Education, 26(6),735-755.Engle, R. (2006). Framing Interactions to Foster Generative Learning: A Situative Explanation of Transfer in aCommunity of Learners Classroom. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 451-498Holmqvist, M., Gustavsson , Laila & Wernberg, Anna (2007): Generative learning. Learning beyond thelearning situation. Educational Action Research, 15(2), 181-208Holmqvist, M., Gustavsson, L. & Wernberg, A. (2008) Variation Theory – An Organizing Principle to GuideDesign Research in Education. In Kelly, A.E., Lesh, R., &. Baek J. (eds) Handbook of design researchmethods in education, 111-130. New York: Routledge.Holmqvist, M. (2011). Teachers’ learning in a learning study. Instructional Science, 39(4), 497-511.Holmqvist Olander, M. & Sandberg, B (2013). Democratic literacy - a complex object of learning. TheInternational Journal for Lesson and Learning Studies, 2(3), 251-289Holmqvist Olander, M. & Bergentoft, H. (2014). Regulation of tenseness. International Journal for Lesson andLearning Studies, 3(1), 24-45Lederman, N. (2007). Nature of science: Past, present and future. In Abell, S & Lederman, N. (Eds) Handbookof Research on Science Education (pp. 831-880). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, New Jersey/London.Ljung-Djärf, A. & Holmqvist Olander, M. (2013). Using Learning Study to Understand Preschoolers’ Learning:Challenges and Possibilities. International Journal of Early Childhood, 1(45), 77-100.Lo, M.L., Chik P.M., Ko, P.Y., Leung, Y.L., Pong, W.Y., Lo-Fu, Y.W. & Ng, F.P. (2005) Learning Studies:Development and Impact. In Lo, M.L., Pong, W.Y. & Chik, P.M. (Eds.) For Each and Everyone:Catering for Individual Differences through Learning Studies (41- 73). Hong Kong: Honk Kong.University Press.Lo Mun Ling & Marton, F. (2011). Towards a science of the art of teaching: Using variation theory as a guidingprinciple of pedagogical design. International Journal for Lesson and Learning Studies, 1(1), 7 – 22Marton, F. & Booth, S. (1997). Learning and awareness. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Marton, F. & Tsui, A.B. (2004). Classroom discourse and the Space of Learning. London: Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates.Marton, F. (2006). Sameness and Difference in Transfer. The Journal of the Learning Science, 15, 499-535.Runesson, U. (1999). Variationens pedagogik. Skilda sätt att behandla ett matematiskt innehåll. [The Pedagogyof Variation] Göteborg: Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis.Stake, R. (2006). Multiple Case Study Analysis. New York & London: The Guilford Press.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1091© ISLS