Science, Technology, Body and Personhood: The Concept ofHealth Emerging in High-Tech Modern Medicine PracticeFederica Raia1,2, Martin Cadeiras2, Ali Nsair2, Daniel Cruz2, Grecia Ramos1, Claire Alvarenga1, Valeria M.Rivera1, Kristina Barrientos1 and Mario C. Deng21University of California, Los AngelesGraduate School of Education and Information Studies, Department Education2David Geffen School of Medicine, Department of MedicineEmail: raia@gseis.ucla.edu, MCadeiras@mednet.ucla.edu, ANsair@mednet.ucla.edu,DCruz@mednet.ucla.edu, greciaramos48@yahoo.com, clairealvarenga@yahoo.com, vmrivera01@ucla.edu,kbarrientos90@gmail.com, MDeng@mednet.ucla.eduAbstract: In this participatory action research project, we studied the process of practice inhigh-tech modern medicine as a particularly powerful domain in which integration of science,technology, body and personhood needs to take place. We posit that this integration demandsa conceptual evolution of a static concept of health into a concept of health that is based onthe ability to adapt and self-manage. There are different level of learning about living withhigh technology modern medicine, including from the patient perspective learning about ownbody, learning to live with the machine, learning to live with uncertainties, and, from thephysician perspective, to understand the relationship between supporting the patient indeveloping a new sense of self, for technology to be completely integrated in the patient’s life,past, present, future and self and the ownership over the specific critical health decisions withits physiological manifestation and course.IntroductionIn this paper we explore the process of practicing high-tech modern medicine as it is the chronic and acuteadvanced heart failure practice, often in the setting in critical care, as a particularly powerful domain in whichintegration of science, technology, body and personhood takes place. Specifically, we investigate howstakeholders (patient, family, healthcare professionals) in Advanced Heart Failure (AdHF) medical encounternegotiate the tensions between formal definitions of health and choice in the actual practice. This study is of aparticular interest for the field of the learning sciences because in agreement with Rogers Hall’s call (Hall,2005), it opens up new perspectives between the larger scales of classification systems at the society/policy levelsuch as the ones outlined in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 2010 (ACA) (Fineberg, 2012) andthe lower scale, such as the level of an individual making informed decisions and of person’s choice –Individuallevel (Washington & Lipstein, 2011) . This research focuses on the middle level – practice level – where peoplenegotiate these tensions in actual practice, the person-in interaction level (Hall, 2005).Our focus on the practice level where participants are in interactions has important implications in thecontext of the rich tradition of research on illness in the sociology and anthropology of medicine and medicineeducation. In the medicine education field, the attention is focused on medical school students and most of theliterature centers on General Practice and the application of models of care such as patient centeredcare.(Stewart et al., 2003). In sociology and anthropology of medicine, there is extensive research on chronicillness either at the policy societal level or on the individual level. Patient-centered perspective provides a richliterature on the experience of chronic illness (Pierret, 2003) as biographical disruption (Bury, 1982) andprocesses of adaptation to a new life (Charmaz, 1995; Pierret, 2003). Yet, this research has been mostlyremoved from the rich context of the specific disease as an ontological reality of the body with few importantexceptions (e.g. Mol, 2002) and from high-tech modern medicine of chronic and acute practice, often in thesetting in critical care whose situated specificity of disease it is not reducible into a melting pot of chronicillness (Timmermans & Haas, 2008). The big impact that the field of science studies has had and continues tohave in the learning sciences is based on the fundamental focus on practice, showing that in the scientificpractice of each discipline, criteria, argumentation, instrumental expertise and methodological sensitivitiesdevelop with their own specificity (Knorr-Cetina, 1981; Latour & Woolgar, 1979). We claim that in the contextof medical practice, as seen in the study on science in action (Latour, 1987)), discipline-dependent knowledgesof practice, concepts of care, disease, decision making and self do emerge with their own specificity. Theexperience of the body and of the self, interacting with physiological constraints and manifestations and theinteractions with high technology make participation in the practices a learning experience. This presupposesboth: what participants become and how they act as knowers (Roth & Lee, 2007).We take the situated specificity of disease in the medical practice as the starting and returning point ofall our discussion. Specifically, this study is situated in the rich context of AdHF where high technologicalICLS 2014 Proceedings1012© ISLSadvances play a fundamental role in people’s lives and practices offering a window on what high-tech modernmedicine entails for individuals in their interactions at the practice levels. Specifically, the study is situated inthe AdHF context of practice as a preeminent example of high-tech modern medicine with its first implantationof a total artificial heart as a permanent device in 1984 and the first use of a wearable left ventricular assistdevice in 1994 (Goldstein et al., 1998). This means that ‘biographical disruptions’ (Bury, 1982) entailintegration of technological advances such as being kept alive mechanically, while continuing participation infamily, work and social life; unknown 30 years ago. These experiences are novel to patients and their familyand unknown to physicians.Society Level / Individual-Level: Health, Choice and Decision-MakingSociety/Policy Level: In the USA, ACA has authorized the creation of the Patient-Centered Outcomes ResearchInstitute (PCORI). This non-profit organization is entrusted by the Congress to identify national priorities forresearch and to fund research guided by patient-centered questions that can provide information about the bestavailable evidence to help patients and their health care providers make more informed decisions, betterunderstand the prevention, treatment and care options available to them, and the science that supports thoseoptions (Washington & Lipstein, 2011). At the Individual Level, providing information to best supportunderstanding and make informed decisions has on one hand contributed to moving the process beyondinformed consent, rooting it in the multifaceted and more complex (Dy & Purnell, 2012) frame where allstakeholders involved – patient, caregivers and health professionals – work together (Charles et al., 1997), eachbringing a complementary and necessary perspective to decision support (Elwyn et al., 2010). At the same time,it is based on normatives of autonomy, individuality and effectiveness which entail responsibility, andaccountability for the consequences of people decision (O'Neill, 2002).Practice Level: How are these concepts of choice, individuality, responsibility and autonomynegotiated in the context of high-tech modern medicine (Timmermans & Haas, 2008) in which AdHF practiceunfolds? We address this question in our studyMethodsThis study is part of an ethnographic and participatory research project (2011-2013) conducted in a largeUniversity Medical Center in California (Raia and Deng, in press).Data Collected and AnalysisThe data have been collected in three stages:Stage.1:Narratives. We conducted exploratory interviews of stakeholders and 1 hour to 2 hour-longopen-ended interviews of participant patients and their family to collect their narratives on the experiences inadvanced heart failure.Stage 2. Medical Encounter Recordings. Three recruited AdHF cardiologists were audio- and videorecorded in their AdHF medical encounters with their patients (N=25). Of the 25 patients in the study, 18patients and their family were recorded in their medical encounters with the participating physician for a periodof 1-2 years AdHF Medical encounters were audiotaped in in-patient medical rounds and audio and videotapedin out-patient clinic medical encounters:i) In in-patient medical rounds medical encounters AdHF cardiologistsare audio-recorded while on rounds in the hospital on AdHF patients who are hospitalized (AdHF in-patients).These patients are often admitted or transferred from a regional hospital into the larger hospital in an advanceddecompensated and often life-threatening condition. It is during these hospital rounds that AdHF cardiologistssometimes meet the patients and their caregiver(s) for the first time. Often, it is during the stay in the hospitalthat patient and caregivers are faced with fundamental decision making of heart transplantation or mechanicalcirculatory support implantation. Each patient is in a single-bed room. In the Cardiothoracic Intensive Care Unit(CTICU) patients are recovering from cardiothoracic surgery for either an assist mechanical circulatory supportdevice implantation or heart transplantation; in Coronary Care Unit (CCU) and Cardiac Observation Unit(COU) patients are under observation and often listed for heart transplantation. In-patient medical rounds arestructured so that the attending AdHF cardiologist, the physician on call responsible for the hospitalizedpatients, walks from unit to unit visiting each patient in her/his hospital room. ii) Out-patient clinic medicalencounters- In these encounters, AdHF patient, not more hospitalized or not yet hospitalized, come in thehospital for a medical appointment and meet with the AdHF cardiologist in examination rooms.Stage 3. Co-Generative dialoguing (CoGen) (Elder and Levin, 1991). AdHF cardiologists, whoseinteractions have been recorded in Stage 2, participate in weekly audio/video-recording viewing sessions as partof the research team. These research encounters (Stage 2) are videotaped (. The diverse perspectives ofparticipating in the study and the researchers are shared, reflected upon and elaborated allowing all to developand understanding of the issue at stake. In these weekly sessions, four AdHF participating cardiologists,together with student researchers and researcher, reviewed the taped medical encounters in which theyparticipated and discuss the elements that emerged to be important to them. Reviewing together the data inICLS 2014 Proceedings1013© ISLSCoGen session allowed to unfold a richer perspective on the practice of high-tech modern and amongst otherthings to address questions most relevant to practice, depending on the clinical circumstances and on thephysician’s stance and knowledge at specific times in the medical encounters (Wirtz et al., 2006). It alsoallowed checking for validity of the emerging patterns identified in this study. As in the tradition ofparticipatory research we all co-author in this paper. Data from Stage 2 medical encounters data was transcribedby student researchers co-authors and the first author of this paper and checked for agreement.Major Findings, Conclusions, and ImplicationsWhen a patient and family member are confronted by choices of heart transplantation or mechanical circulatorysupport device implantation, to make a decision, they must accept that a substitution of a malfunctioning organ(in the first option) or a substitution of the pumping function (in the second option) is possible. This requiresone’s body or loved one’s body to be seen as conspicuous (Heidegger, 1962) in its malfunctioning. This gazeon the properties and natural function of the body parts, not as a whole ‘me,’ moves to consider it as aninstrument that has failed to do its job, with malfunctioning or broken-down part(s). In this, according toHeidegger, familiarity with what was known has broken down (Heidegger, 1962). But what happened when apatient wakes up from the surgery and finds him/herself with a heart transplantation or mechanical circulatorysupport device implantation?The following excerpts two encounters between one of the participant-researcher doctors and Mr. J, a33 year old patient, constitutes a representative example.Context: Mr. J is in his thirties and always been physically very active. His condition of AdHFdeveloped about ten years ago but at the moment has dramatically deteriorated. He is emergently hospitalizedand resuscitated after having suffered a sudden death due to lethal arrhythmia. Mr. J accepts to be a candidatefor heart transplant with the only alternative choice to die possibly very soon from another episode of fastchaotic heart rate for which he has been hospitalized. He is listed on the highest emergency category in theUSA national list for heart transplant but, based on the unpredictable course of a reoccurring fast chaotic heartrate the AdHF health professional team had suggested an implantation of BiVAD (a mechanical circulatorysupport device) as a bridge to transplantation, if another of these episodes with loss of conscience were to occur.Mr. J remained hospitalized in intensive care in Cardiac Observation Unit under close monitoring and the lethalarrhythmia followed much sooner than expected. Mr. J is just recovering from the BiVAD implantation surgeryin the CTICU, when Dr. D enters. The plan for Mr. J is to completely recover from the BiVAD surgery and bedischarged from the hospital to qualify again to be a candidate for heart transplant in accordance with the USAnational directives for heart transplantation listing. Because of the BiVAD implantation, Mr. J also needs tohave two trained caregivers who can assist him living with the assist devise. Dr. D and Mr. J meet for thesecond time now.Encounter 91234Dr. D:Mr. J:Hello young man!How is life?I’m fine(3 sec pause)Three second is a long silence as as long silences are reported to cluster around the one-second interval(0.9–1.2 s) (Jefferson, 1989). Here the doctor is waiting for the Mr. J to continue talking –as he usually does, butMr. J does not. Silence. If we compare it with another day, we see that Mr. Jay respond differently to the doctorsalute:Encounter 10123456789Dr. D:Mr. J:Dr. D:Mr. J:Dr. D:Mr. J:Hi young manHi!How is life?Getting better. Had a nice breakfast.I saw you (3 s)Got the eggsGot the turkey sandwichGot a nice little fruit cupMy feet are starting to feel a little bit betterAs Dr. D. describes in CoGen, entering the room on Day 9, he expected to see Mr. J to be “sitting up inthe middle of bed and despite adversity: “a handsome young man with his long hair looking like a Jesus full ofICLS 2014 Proceedings1014© ISLSinner life, vision energy and dignity holding on each side his two pumps,” Dr. D gesturing the expected Mr. J’sposition gives an impression he is expecting to see somebody in charge: “a victorious young men” “Yes!Having survived a major heart attack, being resuscitated, and undergone a major heart surgery, he should be inthe same framework as I am” and in this framework “just fine is not a good start after a major surgery” because“just I’m fine” does not grasp the immensity of what just happened, what Mr. J went throughDay 9 continues5678910111213141516171819202122232425262728293031323334Dr. D:Mr. J:Dr. D:Dr. D:Mr. J:Dr. D:Mr. J:goodSo, on Friday a week ago when it came upFriday morning was when we said let’s dothe high emergency status heart transplantation listingand maybe we have and organ coming up during the weekendThat was also when we first metyeahAnd then we say ok and Dr. C was already little skepticaland said maybe if anything happens we have to go aheadand this was in the nightAnd so then it was clearwe have to recommend the Bi-ventricular Assist DeviceHow did it feel when the question came up now the assist device.You were prepared on Saturday morningyou know on the 12th?it was it was a little weird, you know,kind of I mean (3.0 sec pause)It’s just kind ofuh, uh a little trippy uhmmhearing something like you knowlike thatIt weirded me out with gangliectomy you knowyou don’t wanna do it (2.0 sec pause)but if it’s really for the best you kind wonna do it,but it’s just weird to think about it you know (1.48 sec pause)and uhhh I am glad it’s happened you know (3 sec)yeah, yeahIt’s a big (1.5 sec pause) thingYes! (2 sec pause)Very big thingAt line 20, Mr. J starts sharing his experience for the first time. It is an experience of estrangementwaking up with the machine as part of one’s own body. This experience is the shared by other patients as Mr. J,a few months later, during an interview, recalls feeling “like a scary character in the movies, half man, halfmachine.”There are the long silences (1. 5 to 3 seconds) in Mr. J talk elaborating his experience. These silencesare not interrupted by the physician. Dr. D notices also that Mr. James does not name the BiVAD, insteadsaying it was ‘trippy … hearing something, you know, like that’ (line 20-25) and that he uses the word ‘weird’three times (line 20, 26 and 29). It is on this word, ‘weird,’ that Dr. D operates the first transformation, from‘weird’ into ‘big’ (line 32). Note that the pause of 1.5 seconds (line 32) after Dr. D uses the word ‘big,’ givesspace to the word and greater emphasis on the transformation. ‘Yes! It is a very big thing.’The patient starts talking and from here the doctor slowly moves into a discussion of what is coming in thefuture to maintain a space where the patient will in time elaborate the experience.Our data show that accepting a life with heart transplantation or mechanical circulatory support deviceimplantation is not done upon making the decision. It is a complex dynamic oscillatory process of adaptivesynchronization. This is based on periods of patient’s aguish and despair, feeling lost in an unfamiliar life, andcountervailing fluctuation of mood between disappointed expectation and support offered by doctors.The expectation of the doctor entering Mr. J’s room is to find a person who won a battle against deathin pursuing an agreed upon course of action (decision making on mechanical circulatory support device) thatallows the patient to continue living his life. When the doctor meets the patient on Day 10 after surgery, there isno correspondence with his expectations. The patient is lost. In the decision-making framework, withnormatives of autonomy, individuality and effectiveness, the patient’s reaction is not readable as being lost, butICLS 2014 Proceedings1015© ISLSis either ignored or, worse, is understood as “patient is not grateful for the gift of life and for the healthcare andfamily efforts in supporting the patient in the difficult decision.”In high-tech modern medicine making a decision is understood as a process of oscillation between asasynchronic state of being “not on the same page” and a return to a synchronic state. The interactional patterssees the doctor respond ‘on not being on the same page ‘ with the goal of formulating for the patientpossibilities for the future. When a synchronic state is reached in one encounter, the expectation is not that it ismaintained, as doctors are observed to respond on this day ‘ not being on the same page,’ understating that is aprocess of integration of science, technology, into a person’ life: a recursive transformation.The understudying of decision-making in the practice of high-tech modern medicine where at theperson level, there is learning to live with the machine and learning to live with uncertainties is an oscillatoryprocess of synchronization fundamentally different from a point of arrival (decision) entailing responsibility,and accountability for the consequences of people decision (O'Neill, 2002). It is not regulated by normative ofautonomy and individuality but by the imperative to care.ReferencesBury, M. (1982). Chronic illness as biographical disruption. Sociology of Health and Illness, 4, (2): 167-182.Charles, C., Gafni, A., & Whelan, T. (1997). Shared decision-making in the medical encounter: what does itmean? (or it takes at least two to tango). Social Science & Medicine, 44, 681-692.Charmaz, K. (1995). The body, identity, and self: Adapting to impairment. Sociological Quarterly, 36(4), 657680.Dy, S.M., & Purnell, T.S. (2012). Key concepts relevant to quality of complex and shared decision-making inhealth care: A literature review. Social Science & Medicine, 74, 582-587.Elden, M., & Levin, M. (1991). Cogenerative learning: Bringing participation into action research. . In W. F.Whyte (Ed.), Participatory action research (pp. 127-142).Elwyn, G., Frosch, D., Volandes, A.E., Edwards, A., & Montori, V.M. (2010). Investing in deliberation: adefinition and classification of decision support interventions for people facing difficult healthdecisions. Medical decision making : an international journal of the Society for Medical DecisionMaking, 30, 701-711.Fineberg, H.V. (2012). Shattuck Lecture. A successful and sustainable health system--how to get there fromhere. The New England journal of medicine, 366, 1020-1027.Goldstein, N.E., Lampert, R., Bradley, E., Lynn, J., & Krumholz, H.M. (2004). Management of implantablecardioverter defibrillators in end-of-life care. Annals of internal medicine, 141, 835-838.Hall, R. (2005). Reconstructing the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(1), 139-155.Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time (J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, Trans.). New York: Harper.Knorr-Cetina, K. (1981). The manufacture of knowledge : an essay on the constructivist and contextual natureof science. Oxford ; New York: Pergamon Press.Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society: Harvard universitypress.Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1979). Laboratory life : the social construction of scientific facts. Beverly Hills:Sage Publications.Mol, A. (2002). The body multiple : ontology in medical practice. Durham: Duke University Press.Mol, A. (2008). The logic of care : health and the problem of patient choice. London ; New York: Routledge.O'Neill, O. (2002). Autonomy and trust in bioethics. Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press.Pierret, J.(2003). The illness experience: state of knowledge and perspectives for research. Sociology ofHealth& Illness, 25, 4-22.Raia, F., & Deng, M. C., (in press) Relational Medicine –Personalizing Modern Healthcare: The Practice ofHigh-Tech Medicine As A RelationalAct. Imperial College Press, LondonRoth, W.M., & Lee, Y.J. (2007). "Vygotsky's neglected legacy": Cultural-historical activity theory. Review ofEducational Research, 77, 186-232.Stewart, M., Brown, J.B., Weston, W.W., McWhinney, I.R., McWilliam, C., & Freeman, T.R. (2003). PatientCentered Medicine: Transforming the Clinical Method. Oxon: UK: Radcliff Medical Press Ltd.Timmermans, S., & Haas, S. (2008). Towards a sociology of disease. Sociology of Health & Illness, 30, 659676.Washington, A.E., & Lipstein, S.H. (2011). The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute—promotingbetter information, decisions, and health. The New England journal of medicine, 365, e31.Wirtz, V., Cribb, A., & Barber, N. (2006). Patient-doctor decision-making about treatment within theconsultation - A critical analysis of models. Social Science & Medicine, 62, 116-124.Zimmermann, C. (2007). Death denial: obstacle or instrument for palliative care? An analysis of clinicaliterature. Sociology of Health & Illness, 29, 297-314.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1016© ISLS