Leveraging Educative Approaches to STEM Disciplinary andInstructional PracticesPhilip Bell, Jeanne Chowning, Elaine Klein, Veronica McGowan, Tana Peterman, Kerri WingertUniversity of Washington, 1100 NE 45th St., Suite 200, Seattle, WA 98105Email: pbell@uw.edu, jtc@uw.edu erklein@uw.edu, vmcgowan@uw.edu, tjbryn@uw.edu, kwingert@uw.eduAnna Maria Arias, Elizabeth A. Davis, Annemarie S. PalincsarUniversity of Michigan, 610 E. University Ave., Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1259Email: aarias@umich.edu, betsyd@umich.edu, annemari@umich.eduApril LuehmannUniversity of Rochester, LeChase Hall 472, Rochester NY 14627, april.luehmann@rochester.eduElizabeth A. Davis (Discussant)University of Michigan, 610 E. University Ave., Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1259, Email: betsyd@umich.eduAbstract: This symposium addresses teacher learning and agency as teachers adapt existingcurriculum and instructional practices to promote student learning through Science,Technology, Engineering & Math (STEM) disciplinary practices. Each study in oursymposium aims to foster student learning of STEM disciplinary practices as an overarchinggoal. We focus on educative curriculum models that support teachers’ identity developmentand disciplinary expertise by cultivating their pedagogical content knowledge for disciplinarypractices in concert with student learning (Davis & Krajcik, 2005; Shulman, 1986). Themultiple research projects in this symposium document practices in various learningenvironments that: a) broaden science participation through teachers’ and students’ authenticinteractions with disciplinary practices, b) recognize multiple epistemologies in STEMenvironments for all participants, c) honor teachers’ expertise in adapting curriculum for theirdiverse contexts, supporting equitable and authentic implementation of science practices(NRC, 2011).IntroductionThis symposium brings together threads of research related to teacher learning and agency as we focus on howteachers adapt existing curriculum and instructional practices to promote student learning through STEMdisciplinary practices. Each study in our symposium aims to foster student learning of STEM disciplinarypractices as the larger goal, while recognizing that teachers need to be grounded in the disciplinary practices oftheir content area if they are to effectively teach them. We aim to develop educative curriculum models(curriculum for students that also contains elements of instruction for educators) that situate teachers withinSTEM-related communities of practice to support their identity development and expertise in these fields bycultivating their pedagogical content knowledge for disciplinary practices in concert with student learning(Shulman, 1986; Kind, 2009; Davis & Krajcik, 2005).Methodologies of these works are diverse, but their goals are similar: to bi-directionally bridge theorywith practice, and further, take curricular adaptations and innovations to scale. We document practices in avariety of learning environments that allow us to investigate and make recommendations in order to: a) broadenscience participation through teachers’ and students’ authentic interactions with disciplinary practices, b)recognize multiple epistemologies in STEM environments for all participants, c) honor teachers’ expertise indeveloping and adapting curriculum for their particular contexts. Our work promotes collaborative expertiseamong teachers in STEM content areas and situates teachers within disciplinary-specific communities ofpractice, enabling equitable and authentic implementation of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS), asenvisioned in the National Research Council Framework for K-12 Science Education (NRC, 2011).In the coming years, as districts transition from state-based standards to the NGSS, they will becharged with adapting their existing curriculum materials and tools to meet not only the new standards, but alsonew practice based-approaches to scientific inquiry (NRC, 2011; Achieve, 2013). These approaches will requireteachers to become familiar with the disciplinary practices of their content area, and to develop new pedagogicalknowledge and skills around teaching these practices. There is widespread agreement that teacher professionaldevelopment is critical for the success of standards-based reform in U.S. schools (Committee on Science andMathematics Teacher Preparation, 2001), and that educative curriculum is a powerful tool for this type ofreform (Kind, 2009).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1426© ISLSPractice-Based Approaches to TeachingThere is currently limited research on how teachers implement practice-based approaches to STEM instruction.Penuel (2009) found teachers preferred adaption over strict implementation of designed curricula, However,teacher adaptations most often build on subject matter knowledge and pedagogical content knowledge (PCK),with no instances of adaptations specifically structured around PCK for disciplinary practices (Davis & Krajcik,2005).Curriculum materials have the potential to support teachers in complex work such as engaging studentsin scientific practices (Brown, 2009). However, teachers’ enactment of curriculum materials, including teachers’support for science practices, varies (e.g., McNeill, 2009) since teachers are engaged with curriculum in aparticipatory relationship (Remillard, 2005). Teachers’ diverse experiences and backgrounds enable them todraw on the resources in curriculum materials in varied ways and adapt the resources differently for use withinthe contexts of their classroom (Brown, 2009, Remillard, 2005).Scholarly Significance of the SymposiumTheoretically driven by the cultural process of learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991), teacher learning within acommunity of practice (Grossman, 2005), and influenced by the interrelationships between educators and theircurricula (Remillard, 2005), this symposium uses diverse methodologies to investigate the ways that teachersengage with scientific practices. Papers discuss engagement in STEM practices through research bridging gradelevels 3-9, pre-service and experienced teachers, and formal and informal learning settings. Considered together,these papers show that teacher learning during adaptation of practice-centered instruction is highly contextdependent. This symposium offers insights regarding successful adaptation of curricula for disciplinarypractices.Designing Educative Curriculum to Address Controversial Issues in ScienceElaine Klein and Veronica McGowan, University of WashingtonWhen scientific content has the potential to be controversial in the classroom, practice-based approaches toinquiry (as advocated for by the NGSS and the Framework; NRC, 2011) are integral to engaging participantsvia multiple pathways that facilitate their deeper knowledge of concepts and theories (Bang, Warren, Rosebery,& Medin, 2012; Kelly, Carlsen, & Cunningham, 1993). Recent work in a diversity of academic disciplines hasbegun to question the historically dominant assumption in science education that presenting empirical evidencealone will shift learners’ understanding of potentially controversial topics; in contrast, equitable scienceinstruction will explicitly engage students about their worldviews, as a way to foster their understanding ofcontent (Collins & Pinch, 1993; Langen, 2004; Nisbet, 2009; Saunders & Rennie, 2011; Verhey, 2005). In termsof what actually transpires in classrooms, however, recent work in this field (Berkman & Plutzer, 2011) revealsthe “cautious 60%” of public high school biology teachers from across the United States that utilize strategies toavoid controversy when teaching about evolutionary concepts. With this context as a backdrop, this studyinvestigates public high school biology teachers’ attitudes and approaches to teaching about evolutionarybiology, which was identified by all participants as a controversial topic within their communities. We then usethese findings to propose an educative curriculum framework that advocates for surfacing multipleepistemologies and ways of knowing within the scientific community, and offer tools and strategies to helpteachers adapt this framework for their particular classrooms.Conceptual Framework and Study DesignThe philosophical underpinnings of the issues described above have led many science educators and researchersto consider whether the goal of science education, especially around potentially controversial issues, is tounderstand or to believe scientific concepts (Cobern, 1994; Smith, 2009; Southerland, Sinatra, & Matthews,2001). There is extensive work (Evans, Legare, & Rosengren, 2010; Legare, Evans, Rosengren, & Harris, 2012;Long, 2011), however, that affirms the capability of non-exclusivist people to move beyond this simplifiedbinary and occupy a “Both/And” position in regard to accepting evolutionary concepts and/or timescale, whilealso holding theistic beliefs of some kind, even within the professional sciences (Cunningham & Helms, 1998;Doolittle, 2009; Gauch, 2006). Further, the strategies of utilizing authentic scientific practices and explicitdiscourse on the nature of scientific knowledge have been found to improve students’ conceptual understandingof natural selection and evolution (Sandoval, 2003; Sandoval & Morrison, 2003; Sandoval & Reiser, 2004). Animportant clarification is that these scholars do not call for actively teaching about beliefs in science classrooms,but, rather, for teachers to foreground these conversations as a mode of engagement to move students towardsconceptual understanding, especially for potentially controversial issues.This DBR study (Design Based Research Collective, 2003) is situated within a year-long, high schoolbiology curriculum design project called Educurious. We take the sociocultural stance that learning is explicitlya cultural process (Lave & Wenger, 1991), and recognize that engaging teachers’ and students’ subjectivity andICLS 2014 Proceedings1427© ISLSvarying cultural experiences as social capital, is a powerful technique to shift their own epistemologicalconceptions of science (Nasir & Hand, 2006; Bang & Medin, 2010). Throughout implementation of theEducurious evolutionary biology unit, we collected and compared daily agendas, teacher-created materials, andonline adaptation tracking logs for each teacher to gauge the type and degree of adaptation of this course foreach classroom. We conducted semi-structured interviews with each teacher to gain a deeper understanding oftheir past experiences teaching about evolutionary biology, and their motivations for making content-specificcurriculum adaptations to the evolution unit, and used this information to guide biweekly online discussionswith the teachers. We then transcribed all of these discourse interactions, and used iterative, open coding toallow for emergent themes in the data to guide coding schemes, analysis, and theory development (Creswell,2007); we also employed critical discourse analysis (Gee, 2011) to draw meaning and patterns from teachers’interviews, talk during meetings, and written accounts.FindingsDavis & Krajcik (2005) suggest that we need to “characterize teacher practice” before we can develop effectiveeducative curriculum models that meet teachers’ needs. In each of the teacher interviews, participants framedevolution as a controversial topic. Within their discourse, teachers posited evolution as controversial specificallybecause of some students’ beliefs, but responded through their practice in diverse and complex ways. Someteachers expressed their own non-exclusivist worldviews, and discussed how they revealed this to their students,in order to model that this stance is tenable.In regards to adapting curriculum, we found that teachers had overwhelmingly positive views andexperiences with curriculum adaptation, and actually preferred adaption over strict implementation of designedcurricula. Teachers most often drew on subject matter knowledge and pedagogical content knowledge whenadapting for their classes; however, our research suggested that teachers do not identify with the disciplinarypractices of their content areas. This suggests that an educative curriculum model should develop partnershipsbetween teachers and disciplinary experts to help them contextualize the real-world applications of the keytheories in evolutionary biology and bring authentic disciplinary practices into their classrooms.Implications for Engaging in Controversial Science TopicsThe goal of all standards and curricula should be to broaden scientific participation and opportunities forstudents from diverse backgrounds and cultures within an equitable framework (NRC, 2011; Calabrese, 2003),yet prescribed curriculum models rarely produce the same learning gains once they are scaled up and enactedacross diverse settings (Taylor, 2012; Squire et al, 2002; Penuel, 2011, Coburn, 2012), and do not cater to thespecific needs of individual teachers, classrooms, and students. At their foundation, scientific disciplines existwithin a broader human and cultural framework, in which individuals, including scientists, hold non-exclusiviststances around controversial ideas. Surfacing this complicated reality will help teachers to leverage their ownand their students’ non-exclusivist thinking within their classrooms to create personally relevant instruction fortheir students. This work strives to advance the essential discussion about how high school biology teachersactually teach about evolution in the complicated social ecology of their classrooms (cf. Eilam, 2009). Oureducative curriculum model incorporates tools and strategies that utilize authentic scientific practices andexplicit discourse on the nature of scientific enterprise and multiple epistemologies to support teachers’development of PCK for disciplinary practices as they adapt designed evolutionary biology unit for their localclassrooms (Sandoval, 2003; Sandoval & Morrison, 2003; Sandoval & Reiser, 2004; Davis & Krajcik, 2005).Teacher Learning of Disciplinary PracticesPhilip Bell, Tana Peterman, Kerri Wingert, and Jeanne Chowning, University of WashingtonThrough an ongoing partnership of educational researchers, practitioners and STEM professionals, weinvestigate questions relating to shared researcher and teacher learning through collaboration around scientificpractices. Our posture is responsive to practitioners’ curricular and collaborative goals and learning needs usingdesign-based implementation methodology (Penuel, 2011; Design Based Research Collaborative, 2003).Research questions include:•How and why do teachers shift their teaching towards practice-focused instruction?•How do teachers share problems of practice, resources and teaching knowledge with others?•How do the practitioners in the school leadership team collaborate with educational researchers?Research FocusThis research examines the networks and cultural pathways (Palinkas, 2009) that teachers utilize as theycontinue improving their practices. We will offer solutions to the persistent gap between research and practice inK-12 STEM education, consistent with ways this gap has been addressed in medicine-related fields through thedeveloping work of “translational research” (Woolf, 2008). During the 2013-14 school year, we haveICLS 2014 Proceedings1428© ISLSextensively documented authentic collaborations with local science teachers in grades 3-8, through which wecontinue to work to solve problems practitioners face in implementing disciplinary STEM practices.Conceptual Framework and Study DesignTranslational research suggests that the gap problem between research and practice should not only be addressedbut reframed. Implicit in the notion of adaptation is a bi-directional process of cultural exchange in which bothresearchers and practitioners come to understand how the knowledge products of each field can strengthen theprofessional activities in the other (Coburn & Stein, 2010; Palinkas et al., 2009; Penuel., et al., 2011). We havebeen studying an adaptation site, in which practitioners from two school districts, educational researchers, andscientists from the Institute for Systems Biology collaboratively develop and enact curricular adaptationsaligned to STEM disciplinary practices.This collaboration, orchestrated by the school districts, asks educators to engage students indisciplinary practices to support their learning of STEM. This comes in response to the new teaching andlearning expectations from the recently adopted Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS; Achieve, 2013),which is based on the Framework for K-12 Science Education (NRC, 2011). The adaptation site work is focusedon collaboratively adapting curriculum and developing relevant strategies and tools to support both teachers’and students’ learning of STEM through engagement in the disciplinary practices, specifically focusing on thepractices of engineering design and scientific explanation and argumentation. We work with teachers to developand analyze what curriculum materials should be provided for teachers, how curriculum materials help teachersunderstand the disciplinary practices, and how teachers could expand the implementation of the practicesthroughout the curriculum at a larger scale (Davis & Krajcik, 2005; Coburn & Stein, 2010). We fully documentthe process consistent with design-based implementation research.Sources of DataThrough the Adaptation Site, we are gathering several types of qualitative data with teachers as they iterativelydevelop educational tools and knowledge in response to STEM educational improvement efforts. Datacollection is in the form of video, audio, and pre- and post-year surveys on the structure and impact of individualteacher networks. Teachers will also engage in focus groups and informal conversations to inform ourunderstanding about their learning throughout the adaptation and implementation process. Most importantly, wewill observe and participate in classroom activity with teachers as they adapt, plan, and implement theirinstruction. Planned data analysis will include discourse analysis of student talk, teacher talk, and talk amongeducational professionals, network analysis of teacher cultural learning pathways, measures of teacher contentknowledge, and qualitative analysis of adapted curricula. Data collection will continue through three years,beginning with the 2013-14 school year.ImplicationsThis research illuminates the ways that a partnership between universities, school districts and local professionalorganizations supports the flow of research ideas to the benefit of teacher practice and professionalization. OurDBIR approach (Penuel et al., 2011, Design-Based Research Collective, 2003) will enable us to document thefull process of teacher learning: from cultural exchange to professional learning to shifts in practice tostrengthened STEM learning opportunities for K-12 students. Our research will result in recommendations forhelping adapt curriculum to include STEM disciplinary practices at scale, with direct connection to studentoutcomes. This research elucidates the ways that teachers improve their own science instructional practicesthrough their collaborations and social networks as well as the ways that they seek and create agency inresponse to new standards.Using Educative Curriculum Materials to Support Teachers in EngagingStudents to Justify PredictionsAnna Arias, Annemarie Palincsar, and Elizabeth A. Davis, University of MichiganAs part of a larger research project looking at the use of educative curriculum materials to support elementaryteachers’ and students’ learning of science practices integrated with science content, this research looks closelyat teachers’ use of educative features added to an existing kit-based science curriculum to support students injustifying their claims, an aspect of scientific argumentation. Using a qualitative, case study analysis approach(Miles, Huberman, & Saldana, 2014; Stake, 2000), we investigate how teachers interact with and adapteducative curriculum materials to provide learning opportunities for their students and consider how patternswithin the student work connect to these opportunities. We ask:ICLS 2014 Proceedings1429© ISLS•••What evidence exists that the teachers drew on the educative features of the unit to support theirstudents to justify their predictions?How do teachers describe drawing on the curriculum materials to support students in justifying theirpredictions?How does the students’ justification of their predictions on a pre- and post-assessment connect to theteachers’ enactment of the unit?Research FocusScientific argumentation, defined as the justification of an explanation, model, or prediction through thecoordination of evidence and theory (Duschl & Osborne, 2002), does not happen often in elementary classroom,despite evidence that elementary children can engage in aspects of this disciplinary practice (e.g., Herrenkohl,Palincsar, DeWater, & Kawasaki, 1999). We hypothesize that educative curriculum materials might support theuse of justification of predictions to serve as an entrée for both teachers and students to engage in scienceargumentation, broadening their participation in authentic practice.While elementary students are often encouraged to make predictions in many subjects, including readingliterature, typically, all predictions are welcomed and students are not held accountable to support theirpredictions with reasoning or evidence. However, science emphasizes providing justification for one’s claim.This disparity in how “prediction” might be used in the elementary grades makes it a particularly interestingscientific practice to study in elementary classrooms. The goal of our investigation is to study how educativecurriculum materials might facilitate the development of teachers’ abilities to engage students in providingjustification for a claim in a prediction and thus begin to move toward scientific argumentation.Conceptual Framework and Study DesignTeachers’ work with curriculum is a participatory relationship in which the resources, stances, and perspectivesof the teacher and the features and resources of curriculum materials interact (Remillard, 2005). Teachers adaptcurriculum materials for use in their classrooms differently in part based on their diverse experiences andbackgrounds (Brown, 2009, Remillard, 2005). For example, McNeill (2009) found that science teachers drew oneducative curriculum materials in different ways when supporting students to engage in constructingexplanations.As part of a large quasi-experimental study looking at the effects of educative curriculum materials,this paper centers on three fourth-grade teachers (Ms. Jay, Ms. Rosser, and Mr. Decker) teaching an ElectricCircuits unit over the course of three months. We enhanced an STC kit-based, inquiry-oriented unit for ElectricCircuits (National Science Resources Center, 2004) with educative features intended to promote teaching,learning, and use of science practices and content (see Davis et al., in press). We designed the educative featuresdrawing on literature and our earlier empirical work to support teachers in integrating science practices andcontent. Certain features foregrounded science practices, including making predictions with justification. Theeducative features included: (a) overviews describing the science practice, providing a rationale for teaching thepractice, and gave possible teaching moves for supporting students applicable across multiple lessons, (b)targeted, lesson-specific suggestions for supporting students engaging in the science practice, (c) reminder boxesthat were inserted into the procedure section of lessons and intended to highlight important aspects of sciencepractices, (d) a rubric and examples feature for analyzing and understanding students’ written predictions, and(e) narratives describing a teacher working with students on justifying prediction.FindingsEach of the teachers seemed to draw on the educative curriculum materials in their teaching, yet theirenactments showed differences in the learning opportunities they provided. For example, how each of theteachers discussed what predictions are and how to justify a prediction varied significantly. Ms. Jay and Ms.Rosser's explanations were clear and drew directly from the educative curriculum materials. Both teachersdefined prediction as “a forecast of future events based on data already collected,” a statement provided in theeducative features. Both teachers also discussed the importance of justifying one’s claim. For example, Ms.Rosser discussed that “predictions require a claim about what is being predicted and justification based onreasoning or previous observations or experiences”. Mr. Decker's explanation of the practice of prediction, onthe other hand, was convoluted and did not reflect the ideas in the educative curriculum materials. Mr. Deckerdid not focus on drawing on prior knowledge or observational data to support why one might make a particularclaim as described in the educative features; instead, he emphasized how the students could see if theirpredictions were correct through an investigation. Similar differences across classrooms appeared in thestudents’ work. More than 90% of students in Ms. Jay’s and Ms. Rosser’s justified their predictions on posttest,which was an increase from the pre-test; however, fewer students justified their predictions on the posttest thanon the pretest in Mr. Decker’s classroom.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1430© ISLSThe three teachers also varied in their perspectives regarding using the educative features to supportstudent engagement in prediction. In the interviews, Ms. Jay pointed to how the curriculum materials facilitatedher ability to engage students in justifying predictions and encouraged her to consider more closely students’thinking across multiple subjects. She also discussed using specific educative features such as the rubric tosupport students’ predictions. In contrast, Ms. Rosser and Mr. Decker did not often point to using specificeducative features when teaching about predictions. Ms. Rosser did discuss using sentence stems to supportstudents in constructing explanation and justifying their predictions, which was suggested by the educativefeatures.Implications for Teaching Practices of Prediction and ArgumentationThis study adds to and extends the research base by highlighting areas of strengths and challenges that mightoccur as teachers interact with and adapt educative curriculum materials to support elementary students inscientific prediction and argumentation. The teachers’ varied integration of the disciplinary practice of justifyingpredictions into their instruction points to areas of teacher learning as well as challenges, adding to otherresearch on designing educative curriculum materials for elementary science classrooms (e.g. Davis et al., inpress; McNeill, 2009). Ms. Jay’s positive response to, and uptake of, the educative features’ focus on justifyingpredictions suggests that such features can help elementary teachers learn more about how to engage students incomplex science practices. In contrast, Mr. Decker’s struggle to understand how the educative features weredefining justification suggests that some teachers may need additional and more explicit support from educativefeatures or extra time to adapt suggestions in the curriculum materials for use in their classrooms. Thesefindings have implications for designing educative curriculum materials and considering how to supportteachers to use and adapt these materials within their classroom. The findings also point to the need for furtherresearch on how facilitating teachers’ engagement of students in justifying prediction may serve an entrée intothe authentic practice of scientific argumentation in elementary classrooms and encourage a greater focus onstudent thinking in teaching.Teacher Identity Development through an Afterschool Club: Science STARS asan Educative Learning Environment for Adaptive Science Teaching andLearningApril Luehmann, University of RochesterTeaching and learning experiences that foreground science culture and practices are rare in current scienceclassrooms, especially given the intense pressures of accountability tests and teacher accountability measures(Marx & Harris, 2006). This reality is especially problematic for preservice practitioners who are just beginningto form their fundamental beliefs and build their competencies related to effective and equitable, studentcentered science education. If our newest professionals have few opportunities to develop professionalappreciations for, understandings of, confidence with and commitments to the fundamental principles and goalsfor reform-based science teaching, it is highly unlikely that school science will soon become a place for youthto participate in the culture of science and thus build positive identities with science. This study seeks tounderstand ways learning-to-teach in informal spaces can be structured through a practice-based curriculum toprovide novice educators meaningful, ongoing and supported opportunities to marry their disciplinary expertisewith youth voices in service of the development of teachers’ own reform-based professional identity.Research FocusThe focus of this research examines ways in which preservice teachers took up and modified a structured,practice-focused science curriculum for urban girls in out-of-school settings called Science STARS. The coreSTARS curriculum outlines benchmark performance events (proposal writing, pilot study, community advisory,inquiry meta-map, and final public conference) and shared curricular goals across inquiry groups (author anempirically based science investigation or engineering design and develop girls’ positive identities in science).Though these events and goals serve as the skeletal structure of the club experience, teachers are explicitlycharged with and supported in completing the unit’s instructional design by marrying their personal disciplinaryexpertise with youth voices through twice-weekly lesson plans, implementation and reflection.In this study, welearn from the experiences of eight preservice science teachers working individually and collectively to developa professional identity through investigations co-developed with urban youth related to the physics of highheels, the science of baking a chocolate chip cookie, the chemistry of craving, and the science of classroomfocus. Given one’s own team of urban teen women for 20 consecutive sessions, each preservice teacher in acohort balances agency and accountability to plan, implement and evaluate Science STARS’ twice weekly clubmeetings toward a final public performance of long-term authentic inquiry. This study explores novice scienceICLS 2014 Proceedings1431© ISLSteacher learning as normative, core and personal identity development (Cobb & Hodge, 2011) evidenced inongoing (written and oral) self-critique and goal setting framed by the following two research questions:••How did teachers’ celebrations and self-critiques reveal their developing identities - normative (who Ishould be) as well as personal (who I am in this situation)?How did participants take up and modify the structural elements of a practice-based curriculum as theymoved with their “students” through a unit?Conceptual Framework and Study DesignScience teacher education programs like the one involved in this study advocate for a particular vision ofscience teaching and learning that is grounded in learning sciences research. Included in this vision is the coconstruction of a classroom culture that engages all participants in “productive disciplinary engagement” whereyouth and instructors intentionally problematize scientific ideas, youth are given authority to define and conductinquiries, participants (youth and adults) hold each other accountable to scientific (and other) standards, and allhave access to essential resources for this co-constructed work (Engle & Conant, 2002). I have arguedelsewhere that identity is an essential lens for science teacher learning as these professionals take up the chargeto enact changes required to nurture youth learning of the disciplinary practices (Luehmann, 2007). This teacherlearning as identity development is supported through opportunities to integrate one’s autobiography, considerand integrate experts’ voices with one’s own, reflect on practice connected to but separated from practice,engage in critical inquiry-based reflection and engage in community-based interactions (Darling-Hammond &Hammerness, 2005).STARS was designed to offer teacher-learners uncommon (and much needed) opportunities to do thiswork within the community of learners of their own cohort and university faculty in spaces separate from theinstitution of schooling, thus allowing for instructional experimentation and interpretation toward aims that arecomplementary to (but often missing from) school learning goals. Agency with accountability, fun with focus,and exploring with explanations are criteria for success made explicit by the program’s leadership team as wellas taken up in various ways by the preservice teachers.As part of a four-year ethnographic design-based research study looking at learning and identity workof teachers and youth in a structured, out-of-schooling learning context, this paper explicitly considers thebalance of agency and accountability for novice teachers in this semester-long project. Throughout the project,perspectives and experiences of all members of interrelated communities of learners (youth, teachers andresearchers) informed ongoing programmatic and research-based decisions.Sources of DataTwice weekly, across 20 weeks, each of eight preservice teachers authored lesson plans toward a finalperformance - a public engagement of youth’s and teachers’ “significant narrators” (Sfard & Prusak, 2005)centered on their scientific work of the semester. This instructional design, implementation and reflective workwas done with significant, ongoing support including participation in a graduate-level methods course, writtenfeedback on each lesson plan more than 24-hours before the lessons were taught, collaborative debriefing aftereach session, and weekly cohort-based video critique around a core science teaching practice (e.g. developingscientific explanations). Though a wide variety of data sources inform this study, primary data sources includewritten plans and reflections, as well as audio recordings of collaborative debriefs. Specifically, these datainclude:• Pre-service teachers’ written plans (weekly) and reflections (twice weekly) including practice-basedgoals, individual youth’s achievements, strengths and thoughts about future work, and evidence of fourkey components of productive disciplinary engagement (problematizing content, giving youthauthority, accountability standards and resources.)• Transcriptions of cohort-based oral daily debriefs (twice weekly) of perceived strengths and futuregoals from four science teachers and two university personnel.Preliminary findings reveal a disconnect for particular preservice teachers’ between their normative andpersonal identities with respect to the sophistication of their understandings of both science concepts andpractices. This disconnect between identities extended to related risk-taking, personally and instructionally.These same teachers differed from their peers throughout the semester in their abilities and willingness tocapitalize on structured aspects of STARS (proposal writing, protocol advisory) - expressing fear, frustration ordisinterest over curiosity and enthusiasm.Implications for Fostering Teacher Identity DevelopmentLearning to teach in out-of-schooling contexts not only offers teacher-learners ongoing safe and supportedopportunities to try, fail, succeed and learn (Gee, 2003) with significant university mentorship; theseICLS 2014 Proceedings1432© ISLSexperiences privilege and foreground a set of research-based proficiencies for teachers of science that arecomplementary to and missing from aspects of teaching and learning that are prioritized by state testing andteacher performance assessments. Included in these proficiencies are practices intentionally designed to nurtureurban youths’ science identities- a core aspect of equity (Cobb & Hodge, 2011). This study provides insightinto innovative ways to scaffold preservice teachers’ abilities with and commitments to facilitating productivedisciplinary practice within the culture of science.ReferencesAchieve, Inc. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards. National Academies Press, Washington, D.C..Bang, M., & Medin, D. (2010). Cultural processes in science education: Supporting the navigation of multipleepistemologies. Science Education, 94(6), 1008–1026.Bang, M., Warren, B., Rosebery, A. S., & Medin, D. (2012). Desettling expectations in science education.Human Development, 55(5-6), 302–318.Berkman, M. B., & Plutzer, E. (2011). Defeating creationism in the courtroom, but not in the classroom.Science, 331(6016), 404–405.Brown, M. W. (2009). The teacher-tool relationship: Theorizing the design and use of curriculum materials. InJ. T. Remillard, B. A. Herbel-Eisenmann, & G. M. Lloyd (Eds.), Mathematics Teachers at work:Connecting curriculum materials and classroom instruction. New York and London: Routledge.Calabrese, B. A. (2003). Teaching science for social justice. New York: Teachers College Press.Cobb, P., & Hodge, L. L. (2011). Culture, identity, and equity in the mathematics classroom. In Yackel, E.,Gravemeijer, K., Sfard, A., & Cobb, P. (Eds.), A Journey in Mathematics Education Research, 48 (pp.179-195). Springer Science+Business Media.Cobern, W. W. (1994). Comments and criticism. Point: Belief, understanding, and the teaching of evolution.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31(5), 583–590.Coburn, C. E., & Stein, M. K. (Eds.). (2010). Research and practice in education: Building alliances, bridgingthe divide. Rowman & Littlefield.Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15–42.Collins, H., & Pinch, T. (1993). The Golem: What everyone should know about science. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Creswell, J. W., & Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative inquiry & research design: Choosing among fiveapproaches. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.Darling-Hammond, L., & Hammerness, K. (2005). The design of teacher education programs. In L. DarlingHammond & J. Bransford (Eds.), Preparing teachers for a changing world: What teachers shouldlearn and be able to do. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Davis, E. A., & Krajcik, J. S. (2005). Designing educative curriculum materials to promote teacher learning.Educational Researcher, 34(3), 3–14.Davis, E. A., Palincsar, A. S., Arias, A. M., Bismack, A. S., Marulis, L. M., & Iwashyna, S. (in press).Designing educative curriculum materials: A theoretically and empirically driven process. HarvardEducational Review.Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educationalinquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(11), 5-8.Duschl, R. A., & Osborne, J. (2002). Supporting and promoting argumentation discourse in science education.Studies in Science Education, 38(1), 39–72.Edelson, D. C. (2002). Design research: What we learn when we engage in design. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 11(1), 105–121.Eilam, B. (2009). The secrets of successful veteran biology teachers: metaphors of evolution, regeneration, andadaptation. Teachers and Teaching: Theory and Practice, 15(4), 493–513.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20(4), 399-483.Evans, E. M., Legare, C. H., & Rosengren, K. S. (2010). Engaging Multiple Epistemologies: Implications forScience Education. In R. S. Taylor & M. Ferrari (Eds.), Epistemology and Science Education:Understanding the Evolution vs. Intelligent Design Controversy (pp. 111–139). New York: Routledge.Gee, J. P. (2011). How to do discourse analysis: A toolkit. New York: Routledge.Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York, NY: PalgraveMacmillan.Grossman, P. (2005) Research on pedagogical approaches in teacher education. In Cochran-Smith, M. &Zeichner, K. Studying teacher education: The report of the AERA panel on research and teachereducation, 425-476.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1433© ISLSHammer, D., & Elby, A. (2003). Tapping Epistemological Resources for Learning Physics. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 12(1), 53–90.Hawkins, J., & Pea, R. D. (1987). Tools for bridging the cultures of everyday and scientific thinking. Journalfor Research in Science Teaching, 24, 291-307.Herrenkohl, L. R., Palincsar, A. S., DeWater, L. S., & Kawasaki, K. (1999). Developing scientific communitiesin classrooms: A sociocognitive approach. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8(3-4), 451–493.Kelly, G. J., Carlsen, W. S., & Cunningham, C. M. (1993). Science education in sociocultural context:Perspectives from the sociology of science. Science Education, 77(2), 207–220.Kind, V. (2009). Pedagogical content knowledge in science education: Perspectives and potential for progress.Studies in Science Education, 45(2), 169–204.Langen, T. A. (2004). What is right with 'teaching the controversy'? Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 19(3), 114–114.Lave, J. (1987). Cognition in practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning. Cambridge University Press.Legare, C. H., Evans, E. M., Rosengren, K. S., & Harris, P. L. (2012). The Coexistence of Natural andSupernatural Explanations Across Cultures and Development. Child Development, 83(3), 779–793.Long, D. E. (2011). Evolution and religion in American education: An ethnography. Dordrecht: SpringerScience+Business Media.Luehmann, A. L. (2007). Identity development as a lens to science teacher preparation. Science Education,91(5), 822-839.Marx, R. W., & Harris, C. J. (2006). No Child Left Behind and science education: Opportunities, challenges,and risks. The Elementary School Journal 106(5).McNeill, K. L. (2009). Teachers’ use of curriculum to support students in writing scientific arguments to explainphenomena. Science Education, 93(2), 233–268.Metz, K. E. (2000). Young children’s inquiry in biology: Building the knowledge bases to empowerindependent inquiry. In Inquiry into inquiring learning and teaching in science (pp. 371–404).Washington, DC: American Association for the Advancement of Science.Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook (3rded.). Los Angeles: Sage Publications, Inc.Nasir, N. S., & Hand, V. M. (2006). Exploring sociocultural perspectives on race, culture, and learning. Reviewof Educational Research, 76(4), 449–475.National Research Council. (2011). A framework for K-12 science education. Washington, D. C.: NationalAcademies Press.National Science Resources Center. (2004). Science technology and children: Electric circuits (2nd ed.).Burlington, NC: Carolina Biological Supply Company.Nisbet, M. C. (2009). Framing science: A new paradigm in public engagement. Understanding science: Newagendas in science communication, 40–67.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For states, by states. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Palinkas, L. A., Aarons, G. A., Chorpita, B. F., Hoagwood, K., Landsverk, J., & Weisz, J. R. (2009). Culturalexchange and the implementation of evidence-based practices: Two case studies. Research on SocialWork Practice, 19(5), 602-612.Penuel, W. R., & Gallagher, L. P. (2009). Preparing teachers to design instruction for deep understanding inmiddle school earth science. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(4), 37–41.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.Penuel, W. R., & Fishman, B. J. (2012). Large-scale science education intervention research we can use.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 49(3), 281–304.Reiser, B. J., Spillane, J. P., Steinmuler, F., Sorsa, D., Carney, K., & Kyza, E. (2000). Investigating the mutualadaptation process in teachers' design of technology-infused curricula. In B.Fishman & S.O'ConnorDivelbiss (Eds.), Fourth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 342–349). Mahwah,NJ: Erlbaum.Remillard, J.T. (2005). Examining key concepts in research on teachers’ use of mathematics curricula. Reviewof Educational Research,75(2), 211-246.Rosenberg, S., Hammer, D., & Phelan, J. (2006). Multiple epistemological coherences in an eighth-gradediscussion of the rock cycle. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(2), 261–292.Sandoval, W. A. (2003). Conceptual and epistemic aspects of students' scientific explanations. The Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 12(1), 5–51.Sandoval, W. A., & Morrison, K. (2003). High school students' ideas about theories and theory change after abiological inquiry unit. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 40(4), 369–392.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1434© ISLSSandoval, W. A., & Reiser, B. J. (2004). Explanation-driven inquiry: Integrating conceptual and epistemicscaffolds for scientific inquiry. Science Education, 88(3), 345–372.Settlage, J., & Meadows, L. (2002). Standards-based reform and its unintended consequences: Implications forscience education within America's urban schools. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(2), 114127.Sfard, A., & Prusak, A. (2005). Telling identities: In search of an analytical tool for investigating learning as aculturally shaped activity. Educational Researcher, 34(4), 14-22.Saunders, K. J., & Rennie, L. J. (2011). A pedagogical model for ethical inquiry into socioscientific issues inscience. Research in Science Education, 43(1), 253–274.Shulman, L. (Ed.). Issues in education research: Problems and possibilities (pp. 399-409). San Francisco:Jossey-Bass Publishers.Shulman, L. S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2),4-14.Smith, M. U. (2009). Current Status of Research in Teaching and Learning Evolution: I.Philosophical/Epistemological Issues. Science & Education, 19(6-8), 523–538.Southerland, S. A., Sinatra, G. M., & Matthews, M. R. (2001). Belief, knowledge, and science education.Educational Psychology Review, 13(4), 325–351.Stake, R. E. (2000). Case studies. In Denzin, N. K. and Lincoln, Y.S., (Eds.) Handbook of Qualitative Research(pp.435-455). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, Inc.Verhey, S. D. (2005). The effect of engaging prior learning on student attitudes toward creationism andevolution. Bioscience, 55(11), 996–1003.Woolf, S. H. (2008). The meaning of translational research and why it matters. The Journal of the AmericanMedical Association, 299(2), 211-213.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1435© ISLS