Linked Reading and Writing Using Wikilinking:Promoting Knowledge Building within Technology-EnhancedClassroom Learning CommunitiesTamar Novik, Dani Ben-Zvi, and Yotam Hod, University of Haifa, Haifa, IsraelEmail: tamar.novik@edtech.haifa.ac.il, dbenzvi@univ.haifa.ac.il, yotamhod@edtech.haifa.ac.ilAbstract: This poster describes and analyzes linked reading and writing through the use ofWikilinks to promote socio-constructivist learning within a technology-enhanced classroomlearning community (TCLC). The course under research is a graduate course designed as aTCLC supported by a Wiki collaborative editing environment. We conduct a micro-analysisof data collected from the Wiki, classroom observations and interviews. We hope this studywill contribute to understanding of knowledge building and design of future TCLCs.Literature ReviewClassroom learning communities (Bielaczyc & Collins, 1999) may be supported by various social technologies.One such technology is an online Wiki collaborative editing environment. We are interested in learning aboutthe unique features of Wiki in supporting meaningful socio-constructivist learning, in particular, individual andshared knowledge construction using linked reading and writing. Earlier work describes and advocates the useof Wiki to support collaborative learning in graduate statistics courses (Ben-Zvi, 2007), and in a CSCL coursenamed “Challenges and Approaches to Technology-Enhanced Teaching and Learning” (CATELT) (Hod &Ben-Zvi, 2013; Konja & Ben-Zvi, 2008). CATELT is a Wiki-based blended course as a part of the EducationalTechnologies Graduate Program at the University of Haifa, Israel. The course was originally enacted in 2006and has been taking place annually since.The same Wiki learning environment has been used across all course generations (with somemodifications) thus enabling each generation to build upon and advance the shared knowledge of thetechnology-enhanced classroom learning community (TCLC). Students in CATELT are of differing levels ofexpertise, however, most are still novices with regards to CSCL and TCLCs. In this poster, we present the earlystages of research based on the 2013 iteration of CATELT, focusing on how using links within a Wiki promotessocio-constructivist learning.Learning and Knowledge Building“Learning is an internal, unobservable process that results in changes of belief, attitude, or skill. Knowledgebuilding, by contrast, results in the creation or modification of public knowledge—knowledge that lives ‘in theworld’ and is available to be worked on and used by other people” (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003, p. 1372).Cress and Kimmerle (2008) have developed a model to build on this distinction of learning and knowledgebuilding to better understand collaborative knowledge building with Wikis. Their model is based onLunhmann’s systemic approach and Piaget’s theory of equilibrium. Knowledge building is described as theprocesses within the Wiki social system, the cognitive processes of the learners, and the interplay between them.Two processes of individual learning: internal assimilation and internal accommodation, and two processes ofcollaborative knowledge building: external assimilation and external accommodation. The cognitive and socialsystems develop mutually, resulting in collaborative knowledge building.Linking and LearningThe constructivist paradigm sees learning as a process in which the learner is active in gathering and organizinginformation, processing it, connecting it to prior knowledge, providing interpretations and turning it frominformation to knowledge (Salomon, 2000). Information usually consists of distinct facts, concepts, ideas orprocedures, and knowledge is seen as a web of connections between pieces of information. To engage inmeaningful learning, a student must make links between pieces of information within one’s cognitive system.Wiki, the web application, is also a web of connections between Wiki pages that are wellinterconnected by hyperlinks, and in this way represents the constructivist view of knowledge. Wikis use asimplified syntax for linking pages within Wiki environments, called “Wikilinks”, which is different from thesyntax of external links, leading to web pages outside of the Wiki. When an internal Wikilink leads to a pagethat does not exist, it has a distinct visual appearance (e.g., red instead of blue). The Wiki promotes the creationof meaningful links between pages by making page link creation easy and intuitive. The Wiki also aims toinvolve the learner in an ongoing process of creation and collaboration that changes the website’s landscape(Leuf & Cunningham, 2001). These characteristics of Wiki make it a good choice as a learning platform inconstructivist learning environments, such as TCLC’s.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1549© ISLSIn CATELT, learners are constantly engaged in creating new pages, improving existing pages, andadding links between pages. While doing so, the process of connection-making can become visible as they makethese connections by adding Wikilinks. These Wikilinks are objects that can be reflected upon and used as abasis for deeper understanding. If we were to apply the model of Cress and Kimmerle (2008) to Wikilinking,then it can be viewed as an external process that can contribute directly to collaborative knowledge building.Similarly, browsing the Wiki can be viewed as an internal process of individual learning, which may indirectlycontribute to knowledge building at a later stage, once learners externalize their new understandings.Research QuestionsBased on the literature review and our deepening understanding of students’ Wikilinking in CATELT (seepreliminary findings), we propose to further study connected reading and writing. In particular, we plan to studythe connections between Wikilinking and knowledge building within CATELT. Our primary research questionis: How do students’ linking practices develop within a Wiki collaborative editing environment? We ask thefollowing sub-questions to answer our main question:• What are students’ Wikilinking practices?• What changes in Wikilinking practices do novices make as they gain expertise in a Wiki-basedcollaborative learning environment?• What do learners’ Wikilinks practices indicate about their knowledge-building?MethodologyData for this research is collected from classroom observations that are, video recorded, interviews withparticipants, and from students’ activities on the online Wiki collaborative editing environment. The data is thenanalyzed using a microgenetic method to uncover processes and developments relevant to answering theresearch questions (Granott & Parziale, 2002).Preliminary FindingsFrom analyzing initial data from CATELT 2013, a few interesting observations can be made about the waylearners used hyperlinks. First, novice learners hardly created new hyperlinks when they created pages in theWiki. Second, the links made were typically external and not Wikilinks. This fact may provide informationabout learners’ epistemologies, such as whether they consider the source of knowledge to be external, or createdwithin a learning community through extended iterative constructivist processes. Third, there was a noticeabledifference between the novices and the more expert learners in the TCLC. The latter made extensive use ofhyperlinks in their page, used mainly internal Wikilinks and even created new Wiki pages and linked to them.ReferencesBen-Zvi, D. (2007). Using Wiki to promote collaborative learning in statistics education. TechnologyInnovations in Statistics Education, 1(1).Bielaczyc, K., & Collins, A. (1999). Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of educationalpractice. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional design theories and models: A new paradigm ofinstructional theory (pp. 269-292). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Cress, U., & Kimmerle, J. (2008). A systemic and cognitive view on collaborative knowledge building withWikis. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3(2), 105-122.Granott, N., & Parziale, J. (Eds.). (2002). Microdevelopment: Transition processes in development andlearning. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Hod, Y., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2013). Productive subjective failure in a learning community: Process of explicatingand negotiating norms. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan and S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Proceedingsof the Tenth Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference (CSCL10), Volume II (pp. 269–270). Madison, WI, USA: University of Wisconsin.Konja, M., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2008). Collaborative learning processes in Wiki-based environments in highereducation. In Y. Eshet, A. Caspi and N. Geri (Eds.), Proceedings of the third annual Chais conferenceon instructional technologies research (pp. 165-170). Ra'anana: The Open University of Israel.Leuf, B., & Cunningham, W. (2001). The Wiki way: Quick collaboration on the Web. Boston, MA: AddisonWesley.Salomon, G. (2000). Technology and education in the age of information (In Hebrew). Haifa, Israel: ZmoraBitan publishers.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. In J. W. Guthrie (Ed.), Encyclopedia of education(2nd edition) (pp. 1370-1373). New York: Macmillan Reference.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1550© ISLS