Designing for Democracy in Education:Participatory Design and the Learning SciencesBetsy DiSalvo and Carl DiSalvo,Georgia Institute of Technology85 5th Street NE, Atlanta, GA 30332bdisalvo@cc.gatech.ed, carl.disalvo@lmc.gatech.eduAbstract: Within the learning sciences the concept of design is important in developinglearning environments and conducting research. We propose the field of learning sciencesseek better understandings of design from the field of design. In this paper we focus onParticipatory Design (PD), where goals for real world impact and democratic process resonatewith goals of the learning science. Our reflection on applying PD in the learning sciencessuggest a more democratic and effective methods for objectives such as: defining research andlearning goals, practices that consider multiple participants in design, practices forestablishing participatory living labs for design research, developing infrastructure forsustainable participation, and using PD as a way to seek transferable rather than generalizableoutcomes. Finally, we reflect on how PD might help us answer some of the issues withinterest driven learning that motivated our work.The effort of the last two-thirds of a century has been successful in building up the machineryof a democracy of mind. It has provided the ways and means for housing and equippingintelligence. What remains is that the thought-activity of the individual, whether teacher orstudent, be permitted and encouraged to take working possession of this machinery: tosubstitute its rightful lordship for an inherited servility. (Dewey, 1903, p 193-194)IntroductionThe goal of the learning sciences is to not only understand the phenomena of learning, but also to impact currentpractices to enable more effective learning. Part of this includes building things, putting them in the world,testing them, refining them and iterating. We propose that the learning sciences would benefit by reflecting onthis process by exploring the discipline of design and design research. One method within the discipline ofdesign, participatory design (PD), offers particular promise for the learning sciences because of aligned goalsfor engaging in in the real world applications and shared democratic values.Although the quote that started this paper is from 1903, we still, persistently, struggle to focuseducation on the learner, their self-motivation, identity, interest, and what they find personally meaningful,rather than simply meeting criteria of content acquisition. PD offers opportunities to uncover self-motivations,identities, and interests and to construct meaningful engagements by working together with participants to cocreating learning environments that meet the needs of the whole community that is engaged in the learningpractice.In this paper we will particularly reflect on challenges with interest driven learning that may beameliorated with PD. While this is not the only area of the learning sciences that can benefit from PD it offers anumber of concrete problems where PD methods may prove useful. Beyond interest based learning will exploresome other current uses of PD in the learning sciences. Then we will introduce participatory design, as it isunderstood in the field of design. And finally we will reflect on some concrete contributions that PD may offerthe learning sciences and how it could impact interest driven learning.Challenges in Designing Interest Driven LearningCurrently many learning activities work to build upon the content interest of the youth such as leveraging youngpeople’s interest in games (Y. B. Kafai, 2006), new media (Forte & Guzdial, 2004) or focus on maker culture(Yasmin B Kafai et al., 2013). A constructionist perspective suggests that learning is most effective when thelearner is constructing a personally meaningful product (Papert, 1993). By creating learning experiences aroundcontent interest or personal interest designers seek to increase motivation and persistence with learning(Schiefele, 1991). However designing and implementing effective interest driven learning activities poses manychallenges, including: What is interesting or personally meaningful to young people?; How do we balancelearning and interest in design?; and How can we create persistence with interest driven learning?ICLS 2014 Proceedings793© ISLSWhat Is Interesting or Personally Meaningful to Young People?Identifying what content is interesting or what activities are personally meaningful young people can be moredifficult than we assume. In some theories of interest it is suggested that interest is content-specific, and it isdirective to how a student is motivated to learn. This type of content interest can be short lived or enduring(Schiefele, 1991). In contrast, use of the phrase personally meaningful is frequently used in constructionisttheory to speak to interest that are more value driven. The ways that personally meaningful is used suggestsinterest that are not necessarily content specific, but have a value to young people as individuals, rather thansimply as cultural signifiers. Some ways that are suggested to create more personally meaningful experiencesare to offer learners a chance to present their work in a public or authentic manor (Shaffer & Resnick, 1999), tohave learners engage in narrative (Bruckman & Resnick, 1995), or to imagine future use of learning (Luckner &Nadler, 1997). These notions of creating motivation based upon the individual’s interest, weather contentinterest or personally meaningful, are more complex than simply looking at what is popular in youth culture andrequire an ability for learning scientist to discover with youth what content or values motivate learning.How Do We Balance Learning and Interest In Design?Even after we uncover the interest of youth it may be difficult to leverage that into a learning experience. Manyhave lamented the edutainment (Resnick, 2004) or gamification (Bogost, 2011) of learning that take popular or“fun” activities like current media or games and use them to candy coat learning. Edelson and Joseph (2004)outline a number of challenges in the logistics of basing learning responsive to individuals’ interest:First, it requires rare levels of internal motivation on the part of children. Second, it providesno mechanism for promoting learning objectives even marginally outside of learners’ interest.Finally, it requires impractical levels of resources and flexibility in serving the divergentinterest of individuals. (Edelson & Joseph, 2004, p 168)How Can We Create Persistence with Interest Driven Learning?While there are many promising interest driven learning experiences, it is challenging to engage in persistencewith learning based upon interest alone. Dewey suggest, in his book Interest and Effort in Education, thatexternal attempts may catch someone’s interest, but holding it and engaging learners in persistent effort andidentification with a topic area are much more difficult (Dewey, 1913). Edelson and Joeseph have addressedthis in their Interest-Driven Learning Design Framework (IDLDF) by focusing on what the learner will perceiveof having a future usefulness outlining five methods for sources of usefulness for designers to use in generatinginterest; Pleasure, Concern, Identity formation, Life goals, and Curiosity (Edelson & Joseph, 2004). However,this framework assumes that the designer or researcher can identify what is pleasurable or of concern to alearner, what activities do they attach to identity or life goals, or simply what makes a young learner curious.Design and Participation in the Learning SciencesThe learning sciences use the word design to describe many of the methods used to plan, develop, test, anditerate learning programs. In addition, there has recently been an emphasis on participatory culture inscholarship related to youth culture (Jenkins, 2009). While the use of these two terms has little directrelationship to participatory design (PD) as it is defined in the field of design, PD still closely aligns with anumber of efforts in the learning sciences.The Learning Sciences’ emphasis on approaches such as Learner Centered Design (LCD), Designbased Research (DbR) and Community Based Design Research suggest that the field is receptive to thinkingabout design critically. In LCD the learner is considered as central to the design process in terms ofconsideration rather than the teacher or facilitator (Soloway, Guzdial, & Hay, 1994). In DbR the emphasis is onusing design to test and building theories in the ever changing and confusing real world rather than a lab setting.To do so it is imperative to engage participants in real world settings and to gather their input in the process(Barab & Squire, 2004). In both of these approaches engage in aspects of prototyping, testing and iterating withparticipants makes them participatory by nature however neither would be engage in PD as it is understood inthe field of design.Community based design research as it has been realized by Bang and colleagues with indigenouscommunities grows from a tradition of Participatory Action Research (PAR) (Bang, Medin, Washinawatok, &Chapman, 2010). PAR and PD share a commitment to working with communities to articulate issues of concernand develop plans of action toward those concerns. But whereas PAR is grounded in inquiry, PD is grounded indesign itself. Community based design research could be seen as a bridge between these traditions and practices,but this line of thinking has yet to be developed in the learning sciences.There are few examples of participatory design in learning, for instance, Druin has lead a number ofefforts the focus on PD in research on and development of human computer interaction for young people(Druin, 2013). While the development of new technology in her work is not explicitly focused on learning,ICLS 2014 Proceedings794© ISLSbecause the participants are youth, frequently learning is a goal of the design process (Druin, 2002). Spikol,Milrad, Maldonado and Pea brought a strong Scandinavian influenced co-design approach to the developmentof mobile science collaborations (Spikol, Milrad, Maldonado, & Pea, 2009). DiSalvo has included elements ofparticipatory design methods in learning science research (B. DiSalvo, 2012) and in collaborative work with theCarnegie Mellon School of Design on the Click! Urban Adventure (B. DiSalvo, Parikh, & Crowley, 2006;Hughes, 2007).Background of Participatory DesignThe origins of participatory design can be traced to Scandinavia in the 1970 and 80s (Ehn 1993, Simonson andRoberston 2012). Early participatory design projects focused on the workplace and were often conducted inconjunction with unions. Participatory design was seen as an approach to ensure democratic agendas in labor,particularly as information technology and automation was introduced into work environments (Simonson andRoberston 2012). From the earliest days, then, participatory design has been at one and the same time a set ofmethods, a practice of engagement, and a commitment to a particular set of political values—all enacted throughdesign.Though still niche within design, over the past several decades participatory design has developed intoa rich domain of research and practice, extending far beyond its origins in Scandinavia. Workplaceenvironments are still central to participatory design, and in addition to the factory floor there are substantialcase studies across fields of work, most notably in healthcare Sjöberg, C., & Timpka, T. (1998) and ingovernment (Anthopoulos, L. G., Siozos, P., & Tsoukalas, I. A. (2007). But as information and communicationtechnologies have changed and expanded beyond the workplace, the field sites of participatory design havelikewise changed and expanded. Increasingly there are examples of community-based participatory design (C.DiSalvo, Clement, and Pipek, 2012) that continue with the methods, practices, and commitments ofparticipatory design but in new contexts, with new actors, and new purposes.For example, the in the city of Malmö, Sweden there are a series of “Living Labs” that have becomesites for a new mode of participatory design that engages residents in the open exploration of inventive creativeuses of information and communication technologies (Ehn 2008; Björgvinsson, E., Ehn, P., & Hillgren, P. A.2010). Notably, many of the residents that participate in these Living Lab programs are immigrants to Sweden.What these programs provide are opportunities to conceptualize and construct systems that function asexperiments in cultural expression, for example, sharing food practices or enabling DIY music production.Other examples of community-based participatory design explore engagement in technical practices such asenvironmental sensing and monitoring. Neighborhood Networks was one such project that brought togetherdesigners and neighborhood residents to explore the practices of environmental monitoring and prototype civicinterventions and alternate forms of expressing environmental data (C. DiSalvo, et al, 2008). What theNeighborhood Networks project demonstrates is an approach to participatory design that seeks to directlyengage the public in the activities of design, not simply for instrumental ends, but as a kind of co-operativestudy of the potential of information and communication technologies.Pelle Ehn, one of the early practitioners of participatory design, has articulated these changes inparticipatory design through a series of papers that explore what he refers to as “participation in design things.”(Ehn 2008) These so-called design things are the instantiation of contemporary controversies, such ascitizenship or pollution (to draw from the examples above). To participate in design things is to collaborate inboth an investigation of the conditions of these controversies (who counts as a citizen? what counts aspollution?) and also to explore how we might respond to these conditions—all through design.These new practices of participatory design are challenging to the participatory design community, andto the practices of professional design and design research more generally, because their purpose is often seen tobe obscure. Certainly, it is more nebulous that the early work of the field in which the relationship between thedesign of technical systems and the agency of workers was (or at was seen to be) direct and an unambiguousdemocratic concern. Still, for Ehn, and many others this mode of participatory design is an extension of thefoundational methods, practice of engagement, and commitment to democratic values. What is different is thatexperiences and events take the place of the technical systems. That is, rather than the end goal being the designof an operational system, the end goal is an experience or event that develops the agency of participants. Thismay involve a technical system, but more as a prop or process. The activities of participatory design becomeactivities of infrastructuring, that is providing the resources necessary to prompt, support, and sustain, thiscollective and collaborative inquiry through design (Ehn 2008; C. DiSalvo, Clement, and Pipek, 2012)).Arguably, learning is an implicit aspect of many of these new participatory design endeavors.Oftentimes there is an aspect of the projects that involves the development of technological literacy or fluency.In some cases, that is an explicit aspect of the project, in others, a by-product of the design activities. Forexample, in the Neighborhood Networks project participants learned about using simple sensors for monitoringvarious aspects of air quality and sound levels. In addition to learning the operation of devices, they alsoencountered the limitations of those devices in use. And too, they had to consider, and ultimately construct,ICLS 2014 Proceedings795© ISLSmethods of communicating that data in a public forum to their neighbors and other interested parties. To achievethis, the designers designed a series of activities and formats — the infrastructure of the project. Likewise withthe projects of the Malmö Living Labs — infrastructuing becomes central to these new modes of participatorydesign.Reflection on What PD Offers the Learning SciencesThere are a number of ways that the methods, practices for engagement and democratic goals of PD can providea useful framework for the use of design with in the learning sciences. In the following section we reflect uponthe use of PD in the learning sciences and envision five ways that PD methods, practices and goals can enhancethe research and output of the learning sciences. These ways include, democratic practices for defining researchand learning goals, practices that consider multiple participants in design, practices for establishing participatoryliving labs for design research, developing infrastructure for sustainable participation, and using PD as a way toseek transferable rather than generalizable outcomes. Finally, we will reflect on how PD might help us answersome of the issues with interest driven learning that motivated our work.Democratic Research and Learning GoalsFrequently in the learning sciences previous findings, policy, administrative directives, or the passions andinterest of the researcher drive our goals for research or learning outcomes. PD proposes a different approach tosetting research and learning goals. In PD it is the community or the participants one is working with thatestablish the goals of design. In practice much of the work of PD is in providing the tools and establishing adialogue with the participants so they can set the agenda for new design.This work is often playful or provocative activities that help participants feel empowered to share theirperspective no mater their level of expertise. Examples of activities are games that involve juxtaposition ofimages, mapping conceptual ideas on geographic maps, or getting participants to create reflective art or craftprojects. At times the outcomes reinforce our understanding or inspire new lines of inquiry, but at other timesthey can be difficult to interpret. It is important to note that interpretation of such activities frequently issecondary to establishing a dialogue and vocabulary between the designer and the participants. We see this workof PD to be beneficial to researchers because it helps break down knowledge, language and power barriers thatlimit the ability of participants to share in setting goals and design directions.Considering Multiple ParticipantsMany of the DbR classroom studies are designed with input from teachers; many constructionist programs aredesigned to give young people choices so they can direct their own learning. Both of these are reflective of PDpractices, yet traditional PD methods call for designers to identify all of the participants and those impacted bythe design. For example, in classroom environments teachers, students, and administrators would all beconsidered important participant in the design process, but other participants may also be included in the designprocess such as parents or policy makers. In informal learning environments, such as in designing museumexhibits the exhibit designers often consider the visitors from various backgrounds, such as experts, parents,youth, or the elderly. However there are other participants that may be overlooked in design, such as themuseum educators, guards, and maintenance staff. We have outlined a few participants that may be overlookedin the design process or whom have roles that can be reconsidered with the use of PD approaches.TeachersTeachers are frequently already included in the design of classroom interventions because of their expertise, butalso because they are necessary implementers – if teachers do not feel ownership and believe in an experimentalproject they will not implement it well. However, in other environments such as educational software,afterschool programs, or museums teachers are not frequently considered participants in the design process. Ifteachers are invited into early speculative design process about more informal learning environments they mayprovide new incites into connections and breakdowns in relationships to classroom learn.YouthInviting youth into defining their own interest would seem like a necessary first step in designing interest drivenlearning, but they are often not part of the design process for learning scientist in the formative stages of design.The use of more playful or provocative PD activities may give youth the self-efficacy, skills and vocabulary tocontribute to the design of interest driven learning. The structure outlined by the IDLDF identifies one way tostructure a learning environment for direction of seeking relevance from the learner rather than selectingrelevant topics based upon the designer or the teachers perspective (Edelson & Joseph, 2004). We suggest thatmethods and practices from PD will help learners contribute in more effective ways to the design processICLS 2014 Proceedings796© ISLSAdministrators, Policy Makers and MaintainersWith in a PD model administrators, policy makers, and those maintaining learning environments would beincluded in the design process. While these participants may not be considered users or learners in a LCDdesign approach their successful engagement with a learning activity or environment is as necessary as otherparticipants. By inviting them in, and giving them tools to dialogue with teachers, youth, and other communitymembers we can create a better understand between all participants and designs to bridge different goals.ParentsAmong youth one of the most influential factors in their life and their learning is parents, yet we frequently donot have their participation in the design of learning environments. Parents are resource providers, brokers andpartners in learning (Barron, Martin, Takeuchi, & Fithian, 2009) and also strongly influence value systems foryoung people that impact their learning (B. DiSalvo, Bruckman, Guzdial, & Mcklin, in press).Living LabResearch with some participant who are resistant to learning or who resent changes imposed from outsider canbe difficult. There is a distrust of outsiders, seeking to do “good” with in a community by imposing their ownvalues (Freire, 1970; Illich, 1971). Successful community based research requires a long-term commitment,with goal setting and co-designing with communities (Stoecker, 2005). One approach to developing a long-termrelationship with participants in education is the laboratory school model, where practice and research onlearning theories have meet (University of Chicago 2013). Other models in learning sciences, while notnecessarily build for this intention, have served as informal learning laboratory spaces such as the ComputerClubhouses (M. Resnick & Rusk, 1999). Existing living labs, such as a the Malmö Living Labs, suggest theyallow for a more democratic approach to research with diverse audiences, allowing goals and innovations toemerge from bottom-up, rather than imposed from on high (Bjrgvinsson, Ehn, & Hillgren, 2010).InfrastructuringWith a similar goal to living labs, infrastruturing is developing tools, such as Wikipeida, where theinfrastructure is designed for participation in shaping the knowledge output and the ongoing design of theenvironment (Ehn, 2008). Within the field of learning sciences one can see that the online Scratch 2.0programing community as infrastructure to encourage ongoing participation and, while perhaps not atformalized participatory infrastructure as Wikipedia, it does have strong participatory elements in the way theprogram is shaped (Resnick et al., 2009). We would encourage further reflection on infrastructure forparticipatory methods in the learning sciences as a way to design more sustainable participation in the design ofthe learning experience and therefore retaining the interest of learners.Transferability Rather than GeneralizalbityA concern with DbR is the generalizability of findings because research is conducted outside of the laboratoryin the highly variable classrooms or informal learning environments. By focusing on developing design methodsor principles, rather than research interventions, the learning sciences gains an approach to offers transferabledesign findings that can be used new contexts. For example, the issues of designing participatory learninginfrastructures addressed with a DbR approach could yield new theory and findings that can transfer to thedesign of other participatory learning infrastructures.PD and Designing Interest Driven LearningThe interest driven learning approach is often about creating a “hook” that will get kids interested in an activitywhere learning is embedded. Frequently these efforts result in candy coated stale and not valued learningactivities that might get immediate attention, but with little persistence. We outlined three questions in designinginterest driven learning that addressed this challenge and will wrap up our reflection with exploring how PD canhelp us answer these questions.What Is Interesting or Personally Meaningful to Young People?We see PD as a way of identifying what is an interesting context to the participants, but also as a way to uncovervalues of the whole community involved in learning. The engagement of the whole community involved withyoung peoples learning will help in shaping fundamental goals for the environment, the research and thelearning that will move a project beyond what is “cool” or “fun” and address issues of value to the learners andthe people that matter to them.How Do We Balance Learning and Interest in Design?By inviting all of the participants to the design table we can engage in design that helps bridge conflicting goals.This means not only talking youth about what is interesting to them but also engaging them in design activitiesICLS 2014 Proceedings797© ISLSabout what is not interesting and what they resist. By allowing the young people and the others in their learningcommunity to better understand motives we can design better interventions and address issues of contentcoverage that call into question what content needs to be covered and why.How Can We Create Persistence with Interest Driven Learning?By designing for participatory infrastructure learners and other community members will be engaged in ongoingdesign, with potential for learning environments that are flexible, democratic, and remain interesting.ConclusionThe learning science relies heavily on the concept of design in establishing methods and practices. It is time thatthe field looks outside of the common use of design terms to understand the methods and practices of the fieldof design. In this paper we found that reflection on the methods, practices and goals of participatory design wasfruitful in addressing issues in interest driven learning and in constructing new ways of looking at design in thelearning science. In future work the use of PD can be leveraged to develop design processes for interest drivendesign, moving past what is “cool” and making learning valuable to learners and their community.ReferencesAnthopoulos, L. G., Siozos, P., & Tsoukalas, I. A. (2007). Applying participatory design and collaboration indigital public services for discovering and re-designing e-Government services. GovernmentInformation Quarterly,24(2), 353-376.Bang, Megan, Medin, Douglas, Washinawatok, Karen, & Chapman, Shannon. (2010). Innovations in culturallybased science education through partnerships and community New Science of Learning (pp. 569-592):Springer.Barab, S., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-Based Research: Putting a Stake in the Ground. The Journal of TheLearning Sciences, 13(1), 1-14.Barron, B., Martin, C.K., Takeuchi, L., & Fithian, R. (2009). Parents as learning partners in the development oftechnological fluency. International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(2), 55-77.Björgvinsson, E., Ehn, P., & Hillgren, P. A. (2010, November). Participatory design and democratizinginnovation. In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference (pp. 41-50). ACM.Bogost, I. (2011). Gamification is bullshit. Ian Bogost.Bruckman, Amy, & Resnick, Mitchel. (1995). The MediaMOO Project Constructionism and ProfessionalCommunity. Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies, 1(1),94-109.Dewey, John. (1903). Democracy in education. The elementary school teacher, 4(4), 193-204.Dewey, John. (1913). Interest and effort in education: Houghton Mifflin Company.DiSalvo, B, Bruckman, A, Guzdial, M, & Mcklin, T. (in press). Saving face while geeking out: Navigatingmotivations of non-learners. Journal of Learning Sciences.DiSalvo, B. (2012). The Glitch Game Testers: The Design and Study of a Learning Environment forComputational Production with Young African American Males. (Ph.D.), Georgia Institute ofTechnology, Atlanta, GA.DiSalvo, B., Parikh, A., & Crowley, K. (2006). Developing the ultimate urban adventure game for middleschool girls. Women in Games.DiSalvo, C., Nourbakhsh, I., Holstius, D., Akin, A., & Louw, M. (2008, October). The Neighborhood Networksproject: a case study of critical engagement and creative expression through participatory design.InProceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008(pp. 41-50). IndianaUniversity.DiSalvo, C., Clement, A., & Pipek, V. (2012). Participatory Design For, With, and ByCommunities. International Handbook of Participatory Design. Simonsen, Jesper and Toni Robertson(Eds). Oxford: Routledge.(2012), 182-209.Druin, Allison. (2002). The role of children in the design of new technology. Behaviour and informationtechnology, 21(1), 1-25.Druin, Allison. (2013). Kid Design. Retrieved 11/8/2013, 2013, from http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/kiddesign/Edelson, Daniel C, & Joseph, Diana M. (2004). The interest-driven learning design framework: motivatinglearning through usefulness. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 6th international conference onLearning sciences.Ehn, P. (1993). Scandinavian design: On participation and skill. Participatory design: Principles and practices,41-77.ICLS 2014 Proceedings798© ISLSEhn, P. (2008, October). Participation in design things. In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference onParticipatory Design 2008 (pp. 92-101). Indiana University.Forte, A., & Guzdial, M. (2004). Computers for communication, not calculation: media as a motivation andcontext for learning. System Sciences, 2004. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Hawaii InternationalConference on, 96-105.Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York, NY: Herder and Herder.Hughes, K. (2007). Design to promote girls' agency through educational games: The Click! Urban adventure. InY. B. Kafai, C. Heeter, J. Denner & J. Sun (Eds.), Beyond Barbie and Mortal Kombat. Cambridge,MA: MIT Press.Illich, Ivan. (1971). Deschooling society. New York.Jenkins, H. (2009). Confronting the challenges of participatory culture: Media education for the 21st century:The MIT Press.Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Playing and Making Games for Learning: Instructionist and Constructionist Perspectivesfor Game Studies. Games and Culture, 1(1), 36.Kafai, Yasmin B, Searle, Kristin, Kaplan, Eliot, Fields, Deborah, Lee, Eunkyoung, & Lui, Debora. (2013).Cupcake cushions, scooby doo shirts, and soft boomboxes: e-textiles in high school to promotecomputational concepts, practices, and perceptions. Paper presented at the Proceeding of the 44thACM technical symposium on Computer science education.Luckner, John L, & Nadler, Reldan S. (1997). Processing the experience: Strategies to enhance and generalizelearning: ERIC.Papert, S. (1993). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York, NY: Basic Books.Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hern·ndez, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., . . . Silverman, B.(2009). Scratch: programming for all. Communications of the ACM, 52(11), 60-67.Resnick, M., & Rusk, N. (1999). 11. The Computer Clubhouse: Technological Fluency in the Inner City. Hightechnology and low-income communities: prospects for the positive use of advanced informationtechnology.Resnick, Mitchel. (2004). Edutainment? No thanks. I prefer playful learning. Associazione Civita Report onEdutainment, 14.Schiefele, Ulrich. (1991). Interest, learning, and motivation. Educational Psychologist, 26(3-4), 299-323.Shaffer, David Williamson, & Resnick, Mitchel. (1999). "Thick" authenticity: New media and authenticlearning. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 10(2), 195-215.Simonsen, J., & Robertson, T. (Eds.). (2012). Routledge handbook of participatory design. London, UK:Routledge.Sjöberg, C., & Timpka, T. (1998). Participatory design of information systems in health care. Journal of theAmerican Medical Informatics Association, 5(2), 177-183.Soloway, Elliot, Guzdial, Mark, & Hay, Kenneth E. (1994). Learner-centered design: The challenge for HCI inthe 21st century. interactions, 1(2), 36-48.Spikol, Daniel, Milrad, Marcelo, Maldonado, Heidy, & Pea, Roy. (2009). Integrating co-design practices intothe development of mobile science collaboratories. Paper presented at the Advanced LearningTechnologies, 2009. ICALT 2009. Ninth IEEE International Conference on Advanced LearningTechnologies.Stoecker, R. (2005). Research methods for community change: A project-based approach. Thousand Oaks, CA:Sage Publications, Inc.ICLS 2014 Proceedings799© ISLS