The Contours and Possibilities of Desire in Sociocultural Researchon Learning and BecomingIan Parker Renga, University of Colorado at Boulder, 249 UCB, Boulder, CO, 80309, ian.renga@colorado.eduAbstract: Though it has enhanced the learning sciences in numerous ways, socioculturaltheory has only somewhat dealt with desire. There is some indication that desire is learned insocial activity and informs identity development, which whets the appetite for conceptualelaboration. In this paper I draw from scholarship in philosophy, religious studies, andeducation to define and expand the concept. This work reveals how desire is directed,disciplined, and has consequences of critical concern. Conceptually, desire may also bepreferable to motivation for researching and appreciating what Dorothy Holland (1992)labeled the directive force evident in individuals’ participation within social activity systems. Irefer to my own work in teacher education to illustrate how the concept frames importantquestions and lines of inquiry for further research.When investigating learning within social activity systems, what are we to make of participants’ expressedyearnings, motivations, aspirations, pleasures, or even dreams? Indeed, I find that an intriguing aspect oflearning—desire—still remains underdeveloped from a sociocultural perspective. Compelling cases have beenmade that desire is both socially constructed (Holland, 1992) and part of identity formation (Packer &Goicoechea, 2000), suggesting that what we come to yearn for may profoundly influence the kind of people weare and are becoming, and what we do and how we see ourselves may shape the objects and intensity of ouryearning. As I propose in this paper, desire is a concept that can enrich our understanding of the relationshipbetween practice, identity, and telos. But just as much of our learning is ubiquitous and tends to go unnoticed(Lave, 2000), desire is likely present but unappreciated in daily activity. As I will reveal, desire is an evocativeconcept that can open up emotional terrain that tends to elude characterization. This may be its conceptual virtuein an era driven by post-Enlightenment rationality where feelings of desire are often treated as threats to orderand stability—irrational urges to be subordinated to reason and either mastered or driven into hiding, accessibleonly through religion or the arts.In this paper I argue that sociocultural theory has much to offer our understanding of desire, and theconcept may prove useful to research in the learning sciences. I begin by drawing upon scholarship inphilosophy, religious studies, education, and critical theory to illuminate some of desire’s conceptual contoursand dilemmas. From there I locate it within sociocultural theory and research. I conclude by briefly showinghow desire is informing the direction of my study of teacher learning within teacher preparation programs.Conceptual Roots and TheoriesThe term ‘desire’ comes from the Latin desiderare (to long for), which in turn comes from de sidere (of thestars) (Hollis, 2010). It would appear that our language of yearning has roots in early travelers’ use of the starsto mark distance and direction. Long before Facebook or Google Maps, a glance upward to the cosmos couldstir wanderlust or remind weary travelers of the comforts of far off homelands. The ancients also ascribed divinemeaning to the stars, projecting onto them mythic ideals and purposes for human activity. While our mythicimagination may have waned in modern times (Armstrong, 2009), we persist in conjuring up and ferventlychasing our dreams and ideals. These dreams serve an important function as a means for playing out potentialfutures that have yet to materialize (Simon, 1992). They situate the motion of life between points past andfuture, actual and possible, thereby establishing various trajectories of being (Cole, 1998; Polman & Miller,2010). They also draw attention to our relative velocity and what we require to keep moving or keep up withothers. Indeed, talking with our fellow travelers, we might wonder how our desires compare and why we findcertain futures more compelling than others.Throughout history philosophers have sought to understand desire and its function in the activity ofdaily life. Characterizing this large body of work, Timothy Schroeder (2009) suggests that desire isfundamentally a state of mind concerned with fulfilling a want or perceived need. He identifies several majortheoretical families that have formed around various interpretations of desire’s presence and purpose in ourlives. Action-based theories define desire as dispositional, or the strength of one’s inclination to take whateveraction is believed will fulfill one’s yearning. This tends to shortchange emotional features of having and actingon desire, which has given rise to pleasure-based theories focusing on the compulsion to seek fulfillment andsatisfaction. Other philosophers have argued that this elevates hedonistic impulses and is dismissive of thehuman propensity for moral evaluation. They maintain that desire is good-based, which follows from theSocratic notion that people desire that which they think is good. Still others prefer attention-based theories ofdesire based on the tendency for individuals to fixate on some inclination around which they construct reasonsICLS 2014 Proceedings	  511© ISLSto satiate the fixation. Finally, holistic theories of desire incorporate some admixture of pleasure, morality, andattention, which are seen as overlapping and often inseparable.Schroeder also highlights additional dilemmas that appear in theoretical discussions of desire. One ismaking sense of multiple desires. Indeed, he notes that humans have many different desires and expressions ofdesire that feed into one another. Imagine a person standing on the shore of a cool lake on a hot day: that personcan feel the urge to jump into the lake (a desire for pleasure) and also want to be the kind of person who acts onsuch impulses (a desire for recognition). Another challenge is what to make of relative intensity, or situationswhere a desire is erratically enacted despite its consistent and unwavering presences in a person’s life. Forexample, teachers often have bad teaching days, but that does not necessarily signal a faltering desire to ensuretheir students’ welfare. Also, certain desires may increase or decrease in intensity with respect to circumstanceand social conditions.Schroeder (2004) helpfully distills these theories into three major components that he argues should beexamined in any exploration of desire: pleasure (and displeasure), motivation (and inhibition), and reward (andpunishment). Pleasure is evident in a sense of satisfaction, specifically the experience of having ourexpectations at least met, and preferably exceeded, within a given situation. Motivation is the conscious focus ongoal attainment—the fixation on a particular outcome and how persistent a person is to attain it. And reward isthe feedback or stimulus received in response to activity. As I interpret them, each component evokes a suite ofreflective questions:• Pleasure: What do I require to be satisfied? What do I enjoy about an activity I am engagedin? How does it compare to my expectations?• Motivation: What preoccupies my mind? What am I after? Why do I choose to take certainactions? What do I hope to accomplish through those actions?• Reward: How did it feel to take certain actions? What feedback keeps me pursuing my goals?Why do I avoid some situations but seek out others?How we answer these questions may reveal how our desires permeate, shape, and direct who we are andwhat we do. Schroeder observes that the components overlap and inform one another. In fact, he argues thatreward is underappreciated in contemporary discussions of desire because it is seen as invoking the ghost ofbehaviorism. And yet, he contends that acknowledging rewards and feedback is crucial for understanding howdesire is learned, and he points to recent neurobiology research on the brain’s reward centers to support hisclaim. Whether or not one buys the biological argument (for a dissenting view, see Latham, 2006), Schroeder’ssuggestions that desire is both experienced bodily and is learned have important implications for how theconcept is framed and studied, especially when examined through critical and sociocultural lenses. Beforetaking up this examination, I want to offer additional conceptual insights from the humanities.Desire as Directed and DisciplinedDiscussions of desire in the humanities tend to highlight three key conceptual features: 1) the object towardwhich desire is directed, 2) the ways in which desire is focused and disciplined, and 3) the intended andunintended consequences of enacting desire. For example, in his assessment of whether or not sports developcharacter, Mark Edmundson (2013) refers to Plato’s notion that human’s possess an inherent desire for glorythat necessitates reason to control it. Edmundson concedes that sports can offer an outlet for this desire bypermitting a disciplined pursuit of the object—glory—without violating the rule of law and moral sensibilities.But he argues that the positive consequences of playing sports are debatable, as deeper and more insidiousdesires for power and individual recognition often lie hidden beneath the cloak of concern for characterdevelopment.Religious scholars and writers inquiring into the human condition have much to say on the nature ofdesire. In his fourth century text, Confessions, St. Augustine chronicles his efforts to discipline and direct hisdesire for pleasure. He recalls the sexual exploits of his youth and how he eventually tired of his insatiableappetites and turned to God for comfort and direction. Exploring this text, Margaret Miles (1992) observes howAugustine presents a contradictory framing of pleasure. On the one hand he sees pleasure as something worthmaximizing through sustained intensity. But on the other he admits that perpetual bliss is impossible, which hisown story makes clear. Augustine resolves the contradiction by vowing to only desire God, in whom he believespleasure is readily and endlessly available without the consequences of guilt or hangovers. He thereby finds anobject for his desire that is suitably beyond his comprehension yet compelling enough to warrant his devotion.Thoreau (1854/2001) reaches a similar conclusion in Walden while pondering his experiences in nature. Heexpresses a firm Puritanical belief that hard work develops divine character, suggesting that such character ismore easily maintained when the body is too exhausted to be lustful. Like Augustine, he argues that desire mustbe controlled and directed toward a higher ideal, a purity of being focused on an incomprehensible naturalbeauty. He worries that his more earthly desires will spoil his devotion to nature and its Creator. For Thoreau thesolution is clear: turn one’s attention to God so “the spirit can for the time control every member and function ofthe body, and transmute what in form is the grossest sensuality into purity and devotion” (p. 514).ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  512© ISLSThe challenge for contemporary devotees is disciplining one’s desire within a consumer-driven culture.For Vincent Miller (2004) “[i]t is clear that our desires are shaped, encouraged, and manipulated” by our dailyparticipation in a society fixated on consuming (p. 109). He sees the formation of this desire as happeningthrough two devices: misdirection and seduction. Misdirection is a tactic whereby individuals becomeconvinced that they can fulfill their innermost desires—those reflecting deeply held values and beliefs—throughtheir consumptive activity. Savvy merchants cleverly associate the purchase of their products with popularcauses, such as cancer research and environmentalism. Seduction keeps individuals in a state of perpetualhunger and convinces them that the ideal state of being is one of constant dissatisfaction. Elaborating this point,William Cavanaugh (2008) observes that consumer culture focuses attention on choice and cultivates a sense ofpleasure in the yearning for things. Happiness is having options, leafing through catalogues and combingthrough websites. The moment of decision—of actual consumption—feels oddly unsatisfying, thereby initiatingthe drive to pursue other desires and choices.Miller contends that seduction and misdirection generate a stunted and dispersed form of desire thatpromises much but offers little. He argues that from childhood onward we learn to repress our desires andengage in consumptive activity to relieve the “ocean of desire seething beneath what can be directly said ordemanded” (p. 125). But consuming fails to address the depths of that ocean. It merely skims the surface,converting the rich cultural textures of human activity and meaning into comparable units—commodities—thatdiminish their possible effects on our lives. Such cultural commodification leads to a shallow appropriation ofcultural and spiritual symbols, languages, and identities. More significantly, it deludes individuals into believingthat symbolic possession can bring about cultural and spiritual ideals that require thoughtful and sustained work.When symbolic consumption inevitably fails to prove transformative, people come to see such ideals asillusions, and visions of happiness, peace, justice, and the fullness of God are written off as utopian fantasies.The yearning for such ideals thus wanes, and the resulting vacuum is filled with a “closed, disenchanteduniverse… of technological planning and pragmatic rationality in which expectation plays no role” (p. 131).Living is thereby reduced to seemingly endless oscillations between cool, levelheaded practicality and hot,impulsive consumer indulgence. Miller contends that breaking this pattern and realizing broader ideals requiresvocational practice within communities that nurture a “commitment to a particular form of life and to thetransformation of the self in order to sustain that commitment” (p. 137).James Smith (2009) suggests that Christian educators interested in cultivating vocation should focusless on transmitting a worldview and more on directing desire. To this end he poses the following questions:What if education … is not primarily about the absorption of ideas and information, but aboutthe formation of the hearts and desires? … What if education was primarily concerned withshaping our hopes and passions—our visions of “the good life”—and not merely about thedissemination of data and information as inputs to our thinking? What if the primary work ofeducation was the transforming of our imagination rather than the saturation of our intellect?And what if this had as much to do with our bodies as with our minds? (p. 18)As with sociocultural learning theorists, Smith challenges the view that an education is primarily a cerebralaffair—a matter of belief, view, or knowledge. He also places a premium on learning environments and sees astrong connection between teaching and ontology, noting how “behind every constellation of educationalpractices is a set of assumptions about the nature of human persons—about the kinds of creatures we are” (p.28).Secular scholars of education have similarly found purchase in linking teaching to desired futures andways of being. Jacqueline Cossentino (2005, 2006) has documented how the Montessori teaching tradition hasdeep roots in a specific cosmic vision of the good life that gives meaning and purpose to its practices andpractitioners. And Jim Garrison (1997) notes how Dewey framed teaching as fundamentally driven byeducational commitments to particular values and visions of society. Garrison contends that great teachingrequires educators to directly engage these visions and the often intensely felt passions they foment. This is why,he observes, the ancient Greeks saw romantic desire—eros—as vitally important to education. What stars tofollow and why were considered significant matters because “[w]e become what we love. Our destiny is in ourdesires, yet what we seek to possess soon comes to possess us in thought, feeling, and action” (p. xiii).Dan Liston (2004) sees such passion as the lure of learning—eros manifested in a desire to experiencethe awe and wonder of the ‘grace of great things’. For teachers this desire can find expression in efforts toconnect children to the world and the various ways it can be understood and experienced. Christine Downing(2009) gives voice to this sentiment when she says of her own teaching,…I want to communicate my love—not exactly of my students, though not exactly not of mystudents—but more explicitly my love of the books, the authors, the ways of looking at theworld that have moved and inspired me, and my love of the process of inquiry that brought meICLS 2014 Proceedings	  513© ISLSto those books, those writers; I want to encourage my students to find what might move themin the same way—and come to love looking for it. (italics in original, p. 153)Mark Edmundson (2005) expresses a similar fondness for books and their usefulness for deciding how and whyto live one’s life in particular ways. By situating the activity of reading within a dynamic exchange between loveand identity, both Downing and Edmundson acknowledge the power of narrative to inform passion and purpose.Liston (2004) suggests that without desire teaching and learning are lifeless endeavors, and students are unlikelyto inherit a love of learning. He observes that teachers who build their practice upon a love of learning maintaina heartfelt connection to their work. They come to appreciate how teaching can be an artful instruction not onlyin ways to acquire knowledge but also in how to love and cherish that knowledge in particular ways.Despite its promise, an engagement with passionate desire is arguably rare in contemporary U.S.schools. Jennifer Logue (2012) suggests that this is because rosy portrayals of educational eros tend to overlookthe darker side of desire. Less discussed is how desire can drive people to defensiveness and obsessive,hysterical behavior. Indeed, in teaching, unfulfilled desire can be deeply disheartening (Liston, 2000). Loguesuggests that educational institutions are designed to prevent desire’s ill effects. They require order andpredictability to function smoothly, which breeds a preference for more sanitized and measurable forms oflearning. Erotic desire threatens this order as a force that upends certainties while feeding radical possibilities.According to Logue, “The unruly, unpredictable, and unconscious aspects of eros render the school oruniversity’s attempt to mold and monitor a knowable, disembodied self, a self measured by predetermined skillsand predictable outcomes, impossible” (p. 73). As such, eros is often confined or scrubbed from formaleducational settings, though not without costs.Desire through a Critical LensWithin the activities of directing, disciplining, and instructing desire are issues of privilege and power thatwarrant critical interrogation. I will briefly offer a feminist examination of desire, though critical race and classanalyses would be illuminating and are certainly necessary to appreciate the lived experiences of the concept.Judith Butler (2004) maintains that our desires are interwoven with the norms of enduring gendernarratives. Because these narratives originate externally to us, we can assume that the desires coded within themalso originate externally. Miles (1992) similarly observes how “desire is always marked by the particularities ofindividual lives, by socially constructed gender assumptions, expectations, and roles, by social location,institutional affiliation, class, and race” (p. 135). She points out that Augustine’s unchecked privilege as aheterosexual male leads him to define desire as something both egocentric and ravenous, which in turn leadshim to prescribe the authoritative disciplining of religious practice. Miles observes how, in his writing,Augustine builds excitement with tantalizing and titillating details only to switch suddenly into chastisement andthe necessity of finding fulfillment in God. He thus frames a choice between desiring earthly objects anddesiring God—a choice that was and arguably still is a privilege of men, whose desires are publicallysanctioned. This indulgence/repentance tension is problematic from a critical perspective in that it permits men,and those in privileged positions of power more generally, to excuse their excesses and establish their pleasureas something only God has the authority judge.Despite these critiques, Miles finds it unfair to hold Augustine accountable for assumptions andtransgressions exceeding the social consciousness of his time, especially if it leads to the outright rejection of hiswork. For Miles, Confessions still offers keen and arguably timeless insights about the human condition. Evenso, she advises greater caution when reading it than has been typical of religious scholarship over the centuries.This body of work has helped establish the dominant norms and conditions for gendered identity, with men asthe desiring beings and women the objects of their desire. Miles notes the conspicuous absence of the voices ofwomen in Augustine’s text; without these perspectives we cannot fully appreciate the constructive momentsbetween friends and lovers where desire is formed. Nor can we understand what the women made of thesituation. How did they participate in a masculine narrative where women are considered pure, their earthlydesires severely limited and controlled? We can reasonably assume that it was difficult, and probably joyless.Even today young women are denied a publically acceptable means for exploring embodied desire and craftingcertain identities and possible futures (Fine & McClelland, 2006; Tolman, 2012). According to Butler (2004),any woman or person identifying as gay, lesbian, or transgender who challenges these arrangements is forced toaskIf I desire in certain ways, will I be able to live? Will there be a place in my life, and will it berecognizable to the others upon whom I depend for social existence? (p. 3)Butler maintains that both desire and social norms are important features of human thriving andcivility. As such, the conscientious resistor should articulate a new vision of being and desire and the necessaryconditions for its enactment. According to Michelle Fine and Sara McClelland (2006), this requires a moreICLS 2014 Proceedings	  514© ISLSholistic view of desire—a “thick desire”—that “situates sexual well being within structural contexts that enableeconomic, educational, social, and psychological health” (p. 301). The liberalization of the modern economy,with its promise of personal freedom and self-formation, would seem more conducive to a thicker form ofcritical, embodied desire. While arguably an improvement, Miller (2004), evoking Foucault, contends that theliberal shift is somewhat illusory, as the injustice of confessional monitoring has given way to the injustice ofself-monitoring. In a liberal society, individuals are expected to proclaim their desires and accept fullresponsibility for their misdirected desires. Significantly, this leaves externalities and social conditions out ofthe conversation. But such conditions are indeed present and serve as crucial resources for constructing desire,which a sociocultural lens helpfully spotlights.Desire from a Sociocultural PerspectiveSociocultural theory dissolves firm distinctions between individuals and social conditions. Through itsdevelopment, the theory has challenged the prevailing model of learning as acquisition and transfer (Sfard,1998; Rogoff, 1997; Packer, 2001) giving way to conceptions of learning as social activity situated withincommunities (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998), undertaken in complex figured worlds (Holland, LachiotteJr., Skinner, & Cain, 1998), profoundly influenced by history and culture (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003), andultimately organized toward possible futures and identities (Cole, 1998; O’Connor & Allen, 2010; Polman &Miller, 2010). In formal educational settings, researchers have applied the theory to upend problematic views ofstudents, teaching, and learning. Hand-in-hand with a postmodern, critical perspective, sociocultural theory hasdeveloped with a desired outcome (telos) in mind of a just and equitable society (O’Connor & Penuel, 2010).By treating individuals as situated within and constitutive of social conditions, the theory offers ampleconceptual groundwork for observing and interpreting how desire takes shape and is learned. It provides helpfultools for empirically analyzing questions such as How do our desires form?; How do we come to prioritize some‘objects’ of desire, including some imagined futures, over others?; and How do we come to understand andpursue our desires in certain ways? I would point out that these questions and their underlying concerns havebeen raised in the sociocultural literature by the mention of a drive to take action or participate in communitiesof practice. In the first paragraph of their seminal text, Lave & Wenger (1991) refer to the novice’s “intentionsto learn” as initiating their engagement with a particular community of practice (italics mine; p. 29). AndBarbara Rogoff (1997) suggests that evidence of learning can include a person’s “changing purposes for beinginvolved, commitment to the endeavor, and trust of unknown aspects of it (including its future)” (p. 280). Wemight therefore ask how and in what ways these intentions and purposes form and influence participation withinsocial activity systems.Doing so from a socioculturally informed perspective provides conceptual inroads into aspects oflearning that have been predominantly defined by cognitive psychology in terms of motivation, which is treatedas something that resides within individuals (cf., Stipek, 1993) to be altered through intrinsic or extrinsic means(cf., Ginsberg, 2005; Middleton, 1995). In their sociocultural take on student motivation, Robert Rueda and LuisMoll (1994) challenge this view and define motivation as situated in social interactions within specific culturalcontexts. They note how this reframing permits a more dynamic understanding of individual studentparticipation and its relationship to the (de)motivating conditions of classrooms. They argue that such a viewcan aide teachers in personalizing the classroom learning experience such that it cultivates students’motivations.Instead of an exclusive focus on motivation, Dorothy Holland (1992) opts to study desire in herinvestigation of college women’s pursuit of romance. She refers to desire as a directive force that is not naturalbut cultural, something learned through social participation. Holland maintains that “thoughts and feeling, willand motivation, are formed as the individual develops” (italics in original, p. 63). This formation isaccomplished through social activity and engagement with cultural resources, and it serves to direct anddiscipline one’s thoughts and feelings in particular ways for particular purposes. For the women she studied thisinvolved learning various discursive moves from peers to deflect unwanted attentions from some suitors whileeliciting attentions from others. Holland observed how the resulting world of romance was formed andreinforced by the women’s behavior, with rules for participation and penalties for violations. Living within thisworld directed the women toward particular outcomes and a particular vision of the good life. Through theirparticipation in this world, the women came to forge an identity rooted in some desired futures but not others,with potentially harmful implications for their academic participation and professional opportunities in collegeand beyond (Holland & Eisenhart, 1990).Holland’s decision to focus on desire instead of motivation is noteworthy. Of course, evoking romanticlove—eros—invites entry into a family of concepts that includes passion and desire. Significantly, though,Holland did not treat romance as a factor affecting some inherent conception of motivation, but rather positionedromance as an organizing object giving shape and purpose to the women’s social activity and identities. Studiesof motivation, even when socioculturally framed, tend to take motivation rather than its various targets as theprimary focus of inquiry. Holland organizes her study instead around understanding the object of the women’sICLS 2014 Proceedings	  515© ISLSinterest—romance—and how it takes hold within a social activity system. Thus, so-called individual motivationis not only situated socially, it is situated within the future-oriented, future-creating character of participationwithin communities. As I see it, acknowledging this shifts the focus away from assessing individuals’ relativemotivational strength and draws attention to conflicts in desired future outcomes, such as achieving romanticfulfillment versus a high-status professional identity. Those futures, while crafted through and from theexperiences of sociocultural, embodied activity, exist in the imagination. And, as Schroeder (2004) points out, itis possible for people to do nothing to realize imagined futures—to show no clear signs of being motivated—yetstill desire them.Holland’s sociocultural treatment of desire arguably passes on the modernist tendency to presumefoundational origins of human activity in favor of a postmodern understanding of activity and its drivers associally constructed with respect to imagined futures (Packer, 2000). Doing so offers insights into objects ofsociopolitical importance formed within and across communities, like identity (Urrieta Jr., 2007). Martin Packerand Jessie Goicoechea (2000) assert that identity is a construct formed through social participation “inrelationships of recognition and desire” (p. 228). They note how participation is complicated by power, politics,and the fact that people tend to move between communities. They maintain that, as individuals try to make senseof this movement and their participation, a desire for recognition emerges and drives the quest for a meaningfulidentity. As they explain, this “desire directed toward another person … seeks recognition that gives not justconsciousness of self but self-consciousness” (p. 233). Thus, we do more than form an identity in relationship toothers; we form the desire for an identity and the desire that others acknowledge it.	  Framing a Research AgendaThrough a sociocultural framework, desire can invigorate familiar conceptual terrain by highlighting thedirection of participation, practice, and identity formation. It does so by invoking the why questions encodedwithin social activity systems: Why is action taken? Why are some goals elevated over others? Why doindividuals seek to become certain kinds of people? It encourages inquiries into the imagined futures anddirections, whether intended or not, of social activity and how individuals are helping to establish those futuresand directions and ensure that progress is made. It also permits us to take seriously not just emotions, butexperiences of pleasure.In my research on teacher education I am using the conceptual language of desire to understand teacherlearning as framed by reformers arguments for what works in schools and who should be tapped to do the work.In the U.S. there is a growing call for a practice-based approach to teacher training and assessment thatreformers believe will bolster the teaching profession by grounding it in research-supported best practices(Zeichner, 2012). There has been a concurrent push to identify inherent traits and desires for the work ofteaching to guide teacher selection and training (Richardson & Watt, 2006; Watt & Richardson, 2008). To thisend, personality instruments like the TeacherFit Inventory are being used to identify teaching applicants by howwell their characteristics match those considered necessary for the work. Some practice-based reformers contendthat such efforts are misguided and distract from the work of identifying effective teaching practices (Hiebert &Morris, 2012). They maintain that nobody is born a teacher and the practices of effective teaching must belearned (Ball & Forzani, 2009). Of course, the prospective teacher must be somebody who is willing to learnthose practices and accept certain definitions of effective. Stated differently, they need to be comfortable withdeveloping particular desires for the work of teaching.Indeed, seen through the lens of desire, any educational reform proposal can be interpreted as an effortto set the conditions for job satisfaction, directing teachers’ attention to particular goals for their work andestablishing what counts as worthwhile feedback. That some teachers may be turned off by these conditionswhile others find them invigorating could be interpreted as a matter of fit between individuals and the work ofteaching. But seeing such reactions as a matter of differing desires for teaching—for what it is, does, and shouldaccomplish—encourages a more nuanced inquiry into those conditions and what drives and sustains them. Itbegs questions such as: Why are certain experiences of job satisfaction considered more acceptable than others?Why are some goals deemed more worthy of pursuit than others? Why are some kinds of feedback offered overothers? Pointing out purported school realities to answer such questions may be inadequate. Cleo Cherryholmes(1992), referring to Dewey’s pragmatic critique of a fixed social reality, notes, “Not everything that works isdesirable, not every belief that is ‘true’ is to be acted upon” (p. 14). The error may be thinking that “true beliefs”about teaching only reflect school realities rather than construct them (Berger & Luckmann, 1966/1991). As aconsequence, what is desired of teaching may become limited by self-fulfilling ideas about what it canaccomplish, while dreams of what it could (or should) accomplish are cast aside and left unexplored.In an effort to understand desire in teacher learning, I am currently employing grounded theorymethodology (Charmaz, 1995; Charmaz & Belgrave, 2003) to investigate beginning teachers’ participationwithin their teacher education programs. Similar to Holland (1992), I want to understand how certain objects ofdesire, including imagined futures, emerge from and give shape to a social activity system and individuals’participation within it. I am curious to know what the beginning teachers yearn for—what they come to desireICLS 2014 Proceedings	  516© ISLSand how they pursue their desires—as they interact with one another, teach children, talk with mentors, receivefeedback, and engage programmatic practices, norms, and rituals.ConclusionIn this paper I have merely scratched the surface of the many ways desire is discussed and can illuminate thetransformative texture of learning. To explore its conceptual features I have turned to humanities scholarshipconcerned with desire’s role in crafting the kinds of people we are and are becoming. I have also brought in acritical view to interrogate a particular narrative of desire that limits its expression and enactment. I havesuggested that desire is often overlooked in daily activity, its visibility likely requiring engagement with theimagination and the wishes, dreams, and futures developed therein. Just as sociocultural theorists haveconstructed definitions of learning for specific purposes, I want to establish desire as a conceptual constructbased on sociocultural assumptions about the nature of human activity such that various expressions andexperiences of yearning are analytically accessible in research on teacher learning. Humanities scholarship andstudies such as Holland’s have laid the groundwork for investigating desire’s presence and consequences withinspecific contexts of social activity, like teaching and teacher education. This paper represents a next step inconceptualizing desire, and empirical research is needed to further establish its contours and analytic usefulnesswithin the learning sciences.ReferencesArmstrong, K. (2010). The case for God. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.Ball, D. & Forzani, F. (2009). The work of teaching and the challenge for teacher education. Journal of TeacherEducation, 60(5), 497-511.Berger, P.L., & Luckmann, T. (1966/1991). The social construction of reality: A treatise in the sociology ofknowledge (No. 10). London, UK: Penguin.Butler, J. (2004). Undoing gender. New York: Routledge.Cavanaugh, W.T. (2008). Being consumed: Economics and Christian desire. Grand Rapids, MI: EerdmansPublishing.Charmaz, K. (1995). Grounded theory: Rethinking methods in psychology. In J.A. Smith, R. Harré, and L.vanLangenhove (Eds.) Rethinking methods in psychology. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.Charmaz, K., & Belgrave, L. (2003). Qualitative interviewing and grounded theory analysis. In J.F. Gubrium,J.A. Holstein, A.B. Marvasti, and K.D. McKinney (Eds.) The SAGE handbook of interview research:The complexity of the craft. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.Cherryholmes, C.H. (1992). Notes on pragmatism and scientific realism. Educational researcher, 21(6), 13-17.Cole, M. (1998). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Cossentino, J.M. (2005). Ritualizing expertise: A non-Montessorian view of the Montessori method. AmericanJournal of Education, 111(2), 211-244.Cossentino, J.M. (2006). Big work: goodness, vocation, and engagement in the Montessori method. CurriculumInquiry, 36(1), 63-92.Downing, C. (2009). The eros of teaching. In Slattery, D.P., and Selig, J.L. (Eds.) Reimagining education:Essays on reviving the soul of learning. New Orleans, LA: Spring Journal.Edmundson, M. (2005). Why read? New York: Bloomsbury.Edmundson, M. (2013). Do sports build character? In Why teach?: In defense of a real education. New York:Bloomsbury.Fine, M., & McClelland, S.I. (2006). Sexuality education and desire: Still missing after all these years. HarvardEducational Review, 76(3), 297-338.Garrison, J. (1997). Dewey and eros: Wisdom and desire in the art of teaching. New York: Teachers CollegePress.Ginsberg, M.B. (2005). Cultural diversity, motivation, and differentiation. Theory into practice, 44(3), 218-225.Gutiérrez, K.D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice.Educational researcher, 32(5), 19-25.Hiebert, J., and Morris, A.K. (2012). Teaching, rather than teachers, as a pathway to improving classroominstruction. Journal of Teacher Education 63(92), 92-102.	  	  Holland, D. (1992). How cultural systems become desire: A case study of American romance. In R. D’Andrade& C. Strauss (Eds.), Human motives and cultural models (pp. 61-89).Holland, D.C., & Eisenhart, M.A. (1990). Educated in romance: Women, achievement, and college culture.Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.Holland, D., Lachicotte Jr.,W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Hollis, J. (2010). Permutations of desire. Parabola 35 (3), p. 6-11.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  517© ISLSLatham, N. (2006). Three compatible theories of desire. Dialogue 45, 131–138.Lave, J. (2000). The practice of learning. In Knud Illeris (Ed.) Contemporary theories of learning: Learningtheorists… in their own words. New York: Routledge.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Liston, D.P. (2000). Love and despair in teaching. Educational Theory, 50(1), 81-102.Liston, D.P. (2004). The lure of learning in teaching. The Teachers College Record, 106(3), 459-486.Logue, J. (2012). Erotic study and the difficulties of desire in education. Philosophy of Education Archive, 7275.Middleton, J.A. (1995). A study of intrinsic motivation in the mathematics classroom: A personal constructsapproach. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 254-279.Miles, M.R. (1992). Desire and delight: A new reading of Augustine's Confessions (p. 23). New York:Crossroad Publishing.Miller, V.J. (2004). Consuming religion: Christian faith and practice in a consumer culture. New York:Continuum.O’Connor, K., & Allen, A. (2010). Learning as the organizing of social futures. NSSE Yearbook, 109(1).O’Connor, K., & Penuel, W.R. (2010). Introduction: Principles of a human sciences approach to research onlearning. NSSE Yearbook, 109(1).Packer, M.J. (2000). Escaping modernity. Human Development, 43(3), 170-177.Packer, M.J. (2001). The problem of transfer, and the sociocultural critique of schooling. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 10(4), 493-514.Packer, M.J., & Goicoechea, J. (2000). Sociocultural and constructivist theories of learning: Ontology, not justepistemology. Educational Psychologist, 35(4), 227-241.Polman, J. L., & Miller, D. (2010). Changing stories trajectories of identification among African Americanyouth in a science outreach apprenticeship. American Educational Research Journal, 47(4), 879-918.Richardson, P.W., & Watt, H.M. (2006). Who chooses teaching and why? Profiling characteristics andmotivations across three Australian universities. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 34(1), 2756.Rogoff, B. (1997). Evaluating development in the process of participation: Theory, methods, and practicebuilding on each other. Change and development: Issues of theory, method, and application, 265-285.Rueda, R., & Moll, L.C. (1994). A sociocultural perspective on motivation. Motivation: Theory and research,117-137.Schroeder, T. (2004). Three faces of desire. New York: Oxford University Press.Schroeder, T. (Winter 2009). "Desire”. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Edward N. Zalta (Ed.).Retrieved at http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2009/entries/desire/Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the danger of choosing just one. Educational Researcher27(2), 4-13.Simon, R. (1992). Teaching against the grain: Texts for a pedagogy of possibility. New York: Bergin & Garvey.Smith, J.K.A. (2009). Desiring the kingdom: Worship, worldview, and cultural formation. Grand Rapids, MI:Baker Academic.Stipek, D.J. (1993). Motivation to learn: From theory to practice. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.Thoreau, H.D. (1854/2001). Walden. In The works of Henry David Thoreau. Ann Arbor: State Street Press.Tolman, D.L. (2012). Female adolescents, sexual empowerment and desire: A missing discourse of genderinequity. Sex Roles, 66(11-12), 746-757.Urrieta Jr., L. (2007). Figured worlds and education: An introduction to the special issue. The Urban Review,39(2), 107-116.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning as a social system. Systems Thinker, 9(5), 2-3.Watt, H.M., & Richardson, P.W. (2008). Motivations, perceptions, and aspirations concerning teaching as acareer for different types of beginning teachers. Learning and Instruction, 18(5), 408-428.Zeichner, K. (2012). The turn once again toward practice-based teacher education. Journal of TeacherEducation 63(5), 376-382.AcknowledgementsMany thanks to those who have provided encouragement and guidance for this work, including Dan Liston,Jennie Whitcomb, Vicki Hand, Erin Furtak, Joe Polman, Deborah Whitehead, and Nancy Parker.ICLS 2014 Proceedings	  518© ISLS