Characterizing a New Dimension of Change in Attending andResponding to the Substance of Student ThinkingJennifer Richards, Andrew Elby, Ayush Gupta, University of Maryland, 2311 BenjaminBuilding, College Park, MD 20742Email: jrich@umd.edu, elby@umd.edu, ayush@umd.eduAbstract: “Responsive teaching,” in which teachers attend and respond to the substance ofstudents’ ideas, is central to facilitating student learning through engagement in authenticdisciplinary practices. In characterizing teachers’ progress toward greater responsiveness,researchers typically code teachers’ attention as shifting toward the intellectual content(substance) of students’ ideas and away from other foci such as students’ correctness. Theseschemes, however, do not distinguish between different aspects of the substance of students’ideas. In this paper, we argue that a science teacher, Mr. S, demonstrates progress not byshifting toward greater attention to “substance,” but rather by shifting in the facet of studentthinking to which he primarily attends and responds. He shifts toward attending to causalstories (mechanistic explanations) and away from causal factors (potentially relevantvariables). We argue that such shifts toward more sophisticated epistemic practices should betargets of professional development and of the assessment of responsive teaching.IntroductionWhen teachers attend and respond to students’ ideas and seek to draw out or connect them with importantaspects of the discipline, students demonstrate enhanced conceptual understanding (e.g., Carpenter, Fennema,Peterson, Chiang, & Loef, 1989; Pierson, 2008) and experience rich opportunities to engage in disciplinarypractices, such as explanation-building and argumentation in science (e.g., Berland & Reiser, 2009; Duschl &Gitomer, 1997). Ball (1993) has described this sort of teaching as involving “twin imperatives of responsivenessand responsibility” (p. 374) – focusing on and grounding instruction in students’ ideas, while helping them learnimportant disciplinary ideas and practices. In science, Hammer and van Zee (2006) highlight the importance ofteachers focusing on various beginnings of science in what students are saying and doing. Take the followingexample they discussed: A student says it gets hotter in the summer because the earth is closer to the sun.Although this idea is incorrect and widely considered to be a common student misconception about the seasons,Hammer and van Zee emphasize the scientific features of the explanation – its mechanistic nature, tangibility,and consistency with other information the student knew. These are a few examples of scientific aspectsteachers could note and promote in students’ reasoning; Hammer and van Zee describe numerous others (e.g.,anticipation of counterarguments, clarity of expression, etc.).Characterizations of favorable change in attending and responding to the substance of student thinking,however, primarily emphasize how closely teachers focus on students’ meanings with little attention to the sortsof discipline-specific features they notice. Researchers tend to focus on the specificity with which teachersattend to students’ ideas (e.g., Jacobs, Lamb, Philipp, & Schappelle, 2011; van Es, 2011), the stance teacherstake toward students’ ideas (e.g., Crespo, 2000; Goldsmith & Seago, 2011), and/or the types of follow-up movesteachers make in response to students’ ideas (e.g., Brodie, 2011; Pierson, 2008). These foci foreground teachers’treatment of students’ ideas – in some cases, in the context of specific disciplinary domains, like elementaryschool students’ mathematical problem-solving strategies – but do not clearly address the range of disciplinaryaspects teachers may attend to in what they hear.In this paper, our primary aim is to bring discipline-specific considerations into the discussion ofchange in attending and responding to the substance of student thinking. Drawing on two similar lessons taughtby middle-school science teacher “Mr. S” in successive years, we argue that part of what constitutes thefavorable change in Mr. S’s attention and responsiveness to student thinking between April 2010 and March2011 is the aspects of scientific reasoning and explanation Mr. S foregrounds with respect to students’ ideas ineach case.Literature Review: Identified Dimensions of Favorable Change in Attendingand Responding to Student ThinkingWe begin by reviewing the dimensions along which researchers describe favorable change in attending andresponding to student thinking, demonstrating that these dimensions are largely free of discipline-specificfeatures.A common consideration in evaluating responsiveness is whether teachers’ descriptions of students’reasoning are a) general and draw on superficial aspects of the ideas or b) specific and draw on details andnuances within the ideas, with the latter considered more responsive (e.g., Crespo, 2000; Fennema et al., 1996;ICLS 2014 Proceedings286© ISLSFranke, Carpenter, Fennema, Ansell, & Behrend, 1998; Jacobs et al., 2011; Kazemi & Franke, 2004; Levin &Richards, 2011; van Es, 2011). For instance, in a teacher work group in which teachers were expected to sharehow their students approached a particular mathematics problem, Kazemi and Franke noted that early on,teachers focused on whether students’ strategies were correct or not but paid little attention to the specifics ofstudents’ solutions. Similarly, Crespo noted that the preservice teachers in her study initially made claims aboutstudent understanding that were not grounded in much evidence, but later, teachers’ “comments revealed greaterattention towards the meaning of student’s mathematical thinking rather than surface features” (p. 170).Similarly, in van Es’s framework, part of what distinguishes Level 1 (baseline) from Levels 3 (focused) and 4(extended) is that teachers in Level 1 “form general impressions of what occurred” and “provide little or noevidence to support analysis,” whereas teachers in Level 3 or 4 “refer to specific events and interactions asevidence” (p. 139).Another way in which researchers characterize favorable shifts in attending and responding to studentthinking is in movement from an evaluative stance (looking only for correctness) to an interpretive stance(making sense of students’ ideas) (e.g., Brodie, 2011; Crespo, 2000; Empson & Jacobs, 2008; Goldsmith &Seago, 2011; Levin & Richards, 2011; Pierson, 2008; van Es, 2011). In teacher work groups, researchersanalyze the types of comments teachers make when looking at student artifacts. For instance, Goldsmith andSeago described how early mathematics teacher work groups interpreted student work in light of the correctanswer, whereas later they looked for the logic in students’ own solutions. Revisiting van Es’s framework,stance is also integrated into the different levels. For example, in Level 2 (mixed), teachers “provide primarilyevaluative with some interpretive comments” (van Es, p. 139), whereas in Levels 3 and 4 teachers shift toentirely interpretive comments.In situ in the classroom, researchers interpret the teacher’s stance based on the follow-up moves theteacher makes in response to students’ ideas. For example, Empson and Jacobs (2008) define a progression inlistening expertise that moves from directive listening (where the teacher focuses on alignment between astudent’s idea and an expected response and actively seeks to elicit the expected response) to observationallistening (where the teacher passively listens to students’ ideas without seeking to extend them) to responsivelistening (where the teacher actively probes students’ ideas and seeks to understand and build on the details).Similarly, Brodie (2011) and Pierson (2008) differentiate between follow-up moves that are corrective versusinterpretive in nature. In these examples, the shift is in how teachers view and thus work with students’ ideasand involves a change from seeking to evaluate students’ ideas to seeking to understand them in more depth.In summary, the shifts in attention/responsiveness described above depict movement from a) evaluatingstudents’ ideas, focusing on surface features to determine alignment with expected responses and makingfollow-up moves to push students in particular directions, to b) interpreting students’ meaning, focusing on thedetails of students’ ideas and making follow-up moves to elicit more information from students. While these areimportant aspects of responsive teaching, they do not shed much light on how teachers are attending andresponding to specific disciplinary aspects of students’ ideas. In this paper, we illustrate and tease apart twoparticular ways in which teachers’ interpretive follow-ups to students’ ideas can intersect with authenticdisciplinary reasoning.Data Sources and Analytical ApproachThe data in this paper come from a professional development project aimed at helping fourth through eighthgrade teachers promote inquiry teaching and learning in their science classrooms. Teachers voluntarily applyand may continue in the project for multiple years. As part of the project, teachers attend a two-week summerworkshop in which they engage in their own minimally-guided inquiry, watch classroom video of studentsdiscussing scientific phenomena, and collaborate on other issues related to inquiry teaching and learning in theclassroom (i.e., assessment, lesson planning, etc.). During the school year, teachers work one-on-one withmembers of our research team to facilitate scientific inquiry in their classrooms and attend bimonthly smallgroup meetings with other teachers and members of the research team.Our research team identified Mr. S – currently in his fourth year of participation in the project – assomeone who came to consistently facilitate rich scientific discussions in his classroom, many of which we havevideotaped. The two selected episodes in this paper come from Mr. S’s seventh-grade classes at a Title I middleschool in which 65% of the students identify as Hispanic, 30% as African American, and about 35% areclassified as having limited English proficiency (1).Specific features of this pair of episodes made them an ideal naturalistic setting for thinking aboutdifferent scientific aspects teachers may attend to in students’ ideas. In many respects, the episodes are similar –they feature the same teacher teaching the “same” lesson in consecutive years (April 2010 and March 2011). Inboth episodes, Mr. S posed the same basic question: If you’re walking with keys, and you want to drop the keysinto a container sitting on the floor, should you release the keys before the container, over the container, or afterthe container? Students posed sensible reasons for each option, and Mr. S entertained a range of possibleanswers. Yet what Mr. S foregrounded in students’ explanations in each episode differed. Our research team hadICLS 2014 Proceedings287© ISLSpreviously noted that Mr. S’s own explanations of scientific phenomena during the summer workshops varied innature, at times identifying the causal factors responsible for the phenomena and at other times fleshing outmore mechanistic explanations for how phenomena occurred. We noted that these different explanatoryapproaches seemed evident in his facilitation of this pair of episodes.Our first analytical step was to fully transcribe the two videotaped episodes, each approximately fifteenminutes in length. The transcript captures pauses and emphases in participants’ speech, drawing ontranscriptional notations from Sacks, Schegloff, and Jefferson (1974): pauses in speech are indicated by longdashes (representing a beat) or (pause) (indicating a longer pause). Moments when a participant cuts himself offare represented by short dashes, and moments when a participant extends a word are represented by repeatedcolons in the middle of the word (e.g., “thi:::nk”). Emphases in speech are indicated by either underlined orcapitalized words, with the latter representing increased volume specifically. Combinations of emphases andcolons reflect pitch change in the course of a word, () indicates that the speech could not be deciphered, andactions are described inside double parentheses (( )).We then compared Mr. S’s attention and responsiveness to students’ ideas in the two episodes in thefollowing manner. We focused on exchanges in which common ideas came up in both episodes or in which Mr.S followed up with students extensively, because these sorts of exchanges were likely to provide useful points ofcomparison. We drew on three kinds of evidence to unpack what Mr. S was foregrounding during theseexchanges:• How Mr. S revoiced students’ ideas (O’Connor & Michaels, 1993) – emphases in his summariessuggested what he primarily attended to (e.g., “Maybe GRA::vity. GRA::vity” [April 2010] vs.“Gravity’s pulling it down” [March 2011])• How and when Mr. S pressed on students’ ideas (Brodie, 2011) – questions Mr. S asked studentsindicated what he wanted them to flesh out (e.g., “So you’re saying some kind of forward motion basedon what?” [April 2010] vs. “Why will the keys go fast too?” [March 2011])• When Mr. S made verbal and nonverbal bids to close the conversation (Schegloff & Sacks, 1999;Stivers & Sidnell, 2005) – accepting students’ ideas as sufficiently articulated demonstrated what hefound satisfactory (e.g., moving to another idea after a student identified wind as influential vs. after astudent explained why wind was influential)Evidence from other data sources (e.g., debrief conversations with Mr. S, recollections from small groupmeetings, stimulated recall/reflection interviews) triangulated with our interpretation of what Mr. S wasforegrounding in each episode. Due to space constraints, we only review evidence from the episodes themselvesin this paper, but more information (including full episode transcripts) can be found in Richards’ (2013)dissertation work.FindingsOur analyses demonstrate that Mr. S foregrounded different aspects of students’ scientific reasoning in hisattention and responses in April 2010 versus March 2011. In the first episode, Mr. S foregrounded studentsidentifying causal factors responsible for the motion they predicted. In the second episode, Mr. S foregroundedstudents articulating causal stories for the motion they predicted, fleshing out how and why the object wouldmove the way it did. This shift in attention from causal factors to causal stories represents a favorable change inthe sophistication of explanation Mr. S attended to and pressed students for in the context of the key dropquestion.Mr. S Foregrounded Causal Factors in the First EpisodeIn the first key drop episode in April of 2010, Mr. S primarily attended and responded to a particular form ofscientific knowledge in students’ ideas – their identification of the causal factors or force-like entitiesresponsible for the motion they predicted. In general, if the factor causing the motion was not apparent in astudent’s explanation, he pressed the student to articulate it; if the factor was apparent, he accepted the student’sresponse. Here, we provide two in-depth examples to illustrate Mr. S’s focus on causal factors and citesupporting evidence from other exchanges throughout the episode.The following exchange occurred well into the discussion and was one of the longest continuousexchanges Mr. S had with an individual student during the episode. The student, Suri (all names arepseudonyms), provided his sense of when it would be best to drop the keys, if you’re running fast:1.2.3.4.5.Mr. S: Okay, Suri, you want to respond to that or add something to the discussion?Suri: Yeah, I’m like, if you’re running, you feel like the wind is pushing you back.Mr. S: So you’re saying as you’re going fast, faster, you’re also feeling some pressure, some air,pushing back against you.Suri: So my drop, um, is from above or after.Mr. S: Above or after because of what?ICLS 2014 Proceedings288© ISLS6.Suri: Because if the wind is working in a different direction than you, you’re running and () ((movesone hand forward and the other in the opposite direction on top)).7. Mr. S: So when you, when you’re saying, when you’re running fast, there’s some pressure coming upagainst you, coming against you?8. Suri: Mm-hmm.9. Mr. S: What is that? (pause) What do you think that is? (pause) So you’re saying there’s a pressure,there’s something pushing back against you. ((faces board, writes)) There’s a push back. And, so thatpush back, when you release the keys, what is it going to do to the keys?10. Suri: They’re gonna drop backward.11. Mr. S: They’re going to drop back. Okay, okay. Um, now, what are someThroughout the exchange, Mr. S attended and responded to Suri’s idea – he maintained his focus on Suri’s ideaand pressed Suri to say more. However, there are nuances in the ways Mr. S interacted with Suri that highlightMr. S’s emphasis on causal factors. For instance, after Suri provided his initial explanation and indicated that hewould drop the keys above or after, Mr. S asked Suri, “Above or after because of what?” (line 5). The fact thatMr. S had already revoiced Suri’s explanation in line 3 and the wording of the question in line 5 suggest that Mr.S may have been looking for Suri to further specify the particular factor he thought was in play. Instead, Surireiterated his story of the wind “working in a different direction than you” (line 6), and Mr. S againacknowledged Suri’s story but pressed for the responsible factor: “What is that?... What do you think that is?”(line 9). Note here that Mr. S attended to the causal story Suri provided about the wind working in a differentdirection and pushing back against you – this aspect was not completely absent. Yet what Mr. S pressed for wasSuri’s identification of the causal factor involved.At several other times throughout the episode, Mr. S also pressed for or attempted to elicit specificfactors or forces underlying the motion students described. For example, early in the discussion, one student,Jack, talked about the keys falling straight down because of their weight. Mr. S responded in part by asking,“What force will cause it to go straight down?” and excitedly accepted the response of gravity (“MaybeGRA::vity. GRA::vity”). Another example occurred when Katherine talked about the keys going backward ifyou’re going fast. In response, Mr. S asked, “If I’m going fast, why would that cause the keys to go backwards?What, what force, what would cause the keys to go back?” His reframing of the question from why the keyswould go backward to what force would cause the keys to go backward, and his subsequent summary thatKatherine “said something about the wind,” reflected his emphasis on causal factors.Further evidence of Mr. S foregrounding causal factors in students’ ideas comes from a close look atanother exchange around an idea that came up in both key drop episodes – that the speed of the runner wouldmake the keys move forward. In the first key drop episode, a student, Diane, related this scenario to what wouldhappen if you were to jump out of a racecar:12. Mr. S: Why before, Diane?13. Diane: Because I thi:::nk that – well, let me try to give you an example, li:::::ke ((loudspeakerinterruption)) I think, like, when you’re racing? Like, you’re in a racecar? And then, you know, let’ssay you have to () on fire or something? So when you’re trying to land on the grass – because you’renot going to get there right when you’re at the grass or else you’re gonna- because the car’s fast, andyou’re going fast too. You gonna, like, get on the mud or something, so you’re going to have to gobefore, so you know, you could, you know what I mean?14. Mr. S: So what do you mean is that there’s some kind of forward motion?15. Diane: Yeah.16. Mr. S: ((faces board, writes)) Okay. So you’re saying some kind of forward motion based on what?17. Diane: On the speed of the person who ().18. Mr. S: So based on sp::eed, right?Again, Mr. S attended and responded to what Diane was saying. In line 12, Mr. S’s question (“Why before?”)elicited a detailed causal story from Diane. His follow-ups, however, did not acknowledge Diane’s specificexample, but rather clarified the kind of motion she implied (line 14) and pressed Diane to identify the causalfactor responsible for the motion (line 16). His verbal emphasis on Diane’s identification of “sp::eed” as therelevant causal factor (line 18), followed by his moving on to another student, suggests this is the kind ofexplanation he was looking for.Mr. S Foregrounded Causal Stories in the Second EpisodeWhen Mr. S explored the same question with another group of students in March of 2011 during his second yearin the project, he attended and responded to a different form of scientific knowledge in students’ ideas – theircausal stories of what they thought would happen. This foregrounding involved his continued pursuit ofdifferent stories and more mechanistic detail from students. We provide two illustrative examples.ICLS 2014 Proceedings289© ISLSAs the discussion started, many students thought you should drop the keys over the container in orderto get them in. Yet they offered multiple kinds of explanations, including restatements of their conclusions andproblematic alternatives (e.g., “Because if we drop it before or after the container, it won’t get in the container”)and appeals to the skill of the person dropping the keys (e.g., “Some people have bad aim, so they can’t evenaim towards the trash can”). Among these explanations was the following causal story from a student, Cooper:19.20.21.22.23.24.25.26.Mr. S: Um, Cooper?Cooper: Um, above?Mr. S: Above.Cooper: Because like the gravity, like, when you put it up, it goes down.Drake: It’s heavy.Mr. S: Cooper said that because it’s heavy, what happens, Cooper, I have to, I have to drop itCooper: No, gravity puts, like, pulls it down.Mr. S: So, because gravity’s pulling it down.Here, Cooper offered both a causal factor and how it works – gravity as the factor that works by pulling thingsdown (line 25). Even though Mr. S momentarily conflated Cooper’s idea about gravity with Drake’s idea aboutheaviness, note the follow-up question Mr. S asked – “what happens?” (line 24). Mr. S was not satisfied with theidentification of the relevant causal factor; rather, he asked Cooper for more of a narrative and, after Cooper’sresponse, verbally emphasized what gravity does (line 26, “gravity’s pulling it down”).As students continued to offer different kinds of explanations, Mr. S returned to Cooper’s explanation,emphasizing its causal nature: “So now let’s, we want to get back to – why, why above? Cooper, you had someexplanation why, what’s the reason for it?” Mr. S recapped Cooper’s response for a third time as he askedstudents for other reasons why you should drop the keys over the container: “Are there any other reasons why Ishould drop it above the container, other than Cooper said, the gravity’s gonna pull it down. Why else might Idrop it above the container?” This repeated emphasis on “why” and the causal story (what gravity does) insteadof just the causal factor (gravity) suggest that Mr. S was looking for students to provide causal story-likeexplanations.This push beyond causal factors became most apparent in an exchange with Chavez about the speed ofthe runner making the keys move forward:27. Chavez: If you do it before, it’ll go directly in? But if you do it like, like28. Mr. S: Why do we have to do it before again?29. Chavez: Because it’ll go, like, IN, like the keys will go in the trash can or the thing will go in the trashcan.30. Mr. S: What will cause it to go in the trash can if we drop it before as opposed to over, because earlieryou said over?31. Chavez: Like, like, like, like, like the speed of the keys also I guess coming off.32. Mr. S: The speed of the- so the keys have speed?33. Chavez: Because you’re walking, no, because like you’re walking? (pause) And like, and like sinceyou’re walking fast, like, I guess the keys will also go fast too?34. Mr. S: The keys will go fast too?35. Chavez: (pause) Yeah.36. Mr. S: Why will the keys go fast too?37. Chavez: I don’t know!38. Mr. S: I released the keys, wouldn’t the keys just be there?Recall how the exchange between Mr. S and Diane went the previous year when the idea of speed came up. Mr.S emphasized Diane’s identification of speed and moved on to another student. Here, there are notabledifferences in Mr. S’s response, despite the parallels between Diane’s idea that “the car’s fast, and you’re goingfast too” [April 2010] and Chavez’s idea that “since you’re walking fast… the keys will also go fast too” [March2011]. First, Mr. S did not simply accept the idea of speed; he started to repeat it (line 32) but then reflected theidea back to Chavez with a questioning intonation (lines 32, 34). Second, Mr. S pushed Chavez to fill out anadditional part of the story by asking, “Why will the keys go fast too?” (line 36). This question, followed by Mr.S’s counterpoint that the keys might “just be there” once they’re released (line 38), indicates that Mr. S wasinterested in more than the identification of speed as a causal factor. He was also interested in Chavez fleshingout a causal story for how the keys would still have speed after they’d been released.Thus, although Mr. S attended to both causal factors and causal stories to some extent in both episodes,we can see that he foregrounded one or the other in each case. We now turn to a discussion of why Mr. S’sforegrounding of causal stories represents a favorable change over his foregrounding of causal factors.ICLS 2014 Proceedings290© ISLSDiscussion: Considerations of Explanatory Sophistication in ScienceWork in science education (e.g., Chinn & Malhotra, 2002; Russ, Scherr, Hammer, & Mikeska, 2008; Sandoval,2003; Windschitl, Thompson, Braaten, & Stroupe, 2012) emphasizes the importance of students constructingcausal explanations for phenomena. For instance, Chinn and Malhotra drew on work from the psychology,sociology, philosophy, and history of science to argue that one aspect of authentic inquiry is “the developmentof theoretical mechanisms with entities that are not directly observable” (p. 186). Sandoval’s analysis of causalcoherence in students’ scientific explanations also focused on causal mechanisms, how students chain causesand effects to create coherent explanations. In creating and developing causal stories of how or why somethinghappened, students engage in a practice that is arguably at the core of science.When possible, fleshing out causal stories is a more sophisticated form of scientific explanation thansimply identifying relevant causal entities or factors (Russ et al., 2008; Windschitl et al., 2012) (2). For instance,Russ et al. developed a framework for analyzing students’ mechanistic reasoning, adapted from philosophy ofscience studies on the work of scientists. In Russ et al.’s framework for analyzing mechanistic reasoning,identifying entities and properties and actions of entities relevant to the target phenomenon is one component,but more sophisticated mechanistic reasoning involves creating a coherent explanation of how these activities orproperties bring about the target phenomenon. In other words, identifying causal factors contributes to but is lesssophisticated than telling causal stories, which requires consideration of how the factors behave and interactwith each other over time.Moreover, in the key drop conversations, students demonstrated the ability to engage in causalstorytelling that could have been capitalized on both years. Consider Diane’s racecar example from the earlierepisode. Although she offered details that could have been drawn out further, Mr. S summarized her idea ashaving to do with speed and forward motion. Although this summary was coherent with Diane’s idea, it quicklyslotted her idea as a certain kind of thing rather than permitting further exploration. Diane’s idea might haveplayed out differently in the second episode. Judging from the Chavez exchange, Diane might have been askedto explain why you would still be going fast once you jumped out of the car. Rather than assuming that the samemechanisms were in play in the key drop scenario and the racecar example, the relationship between thesituations might have been interrogated. In short, various aspects of Diane’s explanation might have receiveddeeper attention, and productively so for students’ learning through engagement in scientific inquiry.Thus, the favorable change seen in Mr. S’s attention and responsiveness can be characterized notsimply as greater attention to the substance of students’ reasoning, but rather, by which aspects of the substanceof student reasoning he foregrounded in his attention and responses. This shift in foregrounding from causalfactors to causal stories does align with a dimension of favorable change noted above, namely the specificitywith which Mr. S attended to students’ ideas. Foregrounding causal stories necessitates attention to details ofstudents’ explanations in a way not required by attention to causal factors. However, with respect to the stanceMr. S took toward the ideas he heard, as reflected in his follow-up moves, we do not see differences between theepisodes. In neither case did Mr. S direct the conversation toward the correct answer, nor did he listen passively;he was engaged in interpreting students’ ideas in both episodes. Similarly, drawing on Brodie’s (2011) scheme,the most frequent types of follow-up moves in both episodes were the reform-type moves of maintaining focuson students’ ideas and pressing for more information. What was distinct between the episodes was the kind ofinformation Mr. S pressed for.Conclusion and ImplicationsWe demonstrated that the shift seen in Mr. S’s attention and responsiveness to the substance of student thinkingbetween the key drop episodes hinged on which aspects of scientific explanation he foregrounded in relation tostudents’ ideas. In his first classroom implementation of the key drop inquiry, Mr. S foregrounded students’identification of the causal factors or force-like entities responsible for the motion they predicted, such asgravity moving the keys down, or speed resulting in the keys’ forward motion. Mr. S’s subsequent classroomimplementation of the key drop inquiry the following year, though, involved a more sophisticated foregrounding– students’ articulation of causal stories of what they thought would happen. Here, mechanism was more of anemphasis, e.g., gravity pulling the keys down, or a lingering question about how the keys still have speed oncethey’re released.We recognize the limitations inherent in a case analysis of a single teacher, and as such, we do notclaim that the specific shift seen here extends beyond this case, nor that discipline-specific considerations arealways relevant in characterizing teachers’ attention and responsiveness to student thinking. Rather, we see thiscase as a proof of concept that in some cases, as in the case of Mr. S, there is a disciplinary dimension toresponsive teaching that is not captured by current characterizations in the literature. Additionally, spaceconstraints prevent us from exploring two related issues: the reasons behind Mr. S’s shift, and evidence that theshift represented stable change in practice rather than a mere “fluctuation.” In other work we explore theseissues (Richards, 2013). However, the data and analysis we presented here are sufficient to support our mainargument that nuanced considerations of disciplinary authenticity and productivity, when evident in the data,ICLS 2014 Proceedings291© ISLSshould inform notions of what counts as progress in responsive teaching—specifically, that shifts in attention tomore sophisticated aspects of the substance of student thinking should count as progress toward greaterresponsiveness.To conclude, we consider the implications of this work for professional development and research inwhich students’ ideas are at the core of teachers’ attention.Implications for Professional DevelopmentWhen students’ ideas are central to professional development efforts, a critical topic for ongoing discussionshould be the various disciplinary aspects that participants (including professional developers) note with respectto student thinking. After spending time making sense of students’ ideas, participants could be asked to reflecton what is scientific about what students are saying and doing. For instance, in this case, Mr. S’s sense thatmechanism came up more in the second summer workshop likely influenced what he paid attention to instudents’ explanations, and how and when he pressed students to fill in gaps. More explicit discussion of suchdisciplinary aspects could help teachers open up space for students to explore and develop a deeper sense of agiven discipline and what it means to engage and participate in ways that disciplinary experts do, in a sensebecoming local disciplinary experts themselves.Moreover, more explicit discussion would promote metaawareness in teachers of what they areforegrounding in given moments. Throughout his participation in the project, Mr. S has tended to use the termscausal factors and causal stories interchangeably, suggesting that he may not have been aware of his differentforegroundings in the episodes. Thus, it is important to note how pervasive his foregroundings were in bothepisodes without his explicit awareness, and to recognize how much more powerful and purposeful theseforegroundings could be with his explicit awareness. Such awareness might also facilitate teachers’ shiftingamong aspects more responsively in the course of authentic disciplinary practice with students, demonstrating asort of flexibility that might represent another avenue of growth for Mr. S and others.Implications for ResearchIn terms of research, it would be beneficial to understand more about the impact different disciplinaryforegroundings have on what students come to see as authentic disciplinary activity. For instance, shortly afterMr. S recapped Diane’s idea as having to do with speed in the first key drop episode, a visiting member of ourresearch team asked, “Folks, did you hear that reasoning?” A student responded, “Yes, it’s based on speed,”suggesting that Mr. S’s foregrounding of causal factors may have been picked up by students as a sufficientexplanation. Exploring potential connections like this between teachers’ foregroundings and students’ senses ofthe discipline is a ripe area for future research, with important implications for what students learn throughengagement in discussions at the intersection of their ideas and disciplinary practices.Future research could also target how explicit professional development discussions of variousdisciplinary aspects impact teachers’ classroom practice. Do teachers exhibit enhanced metaawareness aboutwhat they are attending and responding to within students’ ideas? If so, do they demonstrate more or lessflexibility in what they foreground, and to what ends? Such questions could be explored in continuingprofessional development projects aimed at enhancing teachers’ attention and responsiveness to the substance ofstudent thinking.Endnotes(1) These statistics come from publicly available 2009-2010 demographic data, not directly cited to protect the anonymityof the school.(2) That said, there are certainly situations in which foregrounding the identification of relevant causal factors isappropriate, like when engaging in experimental design (e.g., Ford, 2005; Toth, Klahr, & Chen, 2000). Theidentification of relevant causal factors for a given phenomenon provides useful insights about the phenomenon andpredictive power with respect to similar phenomena, and is a publishable finding in various scientific disciplines, suchas ecology, epidemiology, etc.ReferencesBall, D. L. (1993). With an eye on the mathematical horizon: Dilemmas of teaching elementary schoolmathematics. Elementary School Journal, 93(4), 373–397.Berland, L. K., & Reiser, B. J. (2009). Making sense of argumentation and explanation. Science Education, 93,26–55.Brodie, K. (2011). Working with learners’ mathematical thinking: Towards a language of description forchanging pedagogy. Teaching and Teacher Education, 27, 174–186.Carpenter, T. P., Fennema, E., Peterson, P. L., Chiang, C.-P., & Loef, M. (1989). Using knowledge of children’smathematics thinking in classroom teaching: An experimental study. American Educational ResearchJournal, 26(4), 499–531.ICLS 2014 Proceedings292© ISLSChinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoreticalframework for evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86, 175–218.Crespo, S. (2000). Seeing more than right and wrong answers: Prospective teachers’ interpretations of students’mathematical work. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 3, 155–181.Duschl, R. A., & Gitomer, D. H. (1997). Strategies and challenges to changing the focus of assessment andinstruction in science classrooms. Educational Assessment, 4(1), 37–73.Empson, S. B., & Jacobs, V. R. (2008). Learning to listen to children’s mathematics. In D. Tirosh & T. Wood(Eds.), Tools and processes in mathematics teacher education (pp. 257–281). Rotterdam, NL: SensePublishers.Fennema, E., Carpenter, T. P., Franke, M. L., Levi, L., Jacobs, V. R., & Empson, S. B. (1996). A longitudinalstudy of learning to use children’s thinking in mathematics instruction. Journal for Research inMathematics Education, 27(4), 403–434.Ford, M. J. (2005). The game, the pieces, and the players: Generative resources from two instructionalportrayals of experimentation. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(4), 449–487.Franke, M. L., Carpenter, T., Fennema, E., Ansell, E., & Behrend, J. (1998). Understanding teachers’ selfsustaining, generative change in the context of professional development. Teaching and TeacherEducation, 14(1), 67–80.Goldsmith, L. T., & Seago, N. (2011). Using classroom artifacts to focus teachers’ noticing. In M. G. Sherin, V.R. Jacobs, & R. A. Philipp (Eds.), Mathematics teacher noticing: Seeing through teachers’ eyes (pp.169–187). New York, NY: Routledge.Hammer, D., & van Zee, E. (2006). Seeing the science in children’s thinking: Case studies of student inquiry inphysical science. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.Jacobs, V. R., Lamb, L. L. C., Philipp, R. A., & Schappelle, B. P. (2011). Deciding how to respond on the basisof children’s understandings. In M. G. Sherin, V. R. Jacobs, & R. A. Philipp (Eds.), Mathematicsteacher noticing: Seeing through teachers’ eyes (pp. 97–116). New York, NY: Routledge.Kazemi, E., & Franke, M. L. (2004). Teacher learning in mathematics: Using student work to promote collectiveinquiry. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 7, 203–235.Levin, D. M., & Richards, J. (2011). Learning to attend to the substance of students’ thinking in science. ScienceEducator, 20(2), 1-11.O’Connor, M. C., & Michaels, S. (1993). Aligning academic task and participation status through revoicing:Analysis of a classroom discourse strategy. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 24(4), 318–335.Pierson, J. L. (2008). The relationship between patterns of classroom discourse and mathematics learning(Doctoral dissertation). University of Texas at Austin.Richards, J. (2013). Exploring what stabilizes teachers’ attention and responsiveness to the substance ofstudents’ scientific thinking in the classroom (Doctoral dissertation). University of Maryland at CollegePark.Russ, R. S., Scherr, R. E., Hammer, D., & Mikeska, J. (2008). Recognizing mechanistic reasoning in studentscientific inquiry: A framework for discourse analysis developed from philosophy of science. ScienceEducation, 92(3), 499–525.Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-takingfor conversation. Language, 50(4, Part 1), 696–735.Sandoval, W. A. (2003). Conceptual and epistemic aspects of students’ scientific explanations. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 12(1), 5–51.Schegloff, E. A., & Sacks, H. (1999). Opening up closings. In A. Jaworski & N. Coupland (Eds.), The discoursereader (pp. 263–274). London, England: Routledge.Stivers, T., & Sidnell, J. (2005). Introduction: Multimodal interaction. Semiotica, 156(1/4), 1–20.Toth, E. E., Klahr, D., & Chen, Z. (2000). Bridging research and practice: A cognitively based classroomintervention for teaching experimentation skills to elementary school children. Cognition andInstruction, 18(4), 423–459.van Es, E. A. (2011). A framework for learning to notice student thinking. In M. G. Sherin, V. R. Jacobs, & R.A. Philipp (Eds.), Mathematics teacher noticing: Seeing through teachers’ eyes (pp. 134–151). NewYork, NY: Routledge.Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., Braaten, M., & Stroupe, D. (2012). Proposing a core set of instructional practicesand tools for teachers of science. Science Education, 96, 878–903.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by funding from NSF DRL-0733613 and NSF EHR/DUE-0831970. All findings,opinions, and recommendations expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect theviews of the National Science Foundation. Special thanks to David Hammer, Paul Hutchison, Eric Kuo, AmyRobertson, and ICLS reviewers for feedback on earlier versions of this work.ICLS 2014 Proceedings293© ISLS