Representational Competence and Spatial Thinking in STEMMike Stieff, Matthew Lira and Dane DeSutter, University of Illinois-Chicagomstieff@uic.edu, mlira2@uic.edu, ddesut2@uic.eduAbstract: Spatial ability predicts success in STEM fields, particularly chemistry. As such,new educational models have called for learning environments that improve spatial ability.These environments neglect the role of representational competence in supporting spatialthinking in individual STEM fields. This short paper reports a preliminary investigationconcerning the unique contribution of representational competence to spatial thinking in thediscipline of organic chemistry. Using authentic disciplinary tasks we show that studentachievement and response time depends more upon their developing representationalcompetence in chemistry than mental rotation ability and that the format of a disciplinaryrepresentation can significantly mediate spatial thinking. Given these findings we argue thatnew learning environments that target representational competence may be more effective atsupporting spatial thinking than those that attempt to train generic spatial ability.Spatial Thinking in STEM DisciplinesSpatial thinking is a central component of problem solving at all levels of STEM (Science, Technology,Engineering, and Mathematics) instruction (National Research Council, 2006). In both beginning and advancedclassrooms, students are tasked with identifying important spatial relationships relevant to scientific conceptsand predicting how transformations of those relationships affect physical and biological systems. Spatialthinking ranges in complexity from reasoning about simple geometric relationships, such as the distancebetween two points on a geologic map, to complex spatiotemporal dynamics, such as reasoning about chemicalreaction processes in three-dimensional space. Spatial thinking is challenging and has been cited as a primarybarrier to success in STEM classrooms and to entry in STEM careers (Humphreys, Lubinski, & Yao, 1993;Lubinski, 2010; Wai, Lubinski, & Benbow, 2009). Students who struggle with spatial thinking in entry-levelSTEM courses are less likely to enjoy STEM instruction and pursue STEM professions less frequently (Shea,Lubinski, & Benbow, 2001).The emphasis on spatial thinking in STEM disciplines suggests that individual differences in spatialability are related to STEM achievement. Indeed, correlation studies indicate that achievement in several STEMfields is, to some degree, dependent on spatial ability, such as mental rotation and perspective taking(Kozhevnikov, Hegarty, & Mayer, 2002; Pribyl & Bodner, 1987; Sorby, 2009; Turner & Lindsay, 2003). ManySTEM achievement assessments require students to visualize the spatial transformation of complex structures,mentally rotate imagined objects to compare spatial features, and assume imagined perspectives to draw twodimensional diagrams from different orientations. Thus, students who score poorly on several spatial abilitymeasures (e.g., mental rotation, perspective taking, or spatial visualization) are seen to perform poorly in STEMfields that emphasize spatial reasoning (Shea et al., 2001).The primacy of spatial thinking in the STEM classroom has given rise to a body of learningenvironments that attempt to support and train spatial thinking in different disciplinary contexts. These studiesare quite diverse in their goals and design principles. Designs range from those that attempt to train basic visuospatial ability skills through sustained practice (Miller & Halpern, in press; Sorby, 2001) to those that scaffoldspatial thinking with concrete and virtual models (Stull, Barrett, & Hegarty, 2013; Stull, Hegarty, Dixon, &Stieff, 2012). These efforts have yet to result in large improvements in STEM achievement or degree attainment,although several individual designs show promise for improving spatial thinking in general and on specific tasks(Uttal et al., 2013). As such, curricular and instructional designs that aim to improve spatial thinking in STEMdisciplines remain important targets of current reform efforts.Despite the correlation between spatial ability and STEM achievement, it is not clear if spatial ability isthe primary factor that determines success in STEM achievement. Recent studies suggest that student success inSTEM fields is partially dependent upon representational competence (Kozma & Russell, 1997; Stieff, 2011;Stull et al., 2012) and discipline-specific problem solving strategies (Schwartz & Black, 1996; Stieff, 2007;Stieff, Hegarty, & Dixon, 2010). Representational competence comprises a set of skills that include the ability toanalyze features of a representation, transform one representation into another, generate novel representations,explain the utility of a given representation, and explain the unique affordances of different representations(diSessa & Sherin, 2000; Russell et al., 1997). These skills are necessary for students to interpret and relate thewide variety of external representations across STEM domains that highlight or mask spatial information tovarying degrees. For example, Figure 1 depicts an example assessment item from organic chemistry thatrequires students to translate from a dash-wedge perspective formula to a Newman projection to identify highand low energy spatial conformations of an organic molecule. Students’ with limited representationalICLS 2014 Proceedings987© ISLScompetence who are unable to perform the initial translation are unlikely to identify how the different spatialconformations correlate with energy (Raje & Stieff, 2009, April). Innovative learning environments that aim toimprove representational competence may constitute more productive avenues to support student success thanthose that emphasize generic spatial thinking. The skills composing representational competence reflectauthentic disciplinary practices and ways of knowing not addressed by an environment that emphasizes abstractspatial thinking.HFIHFHFBrHClClClBrHHNewman projectionFischer projectionBrdash-wedge formulaIIFigure 1. The dash-wedge, Newman, and Fischer representations each use different formalisms to represent thesame three-dimensional information in two-dimensional diagrams. In the figure, a concrete molecular model of(1S, 2R)-1-bromo-1-chloro-2-fluoro-2-iodoethane has been spatially transformed to align with each respectivediagram. The model depicted here uses colors to represent individual elements, which are representedsymbolically in the diagrams. Grey = carbon (C), white = hydrogen (H), green = chlorine (Cl), brown = bromine(Br), yellow = fluorine (F) purple = iodine (I).Present StudyIn this investigation we explore the relationship between spatial ability and representational competence in anexperimental study of spatial thinking in the STEM discipline of organic chemistry. Arguably, organicchemistry emphasizes spatial thinking more so than any other post-secondary STEM course, as the discipline’soverarching learning objectives include identifying spatial relationships in hydrocarbons and explaining thechemical and physical properties of a compound resulting from molecular structure. To investigate therelationship between spatial ability and representational competence we compared student achievement on threeassessments that varied by representational format. Formats included (1) only three-dimensional models thatmade spatial relationships salient using shading and perspectival cues (3D-Model), (2) only two dimensionaldiagrams that made spatial relationships implicit using disciplinary formalisms (2D-Diagram), and (3) mixedformats that include multiple representations of a molecular structure (2D-3D Mixed). Each assessment wasconstructed of items that required students to make similarity judgments about pairs of molecularrepresentations to determine whether each pair represented the same molecule or a mirror image (i.e.,enantiomeric relationship). Such items are authentic assessment items employed in organic chemistryclassrooms to evaluate student knowledge of stereochemistry (Stieff, 2007). Using accuracy and response timedata we predicted that student achievement would be higher on the assessments that included a singlerepresentation whether a 3D-Model or a 2D-Diagram than on the mixed representation assessment. Conversely,we predicted that response time would be higher on the mixed representation assessment. We base thesepredictions on the assumption that representational competence, as opposed to spatial ability, is the primarybarrier to spatial thinking in the STEM disciplines. In other words, student failure will result from challengesrelating multiple representations of spatial information independent of their mental rotation ability.MethodParticipantsTwenty-eight (16 female) undergraduate chemistry students participated on a volunteer basis. Each participantwas recruited from the population of students who had completed at least five weeks of instruction in organicchemistry at a major research university. All students had received instruction in content assessed in the study.InstrumentsThree tests of mental rotation that varied by the included representation (3D-Model, 2D-Diagram, 2D-3DMixed) were constructed and employed (see Figure 2 for examples). Each test included stimuli that consistedof pairs of molecular representations that were either identical or mirror image reflections. Each test containedICLS 2014 Proceedings988© ISLSsix asymmetrical stimuli rotated in the picture plane. Identical object pairs were presented once at five uniqueangles ranging from 0 to 180 degrees in 45-degree increments. Six mirror-reflected object pairs were presentedat three randomly selected angles ranging from 0 degrees to 180 degrees in 45-degree increments. Thus, eachtest included 48 trials. The design was not balanced with regard to mirror image pairs, which were not analyzed:Such pairs were included to prevent participants from assuming that all pairs were identical. Mental rotation wasevaluated by the Vandenberg Test of Mental Rotation (Vandenberg & Kuse, 1978).Figure 2. Example stimuli: From top to bottom: 3D-Model, 2D-Diagram, and 2D-3D Mixed item.ProcedureThe study utilized a repeated-measures design with representational format (2D vs. 3D vs. 2D-3D) as a withinsubjects variable. All participants completed all blocks with each block randomly presented first. Theexperiment was presented with ePrime v.2.0. First, participants viewed a screen instructing them to comparestimuli pairs to determine whether each pair contained identical structures. Participants cued the presentation ofeach stimulus by pressing ‘‘SPACE” and responded that pairs contained identical objects by pressing ‘‘I’’ orpressing ‘‘E’’ if they were mirror images (or enantiomers). Participants completed 6 practice trials followed by144 experimental trials. All participants completed each test in approximately 30-40 minutes during which thekeyed response time from stimulus onset was recorded for each trial. The mental rotation test was thenadministered. Participants received $20 USD.ResultsFirst, accuracy was calculated as the average number of correct similarity judgments on identical pairs andanalyzed via repeated-measures ANOVA with representational format as the within-subjects variablecontrolling for mental rotation ability. A main-effect of representational format (F(2,26) = 28.9, p < .001, ηp2 =.53) and spatial ability (F(2,26) = 8.70, p = .007, ηp2 = .25) was observed. As illustrated in Figure 3, plannedcontrasts revealed that students performed worst when evaluating 2D-3D Mixed Representations (M = .77, SD =.15) than they did evaluating 3D-Models (M = .89, SD = .07, F(1, 26) = 8.7, p = .007, ηp2 = .25) or 2D-Diagrams(M = .83, SD = .15, F(1,26) = 8.51, p = .007). There was no difference in accuracy between 2D and 3Dconditions, F(1,26) = 1.96, p = .17. Second, response time was calculated as the average time to respond to astimulus pair and compared across assessments as above. A significant main effect of representational formatwas observed (F(2,27) = 136.68, p < .001, ηp2 = .73) but no relationship between spatial ability and responsetime was evident (F(2,26) = .51, p = .48). As illustrated in Figure 4, planned contrasts revealed that studentsresponded slower to 2D-3D Mixed Representations (M = 17853ms, SD = 5068ms than to either 3D-Models (M= 8764ms, SD = 3395ms, F(1,26) = 64.2, p < .001, ηp2 = .71) or 2D-Diagrams (M = 10759ms, SD = 4018ms,F(1,26) = 136.7, p < .001, ηp2 = .835).ICLS 2014 Proceedings989© ISLSFigure 3. Participant accuracy across conditions. Student achievement was significantly higher in the 3D-Modelcondition than each of the other two conditions. Performance was lowest in the 2D-3D Mixed condition.Figure 4. Participant response time across conditions. Response time was significantly higher in the 2D-3DMixed condition than each of the other two conditions. Performance was lowest in the 3D-Model condition.ConclusionsThese results are consistent with our initial predictions that students would perform better and faster whencomparing representations with similar formats (2D, 3D) than those with mixed formats (2D-3D). As above, allstudents were highly accurate in their evaluation of identical pairs; a meaningful decrement in performance wasobserved only for assessment items that contained mixed representational formats. Ostensibly, this increase inresponse time reflects the additional processing demands required to translate between representations to makean identity judgment. Finally, although mental rotation ability correlated moderately with achievement, theresults suggest that this correlation depends upon how salient spatial information appears in disciplinaryrepresentations. Indeed, our analysis revealed that the format of the disciplinary representations explained morethan twice the variance in achievement than spatial ability. Thus, these results suggest that mental rotation andrepresentational competence are necessary to solve mixed format items. This result is consistent with priorresearch that has demonstrated the task-specificity of strategy use (Stieff, 2007) and suggests that future learningenvironments that target representational competence may be more effective at supporting spatial thinking inSTEM disciplines than those that attempt to train generic spatial ability in isolation.ReferencesdiSessa, A. A., & Sherin, B. L. (2000). Meta-representation: An introduction. Journal of MathematicalBehavior, 19(4), 385-398.Humphreys, L. G., Lubinski, D., & Yao, G. (1993). Utility of predicting group membership and the role ofspatial visualization in becoming an engineer, physical scientist, or artist. Journal of AppliedPsychology, 78(2), 250-261.ICLS 2014 Proceedings990© ISLSKozhevnikov, M., Hegarty, M., & Mayer, R. E. (2002). Spatial abilities in problem solving in kinematics. In M.Anderson, B. Meyer & P. Olivier (Eds.), Diagrammatic representation and reasoning (pp. 155-171).Berlin: Springer-Verlag.Kozma, R., & Russell, J. (1997). Multimedia and understanding: Expert and novice responses to differentrepresentations of chemical phenomena. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 34(9), 949-968.Kozma, R., & Russell, J. (2005). Students becoming chemists: Developing representational competence. In J.Gilbert (Ed.), Visualization in science education (pp. 121-146). London: Kluwer.Lubinski, D. (2010). Spatial ability and STEM: A sleeping giant for talent identification and development.Personality and Individual Differences, 49, 344-351.Miller, D. I., & Halpern, D. F. (in press). Can spatial training improve long-term outcomes for gifted STEMundergraduates? Learning and Individual Differences.National Research Council. (2006). Learning to think spatially. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.Pribyl, J. R., & Bodner, G. M. (1987). Spatial ability and its role in organic chemistry: A study of four organiccourses. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 24(3), 229-240.Raje, S., & Stieff, M. (2009, April). An examination of the cognitive mechanisms underlying chemistrymisconceptions. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational ResearchAssociation, San Diego, CA.Russell, J., Kozma, R., Jones, T., Wykof, J., Marx, N., & Davis, J. (1997). Use of simultaneous-synchronizedmacroscopic, microscopic, and symbolic representations to enhance the teaching and learning ofchemical concepts. Journal of Chemical Education, 74(3), 330-334.Schwartz, D. L., & Black, J. B. (1996). Shuttling between depictive models and abstract rules: Induction andfallback. Cognitive Science, 20, 457-497.Shea, D. L., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2001). Importance of assessing spatial ability in intellectuallytalented young adolescents: A 20-year longitudinal study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(3),604-614.Sorby, S. A. (2001). A course in spatial visualization and its impact on the retention of female engineeringstudents. Journal of Women and Minorities in Science and Engineering, 7(2), 153-172.Sorby, S. A. (2009). Education research in developing 3-D spatial skills for engineering students. InternationalJournal of Science Education, 31(3), 459-480.Stieff, M. (2007). Mental rotation and diagrammatic reasoning in science. Learning and Instruction, 17(2), 219234.Stieff, M. (2011). Fostering representational competence through argumentation with multi-representationaldisplays Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning (Vol. 1, pp. 288-295): Erlbaum.Stieff, M., Hegarty, M., & Dixon, B. L. (2010). Alternative strategies for spatial reasoning with diagrams. In A.K. Goel, M. Jamnik & N. H. Narayanan (Eds.), Diagrammatic Representation and Inference (pp. 115127). Berlin: Springer.Stull, A. T., Barrett, T., & Hegarty, M. (2013). Usability of concrete and virtual models in chemistry instruction.Computers in Human Behavior, 29, 2546-2556.Stull, A. T., Hegarty, M., Dixon, B. L., & Stieff, M. (2012). Use it or lose it: Representational translation withconcrete models. Cognition & Instruction, 30(4), 404-434.Tien, L. T., Roth, V., & Kampmeier, J. A. (2002). Implementation of a peer-led team learning instructionalapproach in an undergraduate organic chemistry course. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,39(7), 606-632.Turner, R. C., & Lindsay, H. A. (2003). Gender differences in cognitive and noncognitive factors related toachievement in organic chemsitry. Journal of Chemical Education, 80(5), 563-568.Uttal, D. H., Meadow, N. G., Tipton, E., Hand, L. L., Alden, A., Warren, C., & Newcombe, N. (2013). Themalleability of spatial skills: A meta-analysis of training studies. Psychological Bulletin, 139(2), 352402.Vandenberg, S. G., & Kuse, A. R. (1978). Mental rotations: A group test of three-dimensional spatialvisualization. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 47, 599-604.Wai, J., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2009). Spatial ability for STEM domains: Aligning over fifty years ofcumulative psychological knowledge solidifies its importance. Journal of Educational Psychology,101, 817-835.AcknowledgementsThe research reported here was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (REESE 1102349).The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent the views of these agencies. The authorsthank Mary O’Donnell for her assistance with data collection and entry.ICLS 2014 Proceedings991© ISLS