Education for Sustainability and Resilience in a Changing ClimateSameer Honwad, Ofelia Mangen Sypher, Christopher Hoadley, Armanda Lewis, New York UniversityEmail: svh1@nyu.edu, mangen@nyu.edu, tophe@nyu.edu, al861@nyu.eduKenneth Tamminga, Pennsylvania State University, krt1@psu.eduRose Honey, Harvard University, rose_honey@mail.harvard.eduDiscussant: Daniel C. Edelson, National Geographic Education FoundationAbstract: Educators, researchers, planners, and policy-makers are faced with the challenge ofpreparing current and future generations for adaptation to the impacts of climate change.Pedagogy related to living sustainably and creating resilience is a complex field of educationalpractice that involves cognitive, social, and affective aspects of teaching and learning such asenvironmental decision-making both in a reactive and an anticipatory framing; learning inboth formal and informal environments; learning to understand complex systems; andunderstanding both scientific and socio-cultural aspects of climate change issues related tosustainability and resilience. This symposium brings together a set of diverse research projectsthat, together, shed light on teaching and learning about sustainability and resilience in achanging climate.IntroductionThe disparity between ecology (which is cyclical) and contemporary production and consumption processes(which are relatively linear) gives rise to unprecedented structural violence and human rights abuses (Bales,2004) as well as climate change and related effects such as atmospheric and oceanic warming, extreme weatherevents, reductions in snow and ice, and global mean sea level rise (IPCC, WG-I SPM, 2013). This structuralviolence and climate change can be traced back to issues of sustainability and resilience across environmental,health, and social factors (Adamson, Evans, & Stein, 2002, Orr, 2012). Thus, the research presented in thissymposium is directed at designing educational interventions to catalyze positive social action that addresses theunsustainability of and lack of resilience in contemporary attitudes, behaviors, and consequent systems ofproduction and consumption.According to Orr (1992), this truly global crisis of unsustainability is “qualitatively different, withoutany historical precedent” and “unprecedented in its sheer complexity" (p. 19), transversing energy, resource use,climate, waste management, technology, cities, agriculture, biological diversity and resilience, internationalsecurity, politics, and human values — a clear and urgent mandate for rejuvenated participation in civic culture,and “an ecologically literate and ecologically competent citizenry” (p. 1).Educators, scientists and policy-makers are thus faced with the challenge of preparing current andfuture generations to make decisions that will mitigate the effects of, and allow us to adapt to, the severeimpacts of structural violence and climate change. Learning about sustainability and resilience are essentialelements of how communities around the world can change their ways of living and adapt to the changingenvironment, which is, in turn, essential to ensuring human resilience. As Orr (1992) writes, “The goal ofecological competence implies a different kind of education and a different kind of educational experience thatdevelops the practical art of living well in particular places" (p. 84).The related attitudes and behaviors are complex and dynamic, and likely influenced by personalexperience and knowledge, as well as cultural and political knowledge and values systems. For example,research has shown that cultural and political values play an important role in how individuals understandclimate science (Leiserowitz et al., 2012). These cultural and political values also influence what actionsindividuals are likely to take based on their understanding of the science of climate change (Leiserowitz &Smith, 2010). Estrada’s (2011) Tripartite Integration Model of Social Influence (TIMSI), suggests thatsupporting climate change related behaviors involves individuals (a) gaining self-efficacy; (b) identifying withconcern about climate change, and; (c) adapting to the values of that group. However, the learning processes bywhich individuals negotiate the aspects of TIMSI while understanding climate science and its impact on theireveryday life are not well understood. Helping people learn about the science of sustainability and resilience iscomplex enough that even those that are knowledgeable about climate science struggle to incorporateknowledge about climate change into their everyday lives (Pidgeon & Fischhoff, 2011). Understanding thecontent, incorporating the content knowledge into decision-making in everyday life, and using the contentknowledge to conceptualize sustainable mitigation and adaptation strategies requires learners to not onlyconnect their own actions to consequences, but also to change attitude and behavior patterns.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1466© ISLSResearch in sustainability, resilience and environmental adaptation addresses the learning goals of (a)understanding issues of sustainability and resilience across spectra –from the personal to the global– and (b)being able to situate one’s self within various systems and subsystems. Pedagogy related to living sustainablyand creating resilience is a complex field of educational practice that involves cognitive, social, and affectiveaspects of teaching and learning. More specifically, educational considerations include (but are certainly notlimited to) environmental decision-making both in a reactive and an anticipatory framework learning in bothformal and informal environments, learning to understand the complex systems of climate and ecosystems, andunderstanding both scientific and cultural aspects of the problems at hand, such as climate change.While all of the above aspects of related pedagogical practices are being studied discretely within thelearning sciences, we propose a systems approach to the topic, the pedagogy, and the related processes ofteaching and learning. Learning to adapt and build resilience requires individuals to: (a) learn how to makesustainable decisions (Atran, Medin & Ross, 2005); (b) learn how to anticipate problems (Hewson, 1992); (c)learn within their informal and formal environments (Bell et al., 2009); (d) learn to understand and resolvecomplex issues (Resnick & Wilensky, 1998); (e) learn within their cultures (Banks, et al., 2007); (f) learn howto resolve problems (Hmelo-Silver, Marathe & Liu, 2007), and; (g) learn how to collaborate with each other(O'Donnell, Hmelo-Silver & Erkens, 2013) to build a sustainable and resilient future.In this symposium we bring together scholars studying some of the aforementioned aspects ofeducational practice across a diverse set of learning environments in addressing the question of how we in thelearning sciences can contribute to this “different kind of education” (Orr, 1992). The symposium includesdiscussion of a variety of challenging issues faced by youth and adults, students and teachers as they addresssustainability and resilience in local and personal, as well as globalized contexts by researchers from differentdisciplines within the learning sciences community.Our exemplars are geographically and culturally diverse. By profiling how youth in Bhutan mergeformal and informal value systems to engage environmental decision-making processes, the symposium notonly invites conversation about how youth in Bhutan learn to engage with complexity but also how they mergeformal and informal knowledge so as to learn environmental problem solving strategies that lead tosustainability. As a part of the symposium we discuss how rural communities in Ghana and Tanzania use ananticipatory learning framing to learn about processes that would help them plan for the future changesoccurring due to the impact of climate change. In this presentation we also discuss the importance of connectingthe past and the future to the present lives of Native American students. Finally, the symposium includes aproject that discusses the challenges faced by teachers in the United States while teaching climate change in theformal classroom.Learning to Make Decisions in the Bhutanese HimalayasSameer Honwad, New York UniversityLearning to make decisions in everyday life that lead to environmental sustainability will allow communities tobetter cope with current impacts and shape future ones (Smit et al., 1999). Literature in environmentaladaptation suggests that environmental decision-making that would help mitigate the impact of climate changeand help communities adapt to the changing environment requires that individuals: (a) learn that everydayactions (eating breakfast, using technology, washing clothes, etc.) are interactions with the environment; (b)understand that everyday actions/decisions have an impact on the environment at a local, national andinternational level, and; (c) understand that the long-term impact of these actions/decisions is an importantaspect of how one can adapt to the changing environment (Bhagwat et al., 2005).Using the three points mentioned above, this study examines the current status of how youth in theBhutan Himalayas understand the environmental decision-making process. The study focuses on the BhutanHimalayas, communities in the mountain regions of Asia that are highly vulnerable to the negative impacts ofthe climate change and therefore are in an urgent need to understand and learn to adapt to the changingenvironment. The retreat of the Himalayan glaciers threatens Bhutanese populations by decreasing their accessto water supplies and dramatically changing the landscape that they rely upon for subsistence (Anthwal et al.,2006). The retreating glaciers also pose a threat to the Bhutanese economy, as their main income generator ishydro-electricity. Given the urgent need to help the people in Bhutan to adapt to the changing environment, thisstudy focuses on how to help youth in Bhutan understand the process of decision-making that would lead togreater environmental sustainability.The study examines the process of environmental decision-making through the lens ofeducation/learning and comments on the improvements required in formal environmental sciences/educationcurriculum so that young people can reflect on the decision-making processes, understand how to mitigate theimpact of climate change, and adapt to the changing environment. The study addresses five research questions:1. What are the main activities that occur in the everyday lives of college students in Bhutan? 2. How do theyouth in Bhutan conceptualize their everyday life decisions in terms of the impact on their local environment? 3.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1467© ISLSHow do Bhutanese youth understand the impact of their everyday life decisions on the environment beyondlocal level—at national and international levels? 4. How do Bhutanese youth conceptualize the long-termimpacts of their everyday life actions/decisions? 5. What role does the formal environmental sciences/educationcurriculum play in the everyday life decision-making processes among the youth in Bhutan?The study seeks to address the deficiency in the literature for environmental decision-making processesfrom a learning and education perspective. The goal of the study is to help youth understand that everyday lifedecisions involve environmental interactions and that in order to be good stewards of the environment the focusneeds to be on reflecting on everyday life decisions. The study also seeks to move beyond the current paradigmof environmental education, which discusses good decisions (recycling, riding a bicycle, buying organic food,etc.) and bad decisions (driving a non-fuel efficient car, not buying local, eating meat, etc.) in terms of havingan impact on the environment. The study keyed on two questions: how do people live their everyday lives? and,how can we make our future generations aware of good problem solving skills that would lead to sustainability?As Sillitoe (2007) emphasizes, there is a need to engage the complexity that characterizes people’s everydaylives and the relationships that they share with their place. Thus, the study is designed to take the first step so asto understand how people live their everyday lives and how they understand the impact of their lives on theenvironment.The study used ethnographic methods—participant observations and interviews—to answer theresearch questions. Twenty-two first year college students participated in the study. The main finding of thestudy was that students do not view their everyday life actions/decisions as a part of interaction with theenvironment. While more than 50% of students understood that their food-, technology-, and transportationrelated decisions had impact on the environment, only 1 student understood that recreational activities/decisionsalso have an impact on the environment. It was observed that students struggled with thinking about theireveryday life actions having impact at a broader scale. While a majority of the students understood that therecould be some impact at the broader scale, they exhibited a poor understanding of the impact itself. This can beobserved through examining the answers of why might there be an impact at the global scale. For example,when asked whether their food habits would have an impact at a broader scale, a majority of respondents talkedabout wasting food as the only impact that would happen at the broader scale. While food wastage is definitely aglobal problem, there are several other problems such as mass production of agriculture or import/export offood that were missed. Thus, overall the students were not able to display an understanding ofinterconnectedness. The idea of interconnectedness is an important concept in the learning to adapt and buildresilience conversation. Interconnectedness helps students understand how environmental decisions are tied intoone another and impact local and global environmental systems.The students also displayed an idea that there are ‘good’ and ‘bad’ environmental practices. Whendiscussing impacts, the students only discussed those that were considered negative. Even when told that theyshould talk about both negative and positive impacts the students only discussed negative impacts. This is aperspective that is often observed in environmental education programs. The idea that there are good practicesand bad practices is a not always conducive to advancing the sustainability discourse. Other research alsoindicates that environmental education research aimed at adaptation and resilience building should move awayfrom imparting to the students knowledge about ‘good’ decisions and ‘bad’ decisions (Tilbury, 1995).Student respondents did not see their environmental sciences curriculum as a part of their everydaylife. Even though they discussed getting their information from the environmental sciences curriculum, theywere not able to connect the information in the curriculum to their everyday lives and thus are not able tounderstand the interconnectedness among the environmental phenomena and lives of people all over the world.The curriculum itself takes on a broad view of the environment. While the authors try to connect the curriculumto the everyday lives of the students, it is observed that the curriculum does not succeed in connecting thecontent to the students’ everyday lives. Also, the curriculum is further isolating to the students of Bhutan as theauthors have a universal/Western science viewpoint.The main findings above suggest a different approach to designing an environmental sciencescurriculum for the students of Bhutan to help them adapt to the changing environment. An environmentalsciences curriculum that focuses on adaptation to climate change needs to address the element ofinterconnectedness. Interconnectedness requires the students to understand how local systems and globalsystems are connected to each other and also have the students think about their decisions in terms of futureimpacts. Learning about the environment would require learners to think about the known (local–short term)and the unknown (global–long term). The learners also need to understand that even the smallest of theactions/decisions in their everyday lives create a disturbance/adjustment in the environment. To deal with aproblem of such dynamic nature requires constant dialogue (deliberation/mitigation) and collaboration (sharingof knowledge). It will require equity, as collaboration studies have observed that any collaboration between nonequal partners is not successful. Thus, any design for environmental science education in the future should putthe above-mentioned elements in the center and the content matter as support material. Every chapter/lesson inICLS 2014 Proceedings1468© ISLSthe curriculum should be outlined as local and global, short-term and long-term, and should have an emphasison mitigation, collaboration, and consensus building.Resilience Through Relationships: Utilizing the Past to Build a Better FutureRose Honey, Harvard UniversityAdaptation and resilience building includes an understanding of the past to build a sustainable present andfuture (Smit et al., 1999). This presentation examines a curriculum development process that incorporates thepast, present and future with the intention of helping Native American students to adapt to their changingenvironments while learning about their traditional culture and the world around them. Research suggests thatfor Indigenous children who live in traditional communities, incorporating cultural relevance into sciencelessons can help students to negotiate their life-world culture into the culture of school science (Aikenhead &Jegede, 1999). It also promotes student intrinsic motivation to learn about the environment around them (Honey,2013). Spotlighting the development of a curriculum that is developed for Native American communities asthey move through western/modern and traditional cultures demonstrates how to combine Native learningprocesses such as relationship building, respect for the environment, and interconnectedness with scientificexperimentation and concepts. As the TIMSI model explored by Estrada (2011) suggests, this curriculumencourages teachers and students in early learning classrooms to think about the water in their community fromboth a cultural and Western Modern scientific perspective, thus hoping to promote deeper integration and“durable motivation to persist as a scientist.”Discovering Our Relationship with Water is an early learning science curriculum being developed aspart of The Handbook on Designing Curriculum Honoring Tribal Legacies: An Epic Journey of Healing. Thismulti-literacies handbook, supported by the National Park Service, revisits the history of Lewis and Clark andthe Corps of Discovery and integrates culture and Indigenous perspectives into curriculum units that focus on avariety of learning disciplines (Honoring Tribal Legacies, 2013). One important goal of this project is to connectpresent-day people, including tribal communities, to the places associated with the Lewis and Clark expedition.The Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail provides an opportunity to demonstrate the continuum of humanhistory in these same locations and the subsequent relationships that have developed and will develop with ourenvironment and our culture into future generations. Through the lens of history, young learners will be guidedto think about our relationship with water, and what human relationships with water were like during the time ofLewis and Clark. Through future iterations of this curriculum aimed at older learners, students can begin tothink about how humans have adapted to changes in our relationship with water today and can then begin todiscover what our relationship with water might look like in the future. The ability to learn from the past andtransfer these lessons toward problem solving in the future is an important skill in a world where we need tolearn to adapt to a changing environment.Water is fundamental not only to our survival, but to our personal health, to the food that we eat, toindustry in our communities, to travel, and almost any activity that we participate in. The relationships that wehave with water will determine our lifestyles and possibly our survival into the future. Focused on earlychildhood education (ages 3–5 years), this curriculum is aligned with Common Core State Standards and NextGeneration Science Standards. It aims to guide students to discover and build their own relationship with water,learn how water is connected to their community, and begin to understand the importance of water in ourenvironment. Through these lessons, students will begin to build foundations for thinking about human andother organism’s relationship with water in the future. There are six units or “learning episodes” whichincorporate three main elements: Honoring Tribal Legacies, Scientific Experimentation, and Lewis and Clarkand the Corps of Discovery. One goal that honors tribal legacies is to have students look at water as a sacred andliving entity that takes care of us, and that needs to be taken care of by us as humans. Another component is toguide young learners to explore water through experimentation, and familiarize them with the idea of scientificexploration. And finally, utilizing Lewis and Clark and their quest to find a water passageway to the PacificOcean, the curriculum connects details of their journey to lessons about water and relationships with tribalpeople. Incorporating these elements into each lesson helps guide students to consider the past while predictingand problem solving in the present and for the future. The six learning episodes are:1. Connections: The Water in Our Community. This episode focuses on how we are connected to thewater in our community.2. Balance: Sinking and Floating. This learning episode is focused on balance and the importance ofhaving a balanced relationship with water.3. Transformation – Gas, Liquid & Solid. This episode recognizes that water can transform, and thatthis can help to keep nature in balance.4. Cycles – The Movement of Water. This episode teaches that water moves from place to place aspart of the water cycle.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1469© ISLS5. Reciprocity – Happy & Healthy Water. The focus for this unit is on how we can take care of waterand how water takes care of us.6. Relationships – Plants, Animals & Water. This learning episode teaches learners that we all have arelationship with water.Thinking about how water looks, feels, and sounds, envisioning boats floating or sinking in rivers,imagining water freezing in the winter and thawing in the spring, looking for food in water such as plants andfish—all of these are vehicles toward thinking about our relationship with water and the relationship that waterhas to many different things in our world. Engaging students at a young age in these teachings will inspire andinitiate a journey of play and inquiry that are designed to promote understandings, discoveries, and relationshipsrelated not only to water, but also to the world around us. By bringing past events into lessons for the future,teachers can guide students toward a type of learning that helps them to gain a sense of self, feel more connectedwithin their community and with the world around them and fosters a sense of stewardship and relationshipbuilding so that at a young age, students begin to build relationships with our environment and learn to take careof everything in the world that we are connected to.In this presentation, the design process associated with the curriculum will be discussed as well as howstakeholders from various backgrounds and with different agendas help to shape the curriculum aimed at theadaptation process. Additionally, there will be an emphasis on the methods of including affective domains oflearning such as engagement and relationship building into an environmental science curriculum. This motivatesstudents to care for their environment as they bridge the gap between formal and informal learningenvironments, and promotes an understanding of our past as a means toward building a sustainable present andfuture.Climate Change, Anticipatory Learning, and Co-resilience in Vulnerable PlacesKenneth Tamminga, Pennsylvania State UniversityThe flurry of climate change and resilience discourses at larger scales of theory and praxis can overlook thetenuous relationships between rural communities and their landscapes. Our interdisciplinary project,Anticipatory Learning for Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience (ALCCAR), was funded through a grantfrom the National Science Foundation’s Human and Social Dynamics Program. It took place in rural Ghana andTanzania from 2009 to late 2012, and involved a consortium of U.S. and African scholars and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). Disciplines represented on the research team included geography, learningscience, landscape architecture, climate science, community development, and disaster management. Weexplored community-level adaptive capacity using the concept of anticipatory learning, defined as learningabout and imaginatively engaging with alternative futures as climate change impacts are increasingly felt. Wewere interested in how iterative social-ecological learning may enhance a community’s capacity to makeflexible decisions in the face of growing uncertainty and climate change. We argued that resilience of socialecological systems relies on iterative learning, reflection, and innovation based on past knowledge (‘memory’),present understandings (‘monitoring and observation’), and anticipation of future change (‘envisioning’)(Walker et al., 2004; Tschakert & Dietrich, 2010). This grounded methodology emerged from an interplaybetween the applied scholarship of investigators and the local sensibilities of co-investigators drawn fromregional NGO partners, broadly informed by theory in the learning sciences, management studies, andcommunity planning and development.We conducted a series of participatory research and learning activities (n=15) in each of the 8 ruralcommunities, and in the context of 3 kinds of relational spaces: visceral/embodied (e.g. walking journeys,environmental monitoring), discursive/dialogic (e.g. scenario building, local theatre, futures mapping), andmaterial/diffusive (e.g., scaled-down climate projection trainings, landscape inventories) (Tschakert, Tamminga,and Dietrich, 2013). We report here on several tools that seem relevant in the context of these proceedings.The walking journey activity emerged following start-up events that gauged community-scaleanticipatory learning capacities through participatory decision-making and information flows. It quickly becameapparent that many of these processes were situated spatially through a localized vocabulary of places andpathways. Thus, we worked with our NGO partners in devising walking journeys with select influencers wholed us through their daily working environs and special places. The 3 thematic journeys were Elemental (waterand soil), Biodiversity (local and regional flora and fauna), and Place (sacred and special places and pathways).Earlier social network mapping and advice from village leaders were used to identify a pair of key informantguides for each theme. The pair then devised and led a 3–4 hour walk through the landscape surrounding theirvillage, interpreting the history of change, current status, and sustaining capacities along their designated theme.Videotaped data were transcribed and coded, with findings showing a range of place-based awareness. Thewalks helped us to see how resident experts learn from the land, how they are connected to its past and present,and how they share land-based knowledge. However, levels of expertise, deep understanding of natural process,and extent of knowledge sharing through the village varied largely from one pair of guides to the next. AnICLS 2014 Proceedings1470© ISLSunanticipated positive outcome was that reference to the walking journeys as a way of knowing was repeatedlymade during later community-wide activities (e.g. community theatre, layered mapping, exit interviews),indicating a collective confirmation of the niche role that place-based influencers could play in buildingadaptive capacity.Concurrently, the environmental monitoring activity engaged small groups of resident volunteers ingathering and assessing environmental data. We instructed these citizen scientists in observing and chartinglocal phenomena of relevance to their small-scale farming and fishing economies (e.g. temperature, rainfall,erosion, patterns crop yield and prices). After 12-18 months of data collection, monitoring results providedopportunities for sharing knowledge, and corroborated earlier village-scale instruction on downscaled climateprojections led by the team’s climate scientist. As one participant noted, the monitors and walking journeyguides represented each community’s “living library.” Post project, and with the ongoing assistance of regionalNGOs, monitoring groups continue to collect data and share insights at the village and district levels.The scenario building activity initiated the final phase of research focusing on the future.Representative groups of women and men developed three distinct visions of their community set in the year2035, under several possible climate change regimes. Facilitated through our NGO practitioner partners, weintroduced information about future precipitation and temperature from downscaled climate projections,injecting trends and surprises beyond the community’s embodied knowledge. Participants explored andnavigated their values, fears, and dreams for the future. The creative co-learning process resulted, once again, invaried scenarios, from idealistic to realistic to rather gloomy. In Ghana, optimistic scenarios were most frequent;in Tanzania, apprehension and realism were at the fore. Even within village groups, some scenarios revealedcontested trajectories. Yet all participants got a taste for the creative power of envisioning uncertain-butplausible futures, and all were eager to proceed with more detailed conceptualizations.The layered mapping activity played out a nascent form of community planning and resourcemanagement. Facilitated by our NGO partners who we trained in advance, a layered mapping exercise wasconducted with participants from across the community. Acetate overlays allowed ideas to be placed over theCommunity Map paper base that had been constructed during the earlier scenario building. The two overlays,Concern & Opportunities and Ideas for the Future, addressed the working themes of resource allocation,environmental hazards, infrastructure, civil discourse, and longer-term environmental monitoring. Allparticipants were invited to contribute using dry-erase markers, applying commonly understood symbols as asort of iconographic shorthand. This was followed by a reflective group-wide discussion that considered themapping process, its content, degree of inclusivity, and next steps. We found that participants were quite adeptat basic concept mapping, and spatially well aware of competing resources and spaces. More significantly, wewitnessed almost all participants beginning to grasp the sense of empowerment that could come from even thissort of rudimentary ‘proto-planning’ as a creative and negotiated endeavor. However, idealism consistentlyoutweighed realism in all 8 communities; setting attainable, flexible and complementary goals remains asubsequent step to tackle.Community leaders are now working with our NGO partners in refining and scaling up planningoptions in anticipation of climate change impacts and opportunities. Grounded anticipatory learning andparticipatory envisioning of preferred-but-realistic futures is just a part of the complex challenge of buildinglocal capacity to achieve co-resilience: communities and working landscapes that each sustains the otherthrough time.Learning to Research: Fostering Climate Change Education Through StudentClimate ResearchOfelia Mangen Sypher, Christopher Hoadley and Armanda Lewis, New York UniversityThe “Learning to Research” (L2R) project was a three-year experiment in fostering climate change educationthrough student-led inquiry oriented climate research conducted in the context of the GLOBE program(globe.gov). Normally, GLOBE uses scientist- and educational researcher-developed curriculum to involvestudents worldwide in earth science data collection, aggregation, and to some extent analysis. Dissemination iscarried out primarily through teacher training on pre-developed data collection protocols, teacher and studentconferences, and through online sharing of data. L2R took a different approach in which teachers were asked tocreate student- or teacher-led inquiry science curriculum on climate change, using either existing data or datathey would collect. In this novel teacher professional development model, teachers were given face-to-faceprofessional development (3 days in-person per cohort), and then were supported to connect with professionalscientists, GLOBE educators, and each other online to design their own curriculum. They also participated inmonthly seminars on Adobe Connect in which shared project-related issues and solution, as well as heardcareer-oriented presentations by professionals using climate-related STEM knowledge in a wide range ofcareers (from scientists to disaster relief and public health professionals).ICLS 2014 Proceedings1471© ISLSIn this symposium, we discuss two sets of findings from the project. First, we present the results of astudy of collaboration processes on the curriculum design teams. This study examined collaborative outcomesusing the TACIT framework (Hoadley, Lee, & Sockman, 2006) based on five dimensions of collaborativechallenges: Trust, Awareness, Contextualization, Incentives, and Techniques for Coordinating. Results indicatethat these dimensions of the collaboration did help predict success on designing and implementing climatechange curriculum. Of the surveyed participants, those who reported that they successfully completed theirprojects also had higher mean TACIT scores than those who reported that their teams were “partially successfulat achieving goals” (p=.999). We speculate on ways these dimensions might have been influenced by theproject design, the collaboration factors (group type, communication media, co-location, etc.).Secondly, we discuss cases that explore how climate change teachers perceive of their participation intechnologically enhanced, collaboratively based professional development activities with respect to educationaland research objectives. Such markers of successful L2R integration, which were triangulated with survey data,include the degree to which teachers access expert knowledge, report changes in their own or their students’disciplinary knowledge, and observe instances of student-led use of data to explore climate-related issues.Additionally, we will illustrate the unanticipated difficulties in helping teachers address climate change in theirclassrooms, and how these unanticipated difficulties were addressed in successive cohorts in the teachertraining. These unanticipated difficulties included: participating teachers’ misconceptions about the fundamentalprocesses of climate change; the need to have strategies for addressing the politics of teaching climate change;challenges surrounding collaborative project-based learning; and the difficulty of having students generateanswerable questions about climate through data-driven inquiry. Changes in the program for later cohortsincluded: increased training on basic climate science; a reduced reliance on distant teacher-peers as coimplementers of geographically distributed curriculum and increased reliance on them as advisers and/orsources of case data; more emphasis on regular, technology mediated check-ins with the whole group; andadditional mentorship on the development of specific research questions and collaborating with local scientificexperts.ReferencesAdamson, J., Evans, M. M. & Stein, R. (2002). The environmental justice reader: Politics, poetics, & pedagogy.University of Arizona Press.Aikenhead, G., & Jegede, O. (1999). Cross-cultural science education: A cognitive explanation of a culturalphenomenon. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36, 269-287.Aikman, S. (1999). Intercultural education and literacy: An ethnographic study of indigenous knowledge.Amsterdam: Benjamins.Anthwal, A., Joshi, V., Sharma, A., & Anthwal, S. (2006). Retreat of Himalayan glaciers–indicator of climatechange. Nature and Science, 4(4), 53-59.Atran, S., Medin, D. & Ross, N. O. (2005). The cultural mind: Environmental decision making and culturalmodeling within and across populations. Psychological Review, 112, 744–776.Bales, K. (2004). New slavery: A reference handbook. ABC-CLIO.Banks, J. A., Au, K. H., Ball, A. F., Bell, P., Gordon, E. W., Gutierrez, K. D., Heath, S. B., et al. (2007).Learning in and out of school in diverse environments: Life-long, life-wide, life-deep. Seattle, WA:University of Washington Center for Multicultural Education.Bell, P, Lewenstein, A., Shouse, A.W., & Feder, M.A. (Eds.) (2009). Learning science in informalenvironments: People, places, and pursuits. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Bhagwat, S. A., C. G. Kushalappa, P. H. Williams, and N. D. Brown. (2005). A landscape approach tobiodiversity conservation of sacred groves in the Western Ghats of India. Conservation Biology, 19,1853–1862.Cordero, E. C., Todd, A. M., & Abellera, D. (2008). Climate change education and the ecological footprint.Bulletins of the American Meteorological Society, (June), 865–872. doi:10.1175/2007BAMS2432.2Estrada, M., Woodcock, A., Hernandez, P. R., & Schultz, P. (2011). Toward a model of social influence thatexplains minority student integration into the scientific community. Journal of EducationalPsychology, 103(1), 206.Hewson, M. G. (1992). Traditional healers in Southern Africa. Annals of Internal Medicine, 128, 1029–1034.Hmelo-Silver, C. Marathe, S., & Liu, L. (2007). Fish swim, rocks sit, and lungs breathe: Expert-noviceunderstanding of complex systems. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16, 307–331.Hmelo-Silver, C., & Pfeffer, M. G. (2004). Comparing expert and novice understanding of a complex systemfrom the perspective of structures, behaviors, and functions. Cognitive Science, 1, 127–138.Hoadley, C., Lee, J. J., & Sockman, B. R. (2008, March). Interdisciplinary collaboration in educationaltechnology design teams: A cross-case analysis using the TACIT Framework. Presented at AmericanEducational Research Association, New York, NY.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1472© ISLSHoney, R. E. (2013). Bitterroots & Bull Trout: Traditional Culture in Science Classrooms on the FlatheadIndian Reservation (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses.HonoringTribalLegacies(2013).CurriculumDevelopmentWebsite,Retrievedfromhttp://blogs.uoregon.edu/tlworkshops/.Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2013). Climate Change 2013: The physical science basis.Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel onClimate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Leiserowitz, A, & Smith, N. (2010). Knowledge of climate change across global warming’s Six Americas. InKnowledge creation diffusion utilization. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.Leiserowitz, A., Maibach, E., Roser-Renouf, C., Feinberg, G., & Howe, P. (2012). Climate change in theAmerican mind: Americans’ global warming beliefs and attitudes in September 2012. New Haven, CT:Yale Project on Climate Change Communication.McCright, A. M. (2010). Beliefs about climate science and concern about global warming in the USpublic, 2001-2010. National Research Council Climate Change Education Workshop (Vol. 1107).Washington, D.C.McMillan, E. E., Wright, T., & Beazley, K. (2004). Impact of a university-level environmental studies class onstudents’ values. The Journal of Environmental Education, 35, 19–29.O'Donnell, A. M., Hmelo-Silver, C., & Erkens, G. [Eds.] (2013). Collaborative learning, reasoning, andtechnology. New York, NY: Routledge.Orr, D. W. (1992). Ecological literacy: Education and the transition to a postmodern world. Albany: StateUniversity of New York Press.Orr, D. W. (2012). Down to the wire: Confronting climate collapse. New York; Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.Pidgeon, N., & Fischhoff, B. (2011). The role of social and decision sciences in communicating uncertainclimate risks. Nature Climate Change, 1(1), 35-41.Resnick, M., & Wilensky, U. (1998). Diving into complexity: Developing probabilistic decentralized thinkingthrough role-playing activities. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7, 153–172.Sillitoe, P. (1998). The development of indigenous knowledge: A new applied anthropology. CurrentAnthropology, 39, 223–252.Smit, B., I. Burton, R.J., Klein, T. & Street, R. (1999). The science of adaptation: A framework for assessment.Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 4, 199–213.Tilbury, D. (1995). Environmental education for sustainability: Defining the new focus of environmentaleducation in the 1990s. Environmental Education Research, 1(2), 195-212.Tschakert P. & Dietrich, K. (2010). Anticipatory learning for climate change adaptation and resilience. Ecologyand Society, 15(2): 11. www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol15/iss2/art11/Tschakert, P., Tamminga, K., & Dietrich, K. (2013). Radical transformative change? Reflections on envisioningand planning for an uncertain future. Manuscript under review, 22 pp.Walker, B., Holling, C., Carpenter, S., & Kinzig, A. (2004). Resilience, adaptability and transformability insocial–ecological systems. Ecology and Society, 9(2): 5.Woodside, C. (2011). It isn’t easy being green. Nature Publishing Group, 1(1), 13–15.doi:10.1038/nclimate1076.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1473© ISLS