Middle School Learners’ Ontological ‘Trying-on’ of Dimensions:A Phenomenological InvestigationKeri Duncan Valentine, Theodore J. Kopcha, The University of Georgia221 Rivers Crossing, Athens, GA 30602Email: frogstuff@gmail.com, tjkopcha@uga.eduAbstract: This paper shares findings from a post-intentional phenomenological study aimedat understanding learners’ experience investigating space and dimension concepts in a fifthand sixth grade mathematics class. Findings indicate experiences in this study manifest as anontological ‘trying-on’ of geometric dimensions (e.g., through sight, perception, and motion),leading learners to conjecture about dimensional relationships. The paper discussesimplications informing the second iteration of the design-based research project.IntroductionBecoming is an ontological notion explicated in the phenomenological philosophical tradition of Heidegger andMerleau-Ponty. Heidegger questions the epistemological focus (i.e., consciousness of something) ofphenomenological investigations, recognizing that experience is already situated in the world of being.Throughout his major work, Being and Time (1927/2008), he uses the phrase ‘Being-in-the-world’ to indicatethe ontological phenomenological starting point. According to Heidegger, phenomenology’s task is to questionwhat it is to be in the everyday world. Merleau-Ponty (1945/2002) agrees with Heidegger’s notion of ‘Being-inthe-world’ and makes embodiment a central theme in his work – a subject embedded in a certain position andtime in space. This is exemplified in his work with the primacy of perception.This paper shares middle school learners’ experiences conjecturing about the relationships betweendimensions following the film Flatland (Travis & Johnson, 2007). The film offers viewers an opportunity tocontemplate analogously within and between dimensions. In addition to the film and subsequent discourse,learners constructed models to demonstrate 3D/4D relationships. For learners, the investigation was taken upontologically as they ‘tried on’ the lenses, motion, and perceptions of imagined characters.Issue Being AddressedRarely do learners reflect on the ontological experience of becoming in mathematics class. Yet, children formconceptions of space early in life simply by being in the world. They engage in everyday activities like“looking, walking, drawing, building, and manipulating objects” (Lehrer, Jenkins, & Osana, 1998, p. 169). Theydevelop intuitions about spatial structure before formalized words are attached to their concepts (Freudenthal,1983; Gravemeijer, 1998; Piaget & Inhelder, 1948/1967; van Hiele, 1986). It is possible that their preformalized concepts formed by being in the world could come in conflict with Euclidean geometric conceptsformally taught in school.These conflicts are shown to relate to the materials and processes used in schools (Lehrer et al., 1998).For example, most textbooks and teachers present images of triangles to students with a horizontal base,although this is not a defining characteristic. This results in students primarily recognizing prototypicalexamples of triangles to the exclusion of non-prototypical examples. These limited conceptions can inhibitstudents from reaching the intended goals of instruction and will most likely resurface in later geometrylearning. Spiro, Coulson, Feltovich, and Anderson (1988) describe reciprocal misconception compounding as aproblem resulting from simplifying complex concepts. Many misconceptions have been identified in geometryand their origins might lie in this simplification process as well as instruction that fail to incorporate learners’prior knowledge (e.g., Carroll, 1998; Monaghan, 2000).The current educational climate rarely provides opportunities for learners to problematize space ingeometry, rather it appears taken-for-granted that everyone shares the same concept – a Euclidean mathematicalspace represented by x, y, and z coordinates. Even more problematic is that school explorations of space start inan abstract manner, building on idealizations of the point (0 space), the line (1 space), and the plane (2 space) –spaces that are actually impossible to find in the world. In this study, we created a learning environment wherelearners could build on prior 3D experiences and the experiences of characters from the film Flatland.ContextForty-three 5th and 6th grade mathematics students were shown Flatland as a way to follow up on a recent unitinvestigating properties of polygons. After watching the movie, students questioned what it would be like to livein a four-dimensional world – to eat, to move, to see. There were no simplistic answers to their questions, so weconjectured as a class and eventually created three-dimensional shapes out of straws and pipe cleaners. Thesewere dunked in bubbles, which allowed students to make physical models of hyper-shapes (i.e., representationsICLS 2014 Proceedings745© ISLSof 4D shapes). A year later, we conducted a post-intentional phenomenological study with students to exploretheir lived experiences. In particular, we explored if and how children take on the perspective of anotherdimension not their own (0D, 1D, 2D, 4D).Theoretical PerspectiveOur perspective acknowledges that humans’ experience of phenomena in the world is complex. Phenomenaemerge over time, are context dependent, and exhibit complex dynamics such as emergence, ambiguity, andadaptation (e.g., Davis & Sumara, 2006; Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006). Not only is the concept of space anddimension taken up as complex and ill-structured, but designing learning environments is viewed as a complex,iterative process informing and developing theory as well as practice (Barab & Squire, 2004; Gravemeijer &Cobb, 2006). At the early stages in design, our aim is to explicate phenomenological understandings concerningthe ways shifts in perspective manifest in complex, emergent environments integrating innovative practices(e.g., modeling, mathematical discourse) and emerging forms of technology (e.g., animations, video cases). Inparticular, we used conceptual change strategies from science education including a discrepant event andbridging analogies as described by Clement (1993, 2008). These manifestations of shifts in perspective werethen used to inform refinements in the design and theoretical conjectures.There is little insight concerning middle school learners investigating the fourth dimension or even howthis may play out using multimedia animations. Banchoff (1990) is one who passes along geometric insights toteachers of young children. He writes “[t]he invitation to examine coordinates from a dimensional standpoint isavailable at all times: We only have to make students aware of what they are seeing” (p. 33). We agree that theinvitation is available but that it also encompasses more than sight. Freudenthal (1973), attributed withdeveloping Realistic Mathematics Education, describes geometry as embodied:since it is about the education of children, [geometry] is grasping that space in which the childlives, breathes and moves. The space the child must learn to know, explore, conquer, in orderto live, breath and move better in it. (p. 403)Clements (1998) describes children’s investigation of shape through various actions (e.g., touching, drawing,discussing, moving); yet, one of his descriptions stands out – “development of perspective taking” (p. 3). Hedescribes the “three mountains” task, where a doll is placed in several positions around a mountain scene.Children are asked to describe the scene from the perspective of the doll as it is moved, but always describe theirown viewpoint instead. He writes, “it is not just familiarity or experience, but connecting different viewpoints,that develops perspective-taking ability” (p. 3). How does one connect different viewpoints? Taking on anexternal perspective is nuanced because children would also have to make a transition from two to three-space.It may help to think about the context of maps to understand viewpoint. According to Presson (1987 as cited inClements, 1998) children:must grow in their ability to treat the spatial relations as separate from their immediateenvironment. These secondary meanings require people to take the perspective of an abstractframe of reference (“as if you were there”) that conflicts with the primary meaning. (p. 13)Methodological ApproachVagle’s (2010) post-intentional phenomenological (PIP) research method was used in this study to capture thelived-experiences of middle school students investigating space and dimension. PIP brings post-structuralthinking in conversation with phenomenology philosophers, such as Husserl (1901/1970) Heidegger(1927/2008), Merleau-Ponty (1945/2002), Gadamer (1975/1994), and methodologists such as van Manen(1990), and Dahlberg, Dahlberg, and Nyström (2008). Phenomena, and humans experience living with them, areseen as tentative manifestations – dynamic and continuously changing. Experiences are not only interpreted, butare lived in tentative, partial, and fleeting ways. Vagle (2010) has designed a five-component process forconducting PIP research: (1) Identify a phenomenon in its multiple, partial, and varied contexts, (2) devise aclear, yet flexible process for collecting data appropriate for the phenomenon under investigation, (3) make abridling plan, (4) read and write your way through your data in a systematic, responsive manner, and (5) craft atext that captures tentative manifestations of the phenomenon it its multiple, partial, and varied contexts.Phenomenology is the study of experience, or as Dahlberg et al. (2008) write, “the science of the worldand its inhabitants, the “things of experience” understood as the world of experience” (p. 33). One cannotinvestigate phenomena without due attention to the central tenet of intentionality. Intentionality is bestunderstood as an embodied relationship to things and beings in the world. Although similar to the word“intention,” or action (i.e., I intend to go to bed early), intentionality is different. We choose to draw on Vagle’s(2009) notion of intentionality as related to PIP research, thus situating intentionality within this study. Vaglewrites (2010) “intentionality is shifting and forever partial and thus can be read through post-structural frames”ICLS 2014 Proceedings746© ISLS(p. 2). This presents a point of departure from other forms of phenomenology, such as transcendentalphenomenology, which seeks to describe essences. Rather, we ascribe to Vagle’s approach that identifiesphenomena as tentative manifestations.Phenomenological philosophers and methodologists have discussed in length and with great detail thephenomenological attitude, sometimes referred to as a scientific or open attitude. In choosing Vagle’s approach,we chose a phenomenological attitude as one of openness, not of phenomenological reduction described byresearchers such as Giorgi (1997), who uses transcendental notions of bracketing and Epoché to capture theessence of a phenomena. An “open attitude” as described by Dahlberg et al. (2008) means, “having the capacityto be surprised and sensitive to the unpredicted and unexpected” (p. 98). Bridling, described below, is one wayboth Dahlberg and Vagle suggest remaining open to the phenomena under investigation.BridlingBridling is a way to negotiate complexity with data rather than being rigid and lockstep. The practice betterencompasses the way towards an increased understanding of the phenomenon, and to us, the validity of theinvestigation. Bridling includes three main activities on the part of the researcher: (1) questioning preunderstandings (including assumptions), (2) remaining open, and (3) joining in an ongoing dialogue about thephenomenon. Therefore, bridling does not remove, set aside, or render the researcher non-influential but“animates and illuminates the researcher more fully” (Vagle, 2009, p. 592). The bridling entries in this studywere made in three different formats: (1) as comments inserted alongside/in the margins of transcripts, (2) asindividual, dated Word document files after analysis sessions, and (3) as notes inserted in books and articles.Statement of Phenomena of Interest and QuestionsThe phenomena of interest in this study aims to show the reader “the lived quality and significance” of middleschool students experience investigating dimensional relationships in a deep and meaningful way. The primaryresearch question asks, “What is the lived-experience investigating dimensional relationships, including thefourth dimension?” Secondary questions ask: (1) What role does the video Flatland play in the experience forstudents? (2) Are there indications that persistent, or long-term learning occurred?Data sources by Primary Research QuestionAll 43 students (21 fifth grade and 22 sixth grade at the time of instruction) from a K-12 independent school inthe Northeastern United States were asked to participate in the study. Three fifth graders (1 female and 2 male)and seven sixth graders (6 female and 1 male) agreed to generate lived-experience descriptions one year afterinstruction. These were used to guide follow-up interviews where all 10 students articulated their experiencesmore fully and/or clarified their experiences. Second-round interviews were conducted as needed to clarify andexpand upon key aspects of the experience. Although the 6th grade interviewees were mostly female, this wasrepresentative of the student body (18 females and 4 males).Because we interviewed former students, we used a “conversational approach” to help alleviatepossible power structures (Denzin, 1989). According to Denzin, interviewing “should not be a relationshipwhere one party does all the talking and the other only asks questions. When interviews turn into this form, theybecome asymmetric, authoritarian social relations in which the power of social science determines theinformation given” (p. 43). To achieve this, we focused on having students describe their experience with asmuch detail and ability to capture multi-faceted aspects of the phenomenon.During the instruction, student participation and work was captured through video and photographs.Additional data sources include lesson artifacts and bridling entries. These were used to guide interviewquestions, support/challenge interview data, and generate hunches as described by Glesne (2011). Theseadditional data sources were also used to generate a multifaceted description of the phenomenon and answersecondary research questions.Analysis: Whole-Part-WholeWe draw on both Vagle (2010) and Dahlberg et al.’s (2008) suggestions for data analysis, using a whole-partwhole approach. Following is a summary, describing with way data is analyzed both within and across sources:• Whole. The first reading focuses on the whole data collection event, where all data pieces are broughttogether and read (not analyzed) as a whole.• Part. This is followed by multiple line-by-line readings with researcher notes and follow-up interviewquestions for each participant. Subsequent line-by-line readings articulate meanings and consider notes,markings, follow-ups, and bridling entries. After saving documents for each participant, the last line-byline reading articulates analytic thoughts for each part for each participant.• Whole. Subsequent readings start to identify tentative manifestations across the data.ICLS 2014 Proceedings747© ISLSFindingsFor this paper focused on becoming, we will explicate a particular manifestation of the learners’ experiencestrying on various dimensions (0D, 1D, 2D, 3D, and 4D). The phenomenon was evidenced through learners’conjectures about what it might be like to see, perceive, and move in the dimensions. Notable in the descriptionsfrom learners was their attention to relationships within the dimensions. For example, when describing sight,perception, and motion in 3D space, they conjectured what it might be like to be a point, a line, a square, a cube,and even a hypercube in 3D space.Learners described Flatland as the point when they started considering dimensional relationships. Theyrelated to the 2D Flatlanders’ struggle to visualize three-dimensional objects. Students had an analogousstruggle visualizing the fourth dimension. Students talked most about the last scene of Flatland. This is the pointwhere they saw the fourth dimension animated for the first time and where they watched Spherius, the main 3Dcharacter in the movie, deny the existence of a fourth dimension. This denial prompted a lengthy discourseamong students about close-mindedness. Students expressed being upset with Spherius for denying a higherdimension in a similar way that 2D characters in the movie denied a third dimension.Taking on Sight and Perception from the Various DimensionsAlmost every student talked about what it might be like to be in a dimension. For some, this took the form ofarticulating what it actually means to be in 3D space and how they are only seeing parts of solids, but not allsides at once. They called this seeing in 2D. They talked about perceiving depth and thinking that we see in 3D.Somehow it was easy for them to then imagine by analogy what it must be like to see and perceive in the fourthdimension – they called this seeing in 3D.Students engaged in their learning experience by trying on different dimensional lenses (orcontemplating being other dimensions) and then visiting other dimensions, even the fourth. Alan is one studentwho attempted to generalize sight and perception for all dimensions and used Euclidean mathematical notions ofthe coordinate system in his discussion. He demonstrated an ability to perceive as “creatures” from differentdimensions, related to the movie Flatland:Pointland is a land of the zero dimension, where all that exists is a point. No axis. Lineland isonly a line, the first dimension with the x-axis (or y). Flatland is the second dimension, withthe x and y-axis. The creatures in the movie could only see a line wherever they looked.Spaceland is the third dimension, where we exist. With the x, y, and z-axis, it is most likelythe largest ‘land.’ The creatures of this land can see a 2D image that can be perceived in 3D.Interesting here was his distinction between sight and perception in 2D Flatland and 3D Spaceland. His abilityto connect dimensions to the x, y, and z-axis demonstrated what Freudenthal termed mathematization (1973).He continued the process as he connected the fourth dimension into this same x, y, and z coordinate framework.If someone asked me to describe the fourth dimension, I would say something along the linesof...basically a dimension more complex than ours as another axis or existence…starts withnone in the zero, x in the first, y in the second, z in the third. We’ll have to make a new letterin the alphabet for the fourth dimension. Or ‘a’…it would probably work, yeah a different sortof direction. The fourth axis is probably where the idea of how I perceived hypercube camefrom. Cause it’s a cube connected by another axis…like a cube in the center connected by theline coming from the outer corner. And I was thinking of those lines as being a fourth axis.Alan was the only student who talked about the x, y, z, and “a” axis in relation to the dimensions, attributingFlatland as his starting point. He said previously he had only learned about the second dimension, but not thezero, first, third, or fourth dimensions. He talked about his experience as a whole:Investigating the fourth dimension is to learn what the world is like mathematically and also toteach us more about the dimension we exist in. The fourth dimension was to explain whythings happen, why the world is like it is. Well, before that, I didn’t really understand. I had avague understanding of the second dimension, but not much of the first, zero, third, or fourth.The biggest thing I learned is that humans exist in the third dimension but we can onlyactually see the second dimension – we just perceive the third. As we evolved to – not evolved– as we exist, only able to see the dimension below it and not the actual dimension it’s in.Dimensions Lower than Three (0-2)This section incorporates students’ discussion of the zero, first, and second dimensions. Students described thesein various ways, taking the perspectives of the different types of dimensional creatures (0D – Point; 1D –ICLS 2014 Proceedings748© ISLSLinelander; 2D – Flatlander; 3D - Spacelander). For example, taking on a Linelander’s perspective of its owndimension, or a Linelander’s perspective of a Flatlander. In addition, they described the dimensions either byappearance, motion, perception, and even the sight available to a particular dimension.Students talked least about the zero dimension, but almost all students recalled the “me” song that thePoint character from Flatland sang. In the following description, Annie talked about the perspective of a point:I had never really thought about it before, like a line can only see side to side of where it is ora point only notices itself because it can’t - it’s not really anything else, I thought that wasreally cool because I’d never really taken that in perspective before.Students’ discussion of the first dimension highlights their attention to limitations of sight and motionavailable to a line. For example, Susie expressed, “their [Linelanders] only way of traveling was right and leftand only it couldn’t have any sort of up and down. It was only just in the two directions.” Edward, Sabrina, andDaria also described Lineland, but they talked more about the Linelanders’ point of view when otherdimensional beings came into their line. For example, Edward talked about one Linelander’s point of viewtowards Arthur Square, a Flatlander visiting the line in the movie:In Lineland it could only see down it’s line so it like it couldn’t see up or down so it wouldn’tbe able to see him…it would only be able to see him if his eye or if his - if he was right on it’sline, so I thought that was kind of cool how it had no other power to see anywhere else.Students talked even more about the second dimension. Mary felt like the movie gave her a betterunderstanding of the second dimension. “If you had a piece of paper, it helped me understand what it would belike if you had a circle that could, or a sphere that could sink into it.” Although this description may seemsimplified upon first reading, Mary started articulating a foundational calculus concept of iteratively slicing asphere. Another student, Susie, described the Flatlander’s point of view and motion. Here, she started to insertherself into the second dimension showing how she took on the role of dimensional motion:It’s kind of crazy for me thinking about actually only living in the flat surface. I sort ofremember always thinking about the idea of how do they move? Do they slide along on thefloor or what? Or crawl? I remember when we started watching, that was basically one of thefirst things that popped out to me. I was like, how are they moving? Its kinda’ cool to thinkabout how – wasn’t he saying that they only have northwards and southwards or something?That they don’t have up and down? Yeah cause it’s flat.The second dimension is typically taught as a concrete dimensional plane. The movie allowed her tocontemplate motion in this dimension, whereas her prior experiences limited her to only seeing two-dimensionaldrawings in books. It created another way of conceptualizing the second dimension, an unexpected (from theteacher’s point of view) experience of taking on the role of seeing and moving in different dimensions.The Third DimensionStudents’ descriptions of the third dimension reflected a problematizing of their own 3D space. These studentshad little formal instruction concerning the third dimension at the start of the lesson. Edward gave a prototypicalexample of problematizing sight from his own third dimension, “We don’t see circles, we see spheres. I meanwe see circles but…and you can’t really get anything completely flat except for like if you’re looking at ascreen. I guess that like what’s inside would be totally flat.” In his description, there is tension as he tried toreconcile seeing “flat” but at the same time seeing, or perceiving, space. Although he did not use the wordperceive, many students did. For example, Alan talked about seeing and perceiving. “The third dimension issomething we can only perceive, and that we can’t really understand further than that in a visual way.”The Fourth DimensionStudents conjectured most about the fourth dimension. Flatland only gave a glimpse of a rotating tesseract at theend of the movie, but this seemed to be the scene that affected them most. During class, student questions aboutthe existence of a fourth dimension were persistent and eventually led to the hands-on investigation with strawand bubble shapes. This led to several conjectures about the fourth dimension, elaborated below.Sight in the Fourth DimensionMary talked about sight and being in the fourth dimension. It’s as if she not only learned about the fourthdimension but also strengthened her understanding of the 0, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd dimensions and their relationship.She talked about what it would be like to see and perceive from each of these dimensions:ICLS 2014 Proceedings749© ISLSI want to know more about what it would actually be like to be in a fourth dimension. I havean idea. You’d be able to see all the sides of an object at once, but it would be like in Flatland.The square guy could only see the sphere when he was in his field of vision. So it would beweird to think that there would be things that we can’t see…you can see all sides ofsomething. I’m continuously getting the vision of your eyes popping out of your head and likecurving around an object so you could see the back of it.Mary’s curiosity led her to think about seeing in a fourth dimension. Other students experienced this as well. Forexample, Edward said:To see every side of a cube, your eyes would have to be…probably have to have one like, likecoming out of like something that’s like this [makes motion of hand making a hook comingfrom forehead curving out to front of face] I guess so you could see like this way toward…likeyou could see yourself…and you could see like anywhere I guess. That would be very difficultto see ourselves, like our eyes.Alan also talked about sight in the fourth dimension, distinguishing between sight and perception:Assuming that any creature can perceive in, can perceive a dimension below it – can SEE thedimension below it, but perceive its own. Well, that would imply the fourth dimensionalcreature would have to be able to see a third dimension. So basically what I imagine a fourthdimensional creature being like is a sphere with eyes on the inside of it, so it could look atsomething from every angle. And it would have to have some way of getting, getting things inthere to look at, but I hadn’t gotten past that. Yeah, you’d have to be able to see all sides atonce. First my…could imagine seeing all three sides of a cube – all six sides of a cube at once.Motion in the Fourth DimensionIn addition to conjecturing about the sight of four-dimensional beings, students also discussed motion. Forexample, Annie inserted the human form into the fourth dimension. “I think it would be pretty insane to live inthe fourth dimension, especially if we were 4D humans, cause that’d mean like our guts would be like rotatinginside of us.” Edward used motion to think about what it must be like to eat a hamburger. “It will be forevergoing in and out of itself so you’d never get a bite with both [the bun and the meat] in it cause sometimes you’dget just the meat and sometimes you’d get just the bun.” When Annie was asked how she would describe thefourth dimension to someone else, she said, “I would tell them that it’s kind of like…I’m still not like 100%sure, but it’s kinda’ like an object…it…attached kind of inside an object, but it’s kind of rotating so it’s alwayson the inside or the outside.” It’s interesting that she was okay admitting not being 100% sure about describingthe fourth dimension, yet continued trying. This seemed to happen for all the students interviewed.Fourth Dimension AppearanceIn addition to talking about sight and motion in the fourth dimension, students made conjectures about theappearance of fourth dimensional shapes. In these descriptions students used terms like “hyper-human.” Forexample, Susie drew upon her science class to conjecture about “a human inside of a human” as a hyper-shape.Susie’s remarks indicated that she was trying to picture humans as they might exist in these conjectured spaces.An Open MindStudents did more than describe the fourth dimension. They also talked about being open-minded and closeminded in relation to dimensions other than our own. For example, Mary said:Before [learning about the 4th dimension] I always thought the 3rd dimension is as far as youcan go in the dimensions or like, I don’t know, not really the best, but we’re the highest youcan go or whatever. But now it’s like…there might be something above us…not above us, butsomething different, or more, or whatever.Mary talked about thinking that the third dimension was the highest. It’s interesting that she chose the phrase,“not really the best, but we’re the highest you can go or whatever.” Edward did a similar thing:He’s [Spherius] like but there could never be a fourth dimension. So I think they can believelike numbers lower than them but they don’t think there’s anything higher than them becauseICLS 2014 Proceedings750© ISLSthey all want to be the best, I guess. Well, I thought that it would be hard to believe there wasa fourth dimension.This idea seems provocative and indicative of most human thinking, similar to people believing they are smarterthan animals. Several students discussed Flatland characters’ denial of higher dimensions, arguing aboutwhether you could perceive other dimensions if you could never actually experience them. These discussionsindicated a tension regarding whether students’ perception of the world was closed or open.Discussion and ConclusionsWe chose these particular manifestations of the phenomenon to show how the experience led them to thinkabout the various dimensions in provocative ways (motion, sight, perception, etc.). The findings indicate thatFlatland served as what Zeck et al. (1998) refer to as a video anchor, a place to start conjecturing aboutdimensions. The fact that their conjectures persisted one year after their experience suggests that experiencingdimensional relationships ontologically may be a way to sustain student learning over time. Students were ableto articulate specific scenes from the movie, as well as use them to continue conjecturing during the interviews.It may be that the video anchor, which provided a powerful analogy, was able to promote thinking and allowlearners to try on a being outside their own dimension.Although we asked non-phenomenological questions, such as conjecturing questions, we feel like theirresponses give researchers and teachers insight into the capability of middle school students’ ability to reasondeeply about space and dimension. We admit not attempting to formalize their learning by connecting theinvestigation to abstract symbols, although we did look at patterns between the dimensions (e.g., number ofvertices, edges, faces). The main focus was encouraging them to engage in a conjecturing activity related totheir interests following the film. Allowing the space for this to happen gives students an opportunity to engagein mathematical processes, much like a scientist problematizing their world. This seems in line with many of theRealistic Mathematics Education (RME) principles (e.g., Cobb, Zhao, & Visnovska, 2008; Gravemeijer, 1998;van den Heuvel-Panhuizen & Wijers, 2005).Future DirectionsWe have already designed and are currently analyzing a second iteration of an instructional program that buildson this study. The revised program incorporates 70 cases of space and perspective in a hypermedia format andcollaborative forms of reflective discourse to support the development of robust, flexible concepts amonglearners (Jacobson, 2008; Kolodner, 2006; Spiro et al., 1988). As part of our research, we have developed aframework grounded in the constructivist perspectives of Cognitive Flexibility Theory (e.g., Spiro et al., 1988)and RME.At this point, we have developed a media rich set of cases for learners to examine multiple perspectivesof space (e.g., noticing surprising similarities and surprising differences between variational instances of aconcept) as a way to understand their inherent complexity. One investigation asks students to consider thevarious ways we capture and represent space. Cases include emergent video techniques that capture sportingevents using slow motion or gyro cameras. Concerning invisible spaces, students are asked to consider fractaland hypercube animations representing dimension and spatial relationships we were unable to visualize untilrecently. At this still emergent stage of design, we are most interested in the ways students experience theirengagement with the cases and the learning environment as a whole. Guided by the primary question, what is itfor students to find themselves perceiving space as mediated in a variety of ways through technology, we areusing post-intentional phenomenological methods to continue our investigation.ReferencesBanchoff, T. F. (1990). Dimension. In L. Steen (Ed.), On the shoulders of giants: New approaches to numeracy(pp. 11–59). Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.Barab, S., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. Journal of the LearningSciences, 13(1), 1–14.Carroll, W. M. (1998). Geometric knowledge of middle school students in a reform-based mathematicscurriculum. School Science and Mathematics, 98(4), 188–197.Clement, J. (1993). Using bridging analogies and anchoring intuitions to deal with students’ preconceptions inphysics. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30(10), 1241–1257.Clement, J. (2008). The role of explanatory models in teaching for conceptual change. In S. Vosniadou (Ed.),International handbook of research on conceptual change (pp. 417–452). New York, NY: Routledge.Clements, D. H. (1998). Geometric and spatial thinking in young children. Opinion paper, Arlington, VA.Retrieved from http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED436232Cobb, P., Zhao, Q., & Visnovska, J. (2008). Learning from and adapting the theory of realistic mathematicseducation. Éducation & Didactique, 2(1), 105–124.ICLS 2014 Proceedings751© ISLSDahlberg, K., Dahlberg, H., & Nyström, M. (2008). Reflective lifeworld research. Lund, Sweden:Studentlitteratur AB.Davis, B., & Sumara, D. (2006). Complexity and education: Inquiries into learning, teaching, and research.Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.Denzin, N. K. (1989). Interpretive interactionism. Applied Social Research Methods Series (Vol. 16). NewburyPark, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.Freudenthal, H. (1973). Mathematics as an educational task. Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel.Freudenthal, H. (1983). Didactical phenomenology of mathematical structures. Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel.Giorgi, A. (1997). The theory, practice, and evaluation of the phenomenological method as a qualitativeresearch procedure. Journal of Phenomenological Psychology, 28(2), 235–260.Glesne, C. (2011). Becoming Qualitative Researchers: An Introduction (4th ed.). Boston, MA: PearsonEducation, Inc.Gravemeijer, K., & Cobb, P. (2006). Design research from a learning design perspective. In J. van den Akker,K. Gravemeijer, S. McKenney, & N. Nieveen (Eds.), Educational design research (pp. 17–51). NewYork, NY: Routledge.Gravemeijer, K. P. (1998). From a different perspective: Building on students’ informal knowledge. In R.Lehrer & D. Chazan (Eds.), Designing learning environments for developing understanding ofgeometry and space, Studies in mathematical thinking and learning (pp. 45–66). Mahwah, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum.Heidegger, M. (2008). Being and time. (J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, Trans.). New York, NY: HarperCollinsPublishers.Husserl, E. (1970). Logical investigations. (J. N. Findlay, Trans.) (Vols. 1-2, Vol. 2). London: Routledge &Kegan Paul.Jacobson, M. J. (2008). A design framework for educational hypermedia systems: Theory, research, andlearning emerging scientific conceptual perspectives. Educational Technology Research andDevelopment, 56(1), 5–28.Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importanceand implications for the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 11–34.Kolodner, J. L. (2006). Case-based reasoning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learningsciences (pp. 225–242). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Lehrer, R., Jenkins, M., & Osana, H. (1998). Longitudinal study of children’s reasoning about space andgeometry. In R. Lehrer & D. Chazan (Eds.), Designing learning environments for developingunderstanding of geometry and space, Studies in mathematical thinking and learning (pp. 137–168).Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Merleau-Ponty, M. (2002). Phenomenology of perception. (C. Smith, Trans.). New York, NY: RoutledgeClassics.Monaghan, F. (2000). What difference does it make? Children’s views of the differences between somequadrilaterals. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 42(2), 179–196.Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1967). The child’s conception of space. (F. J. Langdon & J. L. Lunzer, Trans.). NewYork, NY: Norton.Spiro, R. J., Coulson, R. L., Feltovich, P. J., & Anderson, D. K. (1988). Cognitive flexibility theory: Advancedknowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains (Technical Report No. 441). Champaign, IL:University of Illinois, Center for the Study of Reading.Travis, J., & Johnson, D. (2007). Flatland. Flat World Productions LLC.Vagle, M. D. (2009). Validity as intended: “bursting forth toward” bridling in phenomenological research.International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 22(5), 585–605.Vagle, M. D. (2010, May). A post-intentional phenomenological research approach. Paper presented at theAmerican Educational Research Association, Denver, CO.van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, M., & Wijers, M. (2005). Mathematics standards and curricula in the Netherlands.ZDM - The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 37(4), 287–307.van Hiele, P. M. (1986). Structure and insight: A theory of mathematics education. Orlando, Fl.: AcademicPress.van Manen, M. (1990). Researching lived experience: Human science for an action sensitive pedagogy. Albany,NY: State University of New York Press.Zech, L., Vye, N. J., Bransford, J. D., Goldman, S. R., Barron, B. J., Schwartz, D. L., Kisst-Hackett, R., et al.(1998). An introduction to geometry through anchored instruction. In R. Lehrer & D. Chazan (Eds.),Designing learning environments for developing understanding of geometry and space, Studies inmathematical thinking and learning (pp. 439–464). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.ICLS 2014 Proceedings752© ISLS