Multimedia Educative Curriculum Materials: Designing DigitalSupports for Learning to Teach Scientific ArgumentationSuzanna Loper, Lawrence Hall of Science, Univ. of California, Berkeley, CA, sjloper@berkeley.eduKatherine L. McNeill, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA, kmcneill@bc.eduRaphaela Peck, Lawrence Hall of Science, Univ. of California, Berkeley, CA, ppeck@berkeley.eduJeremy Price, Fairmont State University, Fairmont, WV, jeremy.price@fairmontstate.eduJacqueline Barber, Lawrence Hall of Science, Univ. of California, Berkeley, CA, jbarber@berkeley.eduAbstract: We report on work in progress from a research and development project in whichwe are designing digital supports to help middle school science teachers teach the practice ofscientific argumentation. These supports include educative, teacher-facing videos embeddedin a digital teacher’s guide. In the first phase of the project we developed a framework toguide video development and produced twelve prototype videos. This paper describes theiterative design process for the framework and videos, in which we incorporated evidencefrom analysis of classroom video, teacher interviews, and teacher focus groups in order tocreate a design framework aimed to maximize the quality and practicality of the videos.IntroductionScience education researchers and reform leaders are in alignment with recent U.S. policy documents (NationalResearch Council, 2012) in a call to engage students more deeply and authentically in science practices such asscientific argumentation. Scientific argumentation is a practice that holds great promise for the way in which itdraws together conceptual understanding and reasoning and communication skills that are an essential part ofthe construction of scientific knowledge (Osborne, 2010). Still, implementing the teaching of scientificargumentation poses a great challenge for science teachers (Sampson & Blanchard, 2012). New materials,professional development, and ongoing support are needed (McNeill & Knight, 2013).Digital tools, including videos and other multimedia and interactive materials, offer potential toprovide support for teachers (Lieberman & Mace, 2010). The research and development described in this paperfocuses on supporting middle school science teachers in implementing instruction that emphasizes scientificargumentation. This support is provided by multimedia educative curriculum materials (MECMs), includingteacher-facing videos that aim to help teachers expand their pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) aroundscientific argumentation.Theoretical FrameworkArgumentation and the Role of the TeacherArgumentation has been a focus of research in science education for the past two decades, but has become moreprominent in discussions about educational practice through its inclusion in recent standards documents. In ourwork, we emphasize both dialogic and structural aspects of argumentation. The dialogic aspect of argumentationinvolves the interactions between multiple individuals as they engage in construction and critique (Ford, 2012).The structural aspect focuses on the products of argumentation, in terms of how claims are supported withevidence and reasoning (McNeill & Knight, 2013).The teacher plays an essential role in supporting students in argumentation (Zohar, 2008). Teachers’beliefs and PCK for argumentation impact their willingness to incorporate argumentation into instruction andtheir strategies to support students (Zembal-Saul, 2009). Teachers may lack PCK in how to support students indeveloping argumentation skills (Zohar, 2008). For example, teachers can struggle with the role of evidence inevaluating competing claims (Sampson & Blanchard, 2012) and they can have difficulty supporting students inclassroom discussions in which students critique and question each others’ arguments (Berland & Reiser, 2011).In addition, teachers struggle when assessing the strengths and weaknesses of student arguments and indetermining strategies to support student learning (McNeill & Knight, 2013). Teachers lack pedagogicalstrategies, such as how to define an argument or how to provide content-specific examples (Zohar, 2008). Insum, to effectively integrate argumentation into their practice, teachers need greater support.Digitally Enhanced Educative Curriculum MaterialsEducative curricular materials (ECMs) (Davis & Krajcik, 2005) can have a positive effect on teacherknowledge, practice, and student outcomes. By design, ECMs tie new approaches to specific practices,activities, and learning objectives; ECMs thus have great potential for supporting change in teacher practice(Cervetti, Kulikowich, Drummond & Billman, 2013). Multimedia educative curricular materials (MECMs) thatlink text, representations of student work, and video clips demonstrating pedagogy in action in real classrooms,ICLS 2014 Proceedings1117© ISLShold even greater potential, particularly in an area such as argumentation that incorporates both oral and writtenmodalities. Although there has been little work on the intersection of digital media with educative curriculum,our design of MECMs draws on previous work focused on multimedia representations of practice. Multimediarepresentations of practice can provide learning opportunities for teachers grounded in real life situations thatutilize a rich and multi-layered approach to classroom teaching (van den Berg, Wallace & Pedretti, 2008). Inparticular, video cases specific to a teacher’s curriculum can help support the development of pedagogicalcontent knowledge (Roth, et. al, 2011). Multimedia representations of teaching can illustrate the intricacies andsubtleties of effective teaching practices. This project builds on research on the affordances of digital curriculummaterials, including the possibility for multimedia representations of teaching practice, to help teachers developthe beliefs and PCK that can support their enactment of argumentation instruction.Research and Development ProcessThe work described here is part of a five-year project in which we are designing and researching MECMs tosupport teacher learning of argumentation. We focus here on our early design phase. Our question in this phasewas, How can multimedia educative curricular materials (MECMs) be designed to positively impact teachers’beliefs and pedagogical content knowledge about argumentation? In this design work, our two mainconsiderations were practicality and quality (Doyle & Ponder, 1978); in other words, we sought a designframework that would support the development of videos likely tobe accessed by teachers and to have an impact.In order to pursue these goals of quality and practicality,our development followed an iterative process (see Figure 1), withinput at multiple timepoints from a number of sources. Throughthis process we created a MECM Design Framework to guide thedevelopment of prototype videos. The framework has threecomponents: (1) Learning Goals (our goals for teacher learning);(2) Teacher Needs (types of needs that videos could address); and(2) Video Specifications (guidelines for length, setting andparticipants, and other elements to be included in the videos). TheLearning Goals were derived from review of literature and input ofexpert advisors, described in more detail in McNeill, Katsh-Singer,Gonzalez-Howard, Price & Loper (2013). The Teacher Needs andVideo Specifications were developed based on two main sourcesof evidence; (1) analysis of videotaped lessons and teacherinterviews; and (2) teacher focus groups. These evidence sourcesare described below.Evidence SourcesVideotaped Lessons and Teacher InterviewsIn 2011-12, we collected data from ten teachers implementing afield trial version of an earth science curriculum with a specificfocus on argumentation. For each teacher we collected videotapesof two argumentation lessons and conducted follow-up interviews.Interviews focused on the teachers’ instructional practices inrelation to the original curriculum and their rationales forinstructional decisions specifically around argumentation.Interviews were audio recorded and transcribed and a codingscheme was developed from both our theoretical framework and aniterative analysis of the data (Miles & Huberman, 1994). Thefindings from this study informed the development of the LearningGoals and Teacher Needs and are reported in more detail inMcNeill, Gonzalez-Howard, Katsh-Singer, Price & Loper (2013).Teacher Focus GroupsFigure 0. Iterative cevelopment offramework and prototype videosICLS 2014 ProceedingsIn 2012-13, we conducted a series of teacher focus group sessionsto inform our development of the MECM Design Framework andthe prototype videos themselves. Five teachers were selected froma list of teacher contacts in the local area. These five teachersrepresented a range of school settings (suburban and urban;1118© ISLSparochial, charter, and public), years of experience teaching in the classroom (2-30 years), and prior experienceparticipating in pilot and field trial studies with our group.Four focus group sessions were conducted over a period of seven months. First, each teacherparticipated in an individual interview at their school site. The remaining sessions were conducted as groupsessions, with two sessions occurring in face-to-face meetings and one session conducted via web-basedconference and the use of Google Docs. Data collected included audio recordings, field notes, research memosand participant artifacts. The data was coded in a recursive and comparative manner (Charmaz, 1994) intocategories of findings. The findings from these focus groups informed both the development of the TeacherNeeds and the Video Specifications.Results: Iterative Development of MECM Design FrameworkFindings from the evidence sources were used in the iterative development of the MECM Design Framework,which includes three elements: 1) Learning goals, 2) Teacher needs, and 3) Video specifications.Learning GoalsWe identified three critical learning goals for teachers based on our evidence sources (McNeill, Katsh-Singer et.al, 2013; McNeill, Gonzalez-Howard, et. al, 2013) that focus on both the structural and dialogic aspects ofargumentation. The phrasing of the goals was refined, based on feedback from the teacher focus groups, tomake them clear and appealing to teachers. For example, while these are goals for teacher learning, focus groupteachers recommended that the goals nonetheless be phrased to emphasize student achievement. Focus groupparticipants felt that teachers are motivated by a focus on supporting their students, as opposed to a focus onthemselves as learners.Table 1: Learning GoalsTeachers will learn how to…1. Improve students’ use of high-quality evidence.2. Help students to strengthen their arguments by articulating reasoning (connections between evidenceand claims)3. Create conditions that support student-driven argumentation.Teacher NeedsFollowing a design based research approach, three Teacher Needs were developed as an “embodied conjecture”(Sandoval, 2004) drawing on literature review, expert advisor input, and our other evidence sources. Forexample, in the analysis of videotaped lessons and teacher interviews, we found that different teachers enactedthe same lesson plan in very different ways, and yet all felt that they were implementing the lessons faithfully(McNeill, Gonzalez-Howard, et. al, 2013). This suggested a need for a type of video that provides ‘images ofpractice’ to help teachers better envision the intent represented by the lesson plans. Two other needs wereidentified: ‘meta-level’ videos that provide teachers with foundational information about what argumentation isand why it is important; and ‘strategy’ videos that provide teachers with concrete actions they can use in theclassroom. Based on input from the teacher focus groups, we developed teacher-facing labels for three types ofvideos addressing each of these needs. Table 2 lists the three categories of videos, with the associated TeacherNeeds. The teacher-facing labels for the videos are in quotations.Table 2: Video Categories and Associated Teacher Needs1.Meta-Level Videos (“Building Blocks”): Teachers need to understand the elements of scientificargumentation (for example, the components of an argument, or what counts as scientific evidence) andthe rationale for incorporating argumentation into science instruction.2. Images of Practice (“In the Classroom”): Teachers need an image of what an instructional practicelooks like in the classroom, and increased confidence that it can be enacted with real students.3. Strategy Videos (“Strategies”): Teachers need concrete tools, activities and strategies that they cantake into the classroom and try right away.Video SpecificationsThe teacher focus groups were our primary evidence source for constructing a set of Video Specifications,designed to help us maximize the practicality of the videos, in particular the likelihood that teachers wouldactually use them (Doyle & Ponder, 1978). We sought input from teachers about their preferences for theelements included in the videos and how they believed they would use the videos. Themes that emerged fromthe teacher focus groups fell into three categories: 1) Access Options and Potential Uses, 2) On-ScreenICLS 2014 Proceedings1119© ISLSParticipants and Settings, and 3) Video Details and Supporting Media. These findings from the focus groupsresulted in the development of a list of Video Specifications, excerpted in Table 3.Table 3: Video SpecificationsAccess Options and Potential Uses• Flexible access system, including both lesson-specific links and top-level menu structuresOn-Screen Participants and Settings• Diverse classroom settings; avoid classrooms that appear unusually ‘high-resourced’• Include extended student dialogue• Teacher voices are more desirable than scientists or curriculum developersVideo Details and Supporting Media• Video length 3-6 minutes• Include reflection questions for teacher• Include annotation or call-outs to help scaffold teacher interpretation of student footage• Include explicit connections to state and national standardsDevelopment of Prototype VideosThe MECM Design Framework was used to guide the creation of twelve prototype videos, listed in Table 4.Table 4: Titles of 12 prototype videosLearning GoalBuilding BlocksIn the ClassroomStrategies1: High qualityevidence● What Is Evidence?● What Does Evidence LookLike?● Strategies for Working withEvidence from Text2: Reasoning● Why Is ReasoningImportant?● What Does Reasoning LookLike?● Strategies for SupportingReasoning with Questioning3: StudentDrivenArgumentation● WhyArgumentation?● What Is a ScienceSeminar?● What Does a Culture ofArgumentation Look Like?● What Does Working withMultiple Claims Look Like?● Strategies for AdaptingActivities for Argumentation● Strategies for ConductingScience SeminarsThe videos contain a mix of classroom and interview footage, text, and voiceovers. Video scripts weredeveloped in an iterative process involving preliminary script development, collection of footage, culling offootage, and revision of scripts based on footage availability. Four filming days were conducted, with two daysfocused on classroom footage and two days focused on interviews with teachers, scientists and curriculumdevelopers. For each classroom filming day, we spent 1-2 days prior to filming working with the students toprepare them for the activities that would be filmed. Working with a video production company specialized ineducational media, we created draft videos that went through several rounds of input and revision.Figure 1: Frames from Why Is Reasoning Important? and What Does Working with Multiple Claims Look Like?Figure 2 shows sample frames from two of the videos. The frame on the left-hand side is from a“Building Block” video. In this case, the video is annotated to help the viewer link the students’ words to thecomponents of an argument. The frame on the right-hand side is from an “In the Classroom” video focused onstudent-driven argumentation. Here the text at the bottom of the screen highlights this characteristic ofargumentation as the viewer observes students engaging in these important interactions.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1120© ISLSDiscussionPrevious technology innovations have not become widespread in K-12 schools, in part because of their lack offocus on systemic issues such as usability, scalability and sustainability (Fishman, Marx, Blumenfeld, Krajcik &Soloway, 2004). In our work on the development of MECMs to support teachers’ learning of argumentation, wetake this issue seriously. Our current MECM design framework suggests the importance of focusing on bothquality and practicality: creating materials that could have the desired impact, and developing them in a waythat teachers would see as useful and appealing. For example, in the creation of the learning goals, we utilizedthe current research literature (e.g. McNeill & Knight, 2013; Ford, 2012) and our evidence sources to identifyhigh quality learning goals addressing both structural and dialogic aspects of argumentation. Then we modifiedthe language of those learning goals to target supporting students, instead of teachers, because in terms ofpracticality the focus group teachers found these more appealing. We feel that both quality and practicality areessential characteristics of MECMs to support greater scalability. The prototype videos are currently beingrevised based on further input, and their impact will be investigated in a randomized experimental study.ReferencesBerland, L. K. & Reiser, B. J. (2011). Classroom communities' adaptations of the practice of scientificargumentation. Science Education, 95, 191-216.Cervetti, G. N., Kulikowich, J., Drummond, M., & Billman, A. (2013). Influence of educative curriculummaterials on teachers' learning and teaching. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the AmericanEducational Research Association. San Francisco, CA.Charmaz, K. (1994). Grounded Theory: Objectivist and Constructivist Methods. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S.Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of Qualitative Research (pp. 509–535). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Doyle, W., & Ponder, G. (1978). The practicality ethic in teacher decision-making. Interchange, 8(3), 1-12.Davis, E. A., & Krajcik, J. S. (2005). Designing educative curriculum materials to promote teacher learning.Educational Researcher, 34(3), 3-14.Fishman, B., Marx, R. W., Blumenfeld, P., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2004). Creating a framework forresearch on systemic technology innovations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 43-76.Ford, M. J. (2012). A dialogic account of sense-making in scientific argumentation and reasoning. Cognitionand Instruction, 30(3), 207-245.Lieberman, A. & Mace, D. P. (2010). Making practice public: Teacher learning in the 21st century. Journal ofTeacher Education, 61(1-2), 77-88.McNeill, K. L., & Knight, A. M. (2013). Teachers' pedagogical content knowledge of scientific argumentation:The impact of professional development on k-12 teachers. Science Education, 97, 937-972.McNeill, K. L., Katsh-Singer, R., Gonzalez-Howard, M., Price, J. F., & Loper, S. (2013). Factors that impactteachers’ argumentation instruction in their classroom. Paper presented at the annual meeting of theAmerican Educational Research Association. San Francisco, CA.McNeill, K. L., Gonzalez-Howard, M. Katsh-Singer, R., Price, J. F. & Loper, S. (2013). Teachers' beliefs andpractices around argumentation during a curriculum enactment. Paper presented at the annual meetingof the National Association for Research in Science Teaching. Rio Grande, Puerto Rico.Miles, M. B. & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.National Research Council (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting conceptsand core ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Osborne, J. (2010). Arguing to learn in science: The role of collaborative, critical discourse. Science, 328, 463466.Roth, K. J., Garnier, H. E., Chen, C., Lemmens, M., Schwille, K., & Wickler, N. I. Z. (2011). Videobased lessonanalysis: Effective science PD for teacher and student learning. Journal of research in science teaching,48(2), 117-148.Sampson, V. & Blanchard, M. (2012). Science teachers and scientific argumentation: Trends in views andpractice. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 49, 1122-1148.Sandoval, W. A. (2004). Developing learning theory by refining conjectures embodied in educational designs.Educational Psychologist, 39(4), 213–223.van den Berg, E., Wallace, J., & Pedretti, E. (2008). Multimedia cases, teacher education and teacher learning.In Voogt, J. & Knezek, G. (Eds.), International handbook of information technology in primary andsecondary education. (pp. 475-487). New York, NY: Springer, LLC.Zembal-Saul, C. (2009). Learning to teach elementary school science as argument. Science Education, 93, 687719.Zohar, A. (2008). Science teacher education and professional development in argumentation. In S. Erduran &M. P. Jimenez-Aleixandre (Eds.). Argumentation in science education: Perspectives from classroombased research. (pp. 245-268), Dordrecht: Springer.ICLS 2014 Proceedings1121© ISLS